CHAPTER I.

‘ TOM ! '

Novanswer.

‘ Torn ! ’

No answer. .

‘tht’s gone with that boy, I wonder? You TOM! '

The old pulled her spectacles down and looked over
them about the room ; then she put them up and looked out
under them. She seldom or never looked through them for so
small a. thing as a boy; they were her state pair, the pride
of her heart, and were built for ‘ style,’ not service—she could
have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well. She looked
perplexed for a moment, and then said, not ﬁercely, but still
loud enough for the furniture to hear:

‘Well, I lay if I get hold of you, I’ll-—’

She did not ﬁnish, for by this time she was bending down
and punching under the bed with the broom, and so she
needed breath to punctuate the punches with. She resurrected
nothing but the cat.

‘ I never did see the beat of that boy I ’

She went to the open door and stood in it, and looked out

‘* 7,

2 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

among the tomato vines and ‘ jimpson ’ weeds that constituted
the garden. No Tom. So she lifted up her voice at an angle
calculated for distance, and shouted:

‘ Y-o-u-u Tom! ’

There was a slight noise behind her, and she turned just in
time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and
arrest his ﬂight. '

‘ There! I might ’a’ thought of that closet. What you
been doing in there ?

‘ Nothing.’

‘Nothing! Look at your hands, and look at your mouth.
What is that track ? ’ -

‘ I don’t know, aunt.’

‘ Well, I know. It’s jam, that’s what it is. Forty times
I’ve said if you didn’t let that jam alone I’d skin you. Hand
me that switch.’

The switch hovered in the air—the peril was desperate.

‘ My ! Look behind you, aunt ! ’ ’

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of
danger. The lad ﬂed, on the instant, scrambled up the high
board-fence, and disappeared over it. His Aunt Polly stood
surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle laugh.

‘ Hang the boy, can’t I never learn anything? Ain’t he
played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for
him by this time ? But 'old fools is the biggest fools there is.
Can’t learn an old dog new tricks, as the saying is. But my
goodness, he never plays them alike two days, and how is a
body to know what’s coming P He ’pears to know just how
long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he
knows if he can make out to put me 011' for a. minute or make
me laugh, it’s all down again, and I can’t hit him a lick. I
ain’t doing my duty by that boy, and that’s the Lord’s truth,
goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile the child, as the

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 3

Good Book says. I’m n—laying up sin and suﬁ‘ering for us both,
I know. He’s full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! he’s my
own dead sister’s boy, poor thing, and I ain’t got the heart to
lash him, somehow. Every time I let him oﬁ‘ my conscience

 

AUNT POLLY BEGUILED.

does but me so; and every time I hit him my old heart most
breaks. Well—a-well, man that is born of woman is of few
days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it’s
so. He’ll play hockey this evening,l and I’ll be obleeged

' South-western for ‘ afternoon!
It ‘2

a; Lg ujsﬁlt,’
k

4 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

to make him work to-morrow, to punish him. It‘s mighty
hard to make him work Saturdays, when all the boys is having
holiday, but he hates work more than he hates anything else,
and I’ve got to do some of my duty by him, or I’ll be the
ruination of the child.’

Tom did play hockey, and he had a very good time. He
got back home barely in season to help Jim, the small coloured
boy, saw next day’s wood, and split the kindlings before supper
—at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to Jim
while Jim did three-fourths of the work. Tom’s younger
brother (or rather, half brother) Sid was already through with
his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a quiet boy,
and had no adventurous, troublesome ways. While Tom was
eating his supper and stealing sugar as opportunity offered.
Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of gnile, and‘
very deep—for she wanted to trap him into damaging reveal—
ments. Like many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet
vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and
mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most
transparent devices as marvels of low cunning. Said she:

‘ Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn’t it P ’

‘ Yes’m.’

‘ Powerful warm, warn’t it ? ’

‘ Yes’m.’

‘Didn’t you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?’

A bit of a scare shot through Tom—a touch of uncomfort-
able suspicion. He searched Aunt Polly’s face, but it told him
nothing. So he said: '

‘ No’m—well, not very much.’

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom’s shirt, and
said :
‘ But you ain’t too warm now, though.’ And it ﬂattered
her to reﬂect that she had discovered that the shirt was dry

TH ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. *5

without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her
mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind lay now.
So he forestalled what might be the next move.

‘Some of us pumped on ‘our heads—mine’s dump yet.
See ? ’

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit
of circumstantialevidence, and missed a trick. Then she had
a new inspiration:

 

A GOOD OPPORTUNITY.

‘Tom, you didn’t have to undo your shirt collar where I
sewed it to pump on your head, did you? Unbntton your
jacket!’

The trouble vanished out of Tom’s ﬁne. He opened his
jacket. His shirt dollar was securely sewed.

‘Bnther! Well, go ’long with you. I made sure you’d
played hockey and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom.
I reckon you’re a. kind of a singed cat, as the saying is—
better’n you look—this time.’ ’

She 2was half sorry her sagaeity had miscarried, and half
glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.

 

6' THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

But Sidney said:

‘Well, now, if I didn’t think you sewed his collar wit
white thread, but it’s black.’ ‘

‘Why, I did sew it with white! Tom 1’

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the
door, he said:

‘ Siddy, I’ll lick you for that.’

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were
thrust into the lappels of his jacket—and had thread hound
about them—one needle carried white thread and the other
black. He said:

‘She’d never noticed if it hadn’t been for Sid. Confound
it! sometimes she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it
with black. I wish to geeminy she’d stick to one or t’other—I
can’t keep the run of ’em. 'But I bet you I’ll lam Sid for
that. I’ll learn him!’ ‘

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the
model boy very well though—and loathed him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his
troubles. Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy
and bitter to him than a man’s are to a man, but because a
new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out
of his mind for the time—just as men’s misfortunes are for-
gotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This new
interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just
acquired from a negro, and he was suﬂ'ering to practise it
undisturbed. It consisted in a peculiar bird~like turn, a sort
of liquid warble, produced by touching the tongue to the roof
of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music. The
reader probably remembers how to do it if he has ever been a
boy. Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it,
and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony
and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 7

feels who has discovered a new planet. No doubt, as ﬁir as
strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage
was with the boy, not the astronomer.

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark yet.
Presently Torn checked his whistle. A stranger was before
him—a boy a shade larger than himself. A new comer of any
age or either sex was an impressive curiosity in the poor little,
shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy was well—dressed, too ‘
-—-well—dressed on a week-day. This was simply astounding.
His cap was a. dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth
roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
He had shoes on—and yet it was only Friday. He even wore a
necktie, a bright bit of ribbon. He had a citiﬁed air about
him that ate into Tom’s Vitals. The more Tom stared at the
splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his ﬁnery,
and the shabbier and shabbier his own outﬁt seemed to him to
grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved—
bnt only sidewise, in a circle; they kept thee to face and eye
to eye all the time. Finally, Tom said:

‘ I can lick you! ’

‘I‘d like to see you try it.’

‘ Well, I can do it.’

‘ No, you can’t, either.’

‘ Yes, I can.’

‘ No, you can’t.’

‘ I can.’

‘ Can’t.’

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:
‘ What’s your name? ’

‘ ’Tisn’t any of your business, maybe.’

‘ Well, I ’low I'll make it my business.’

8 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM MWYER.

‘ Well, why don’t you? ’

‘ If you say much I will.’

‘ Much—much—much! Them, now.’

‘ Oh, you think you’re mighty smart, don’t you? I could
lick you with‘ one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to.’

‘ Well, why don’t you do it ! You say you eon do it.’

‘ Well, I will, if you fool with me.’

‘ Oh, yee—I’ve seen whole families in the same ﬁx.’

‘Srnarty! You think you’re some now, don’t you? Oh,
what a hut! ’

‘You can lump that. hat if you don’t like it. I dare you to
knock it oﬂ' ; and anybody that’ll take a. dare will suck eggs.’

‘ You’re a liar l ’

‘ You’re another.’

‘ You’re a ﬁghting liar, and dasn’t take it up.’

‘ Aw—take a walk! ’

‘ Say—if you give me much more of your sass, I’ll take and
bounce a rock oﬁ'n your head.’

‘ Oh, of course you will.’

‘ Well, I will.’

‘ Well, why don’t you do it, then P What do you keep
sum/rig you will for? Why don’t you do it? It’s because
you’re afraid.’

‘ I ain’t afraid.’

‘ You are.’

‘ I ain’ .'

‘ You are.’

Another pause, and more eyeing and sidling around each
other. Presently they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said :
‘ Get away from here! ’

‘ Go away yourself!
‘ I won’t.’
‘ I won’t, either.’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 9

So they stood, each with a foot placed at. an angle as a
brace, and both shoving with might and main, and gloweriug
at each other with hate. But neither could get an advantage.
After struggling till both were hot- and ﬂushed, each relaxed
his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:

 

wno’s APRAID .7

‘ You’re a coward and a pup. I’ll tell my big brother on
you, and he can thrash you with his little ﬁnger, and I’ll make
him do it, too.’

‘ What do I care for your big brother? I’ve got a brother
that’s bigger than he is ; and, what‘s more, he can throw him
over that fence, too.’ [Both brothers were imaginary.] q

‘ That's a lie.’

 

10 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

‘ Yam saying so don’t make it so.’

Torn drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said:

‘ I dare you to step over that, and I’ll lick you till you can’t
stand up. Anybody that’ll take a dare will steal sheep.’

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

‘Now you said you’d do it, now let’s see you do it.’

‘ Don’t you crowd me, now; you better look out.’

‘ Well, you said you’d do it—why don’t you do it ? ’

‘ By jingo! for two cents I will do it.’ .

The new boy took two Broad coppers out of his pocket, and
held them out with derision. Tom struck them to the ground.
In an instant both boys were rolling and tumbling iu the
dirt, gripped together like cats ; and for the space of a. minute
they tugged and tore at each other’s hair and clothes, punched
and scratched each other’s noses, and covered themselves with
dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and through
the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy
and pounding him with his ﬁsts. -‘

‘ Holler ’nuﬁ' ! ’ said he.

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying—
maiuly from rage.

‘ Holler ’nuﬂ' ! ’——and the pounding went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered ‘ ’Nuﬂ‘! ’ and Tom
let him up, and said:

‘ Now that’ll learn you. Better look out who you’re fooling
' with next time.’

The new boy went oﬁ' brushing the dust from his clothes,
sobbing, snuﬂ'ling, and occasionally looking back and shaking
his head, and threatening what he would do to Tom the ‘ next
time he caught him out.’ To which Tom responded with jeers,
and started off in high feather; and as soon as his back was
turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it, and hit him
between the shoulders, and then turned tail and ran like an

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. ll

antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out
where he lived.  He then held a position at the gate for some
time, daring the enemy to come outside; but the enemy only
made faces at him through the window, and declined. At last
the enemy’s mother appeared, and called Tom a bad, vicious,
vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away, but he
said he ‘ ’lowed ’ to ‘lag ’ for that boy.

 

 

 

 

a, 3—
A CAUTIOUS OLIMB.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed
cautiously in at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade in the
person of his aunt; and when she saw the state his clothes
were in, her resolution to turn his Saturday holiday into cap-
tivity at hard labour became adamantine in its ﬁrmness.

\' 1m Lzéa'

I2 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER II.

SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was
bright and fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in
every heart; and if the heart was young the music issued at
the lips. There was cheer in every face, and a spring in
every step. The locust trees were in bloom, and the fragrance
of the blossoms ﬁlled the air. Cardiﬁ' Hill, beyond the village
and above it, was green with vegetation, and it lay just far
enough away'to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful,
and inviting.

Tom appeared on the side-walk with a bucket of whitewash
and a long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all
gladness left him, and a deep melancholy settlai down upon
his spirit. Thirty yards of board—fence nine feet high! Life
to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing
he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank;
repeated the operation; did it again; compared the in-
signiﬁcant whitewashed streak with the far—reaching conti-
nent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box
discouraged. Jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin
pail, and singing ‘Buﬁ‘alo Gals.’ Bringing water from the
town pump had always been hateful work in Tom’s eyes before,
but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there
was company at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and
girls were always there waiting their turns, resting, trading play—
things, quarrelling, ﬁghting, skylarking. And he remembered

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 18

that. although the pump was only a hundred and ﬁﬁy yards 03',
Jim never got back with a. bucket of water under an hour;
and even then somebody generally had to go aﬁzer him. Tom
said:

‘ Say, Jim ; I’ll fetch the water if you’ll whitewash some.’

Jim shook his head, and said:

‘Can’t, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an’
git dis water an’ not stop foolin’ roun’ wid anybody. She say
she spec’ Mars Tom gwine to ex me to whitewash, an’ so she
tole me go ’long an’ ’tend to my own business-she ’lowed she’d
’tend to de whitewashin’.’

‘ 0h, never you mind what she said, Jim. That‘s the way
she always talks. Gimme the bucket—I won’t be gone only a
minute. She won’t ever know.’

‘ Oh, I dasn’t, Mars Tom. Ole missis she’d take an’ tar de
head oﬁ"n me. ’Deed she would.’

‘ Shel She never lick anybody—whacks ’em over the head
with her (Thimble, and who cares for that, I’d like to know?
She talks awful, but talk don’t hurt—anyways, it don‘t if she
don’t cry. Jim, I’ll give you a marvel. I’ll give you a white
alley ! ’

Jim began to waver.

‘White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw.’

‘My! Dat’s a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But, Mai-s
Tom, I’s powerful ’frsid ole minis—J

‘And besides, if you will I’ll show you my sore toe.’

Jim was only human—this attraction was too much for him.
He put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the
toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being
unwound. In another moment he was ﬂying down the street
with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with
vigour, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the ﬁeld with a
slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.

14 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

But Tom’s energy did not last. He began to think of‘the
fun he had planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied.
Soon the free boys would come tripping along on all sorts of
delicious expeditions, and they would make a world of fun of
him for having to work—~the very thought of it burnt him like
ﬁre. He got out his worldly wealth and examined its—hits of

 

 

 

'rnmrnn' TO Bvsumss.

toys, marbles and trash ; enough to buy an exchange of work,
maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of
I pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his pocket,
and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark
and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! N othing
less than a great, magniﬁcent inspiration.

=1, 1:. ‘;L“:’lx"

TILE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 15

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben
Rogers have in sight presently—the very boy, of all boys, whose
ridicule he had been dreading. Ben’s gait was the hop-skip-
and-jump—proof enough that his heart was light and his
anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and giving along,
melodious whoop at intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-
dong—dong, ding—dong-dong, for he was personsting a. steam-
boat. As he drew near he slackened speed, took the middle of
the street, leaned far over to starboard, and rounded~to ponder-
ously and with laborious pomp and circumstance—for he was
personating the ‘ Big Missouri,’ and considered himself to be
drawing nine feet of water. He was boat, and captain, and
engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing
on his own hurricane deck giving the orders and executing
them:

‘ Stop her, sir! Ting-a—ling-ling.’ The headway ran almost
out, and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

‘ Ship up to back! Ting—e-ling-ling ! ’ His arms straight~
ened and stiffened down his sides.

‘ Set her back on the stabboard! Ting-a-ling—ling! Chow!
ch-chow-wowl Chow!’ His right hand meantime describing
stately circles, for it was representing a forty-footwheel.

‘Let her go back on the labboardl Ting-aJing—ling!
Chow-ch-ohow—chow ! ’ The left hand began to describe
circles.

‘Stop the stabboardl' Ting—a-lingbling! Stop the lab—
board! Come ahead on the stabboard! Stop her! Let your
outside turn over slow! 'l‘ing-a-ling-liug! Chow-ow-ow! Get
out that head-line! Lively, now! Come—out with your
spring-line —what’re you about there? Take a turn round
that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage now—
let her go! Done with the engines,'sir! Tingd—ling—ling!
Sh’t! e’h’t! eh’t!’ (trying the gauge-cocks).

16 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWI'ER.

Tom went on whitewashing—paid no attention to the
steamboat. Ben stared a moment, and then said :

‘ Hi-yi! You’re up a stump, ain’t you?’

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of
an artist; then he gave his brush another gentle sweep, and
surveyed the result, as before. Ben ranged up alongside of

 

‘ AIN'T THAT WORK 1' ‘

him. Tom’s honth watered for the apple, but he stuck to his
work. Ben said:

‘ Hello, old chap; you got to work, hey?’

Tom wheeled suddenly and said:

‘ Why, it’s you, Ben ! I warn’t noticing.’

{>0 36:"
.l, x O,

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. l7

‘Say——I’m going in a-swimming, I am. Don’t you wish
you could? But of course you’d drutber work—wouldn’t
you? Course you would 1 ’

Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:

‘ What do you call work?’

‘ Why, ain’t that work? ’

Torn resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:

‘Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain’t. All I know is, it
suits Tom Sawyer.’ .

‘ Oh, come now, you don’t mean to let on that you
like it?’

The brush continued to move.

‘Like it? Well, I don’t see why I oughtn’t to like it.
Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day l’ '

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling
his apple. Tom swept his brush daintin back and forth—
stepped back to note the effect—added a touch here and there
—ciiticised the eﬂ'ect again—Ben watching every move, and
getting more and more interested, more and more absorbed.
Presently he said :

‘ Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little.’

Tom considered—was about to consent ; but he altered his
mind:

‘No, no; I reckon it wouldn’t hardly do, Ben. You see,
Aunt Polly’s awful particular about this fence—right here
on the street, you know——but if it was the hack fenoe I
wouldn’t mind, and she wouldn’t. Yes, she’s awful particular
about this fence; it’s got to be done very careful; I reckon
there ain’t one boy in a thousand, maybe two thousand, that
can do it the way it’s got to be done.’

‘No——is that so? Oh, come now; lemme just try, only
just a little. I’d let you, if you was me, Tom.’

‘ Ben, I’d like to, honest Injun; but Aunt Polly—well, Jim

0

18 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEIZ.

wanted to do it, but she wouldn’t let him. Sid wanted to do
it, and she wouldn’t let Sid. Now, don’t you see how I’m -
ﬁxed? If you was to tackle this fence, and anything was to
happen to it—’

‘Oh, shucks; I’ll be just as careful. Now lemme try.
Say—I’ll give you the core of my apple.’

‘ Well, herebNo, Ben ; now don’t; I’m afeard—’

‘ I’ll give you all of it i ’

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face but
alacrity in his'heait. And while the late steamer ‘Big Mis-
souri ’ worked and sweated in the sun, the retired artist sat on

 

A MOTLEY COLLECTION.

a barrel in the shade close by, dangled his legs, munched his
apple, and planned the slaughter of more innocents. There
was no lack of material ; boys happened along every little
while ; they (name to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the
time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to
Billy Fisher fora kite, in good repair; andwhen he played out,
Johnny Miller bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it
with; and so on, and so on, hour after hour. And when the
middle of the aﬂernoon came, from being a poor poverty.
stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in
wealth. He had, beside the things before mentioned, twelve
marbles, part of a jew‘s—harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look

‘35
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA. WYER. 19

through, a spool-cannon, a key that wouldn’t unlock withing,
a fragment of chalk, a glass shopper of a decanbei; a tin soldier,
a. couple of tadpoles, six ﬁre-crackers, a kitten with only one
eye, a. brass door-knob, a dog-colhr—but no dog—the handle
of a knife, four pieces of orange-peel, and a dilapidated old
window-sash. He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

uusmmnr.

——-plenty of company—and the fence had three coats of white-
wash on it! If he hadn’t run out of whitewash, he would have
bankrupted every boy in the village.

Tom said to himself that it was not such a. hollow world,
aﬁer all. He had discovered a great law of human action,

without knowing it—namely, that in order to make a man or a
. c 2

 

.9
2p . THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing diﬁi-
oult to attain. If ,he had been a great and wise philosopher,
like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended
that Work consists of whatever a body is obhlged to do, and that
Play consists of whatever a. body is not obliged to do. And this
would help him to understand why constructing artiﬁcial
ﬂowers or performing on a. treadmill is work, while rolling
ten-pins or climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There
are wealthy gentlemen in England who drive four-horse
passenger-coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line in the
summer, because the privilege costs them considerable money ;
but if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn
it into work, and then they would resign.

The boy mused a while over the substantial change which
had. taken place in his worldly circumstances, and then wended
toward head-quarters to report. ’

new ADVENTURES OF TOM 8A Wrs’ze.‘ 21

CHAPTER III.

Ton presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by
an open window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was
bed-room, breakfast-room, dining-room, and library combined.
The balmy summer air, the restful quiet, the odour of the
ﬂowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees, had had their
effect, and she was nodding over her knitting—for she had no
company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap. Her
spectacles were propped up on her grey head for safety. She
had thought that of course Tom had deserted longago, and
she wondered at seeing him place himself in her power again in
this intrepid way. He said:

‘ Mayn’t I go and play now, aunt? ’

‘ What, a‘ready? How much have you done ? ’

‘ It’s all done, aunt.’

‘ Tom, don’t lie to me—I can’t bear it.’

‘I ain’t, aunt; it is all done.’

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went
out to see for herself; and she would have been content to ﬁnd
twenty per cent. of Tom’s statement true. When she found the
entire fence whitewashed, and not only whitewashed but elabor-
ately coated and reeoated, and even a streak added to the ground,
her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She said:

‘ Well, I never! There’s no getting round it : you can»
work when you’re a mind to, Tom.’ And then she diluted the
compliment by adding, ‘ But it’s powerful seldom you’re a mind

22 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 'SAWYER,

to, I’m bound to say. Well, go ’long and play; but mind you
get back sometime in a week, or I’ll tan you.’

She was so overcome by the splendour of his achievement
that she took him into the cloet and selected a. choice apple,
and delivered it to him, along with on improving lecture upon the
added value and ﬂavour a treat took to itself when it came
without sin through virtuous eﬁ'ort. And while she closed with
a happy Scriptural ﬂourish, he ‘hooked ’ a doughnut.

 

Then he skipped outq and saw Sid just starting up the out-
side stairway that led to the back rooms on the second ﬂoor.
Clods were handy, and the air was full of them in a twinkling.
They raged around Sid like ahailstorm ; and before Aunt Polly
could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six
or seven clods had taken personal eﬁ'ect, and Tom was over the
fence and gone. There was a. gate, but as a general he
was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEJL 23

peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to
his black thread and getting him into trouble.

Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley
that led by the back of his aunt’s cow stable. He presently
got safely beyond the reach of capture and punishment, and
heated toward the public square of the village, where two

 

AFTER THE BATTLE.

‘military’ companies of boys had met for conﬂict, according to
previous appointment. Tom was General of one of these armies,
Joe Harper (:1 bosom friend) General of the other. These two
great commanders did not condescend to ﬁght in person—that
being better suited to the still smaller fry—but sat together
on an eminence and conducted the ﬁeld operations by orders

{Jingle

24 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA W YER.

delivered through aidesrde-camp. Tom’s army won a great
victory, after a long and hard-fought battle. Then the dead
were counted, prisoners exchanged, the terms of the next/dis-
agreement agreed upon, and the day for the necessary battle
appointed; alter which the armies fell into line and marched
away, and Tom turned homeward alone.

As he was passing by the house where Jeﬂ' Thatcher lived,
he saw a. new girl in the garden—a lovely little blue-eyed
creature with yellow hair plaited into two long tails, white
summer frock, and embroidered pantalettes. The fresh-crowned
hero fell without ﬁring a shot. A certain Ainy Lawrence
vanished out of his heart, and left not even a memory of herself
behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction; he had
regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only apoor
little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her,
she had‘oonfessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest
and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days, and
here, in one instant of time, she had gone out of his heart like
a casual stranger whose visit is done.

He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw
that she had discovered him; then he pretended he did not
know she was present, and began to ‘ show oﬁ‘ ’ in all sorts of
absurd boyish ways, in order to win her admiration. He kept
up this grotesque foolishness for some time; but by-and-hy,
while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic per- ‘
formances, he glanced aside, and saw that the little girl was
wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to the
fence, and leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry
yet a while longer. She halted a moment on the steps,‘ and
then moved toward the door. Tom heaved a great sigh as
she put her foot on the threshold; but his face lit up, right
away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment
before she disappeared.

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 25-

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two
of the ﬂower, and then shaded his eyes with his hand,
and began to look down street as if he had discovered some--
thing of interest going on in that direction. Presently he
picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose,
with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to
side in his eﬂ‘orts he edged nearer and nearer towards the
pansy; ﬁnally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes
closed upon it, and he hopped away with the treasure, and,
disappeared round the corner. But only for a minute—only
while he could button the ﬂower inside his jacket, next his.
heart, or next his stomach possibly, for he was not much posted
in anatomy and not hypercritical anyway.

He returned now and hung about the fence till nightfall,
‘showing 05" as before; but the girl never exhibited herself"
again, though Tom comforted himself a little with the hope
that she had been near some window meantime, and been
aware of his attentions. Finally, he rode home reluctantly,
with his poor head full of visions.

All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt
wondered ‘what had got into the child.’ He took a good
scolding about clodding Sid, and did not seem to mind it in
the least. He tried to steal sugar under his aunt’s very nose,
and got his knuckles tapped for it. He said :

‘ Aunt, you don’t whack Sid when he takes it.’

‘ Well, Sid don’t torment a body the way you do. You’d
be always into that sugar if I wasn’t watching you.’

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in
his immunity, reached for the sugar—bowl—a sort of glorying
over Tom which was well-nigh unbearable. But Sid’s ﬁngers-
slipped, and the bowl dropped and broke. Tom was in ecstasies
—in such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was
silent. He said to himself that he would not speak a word,

26 .THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly still till
she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and
there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet
model ‘catch it.’ He was so brimful of exultation that he
could hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and
stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from
over her spectacles. He said to himself, ‘ Now it’s coming!’

 

NOT AIIBS.

And the next instant he was sprawling on the ﬂoor! The
potent palm was uplifted to strike again, when Tom cried out:
‘ Hold on, now, what’re you belting me for? Sid broke it ! ’
Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing
pity. But when she got her tongue again she only said: '
‘ Umf 2 Well, you didn’t get a lick miss, I reckon.
You been into some other audacious mischief when I wasn’t
around, like enough.’
Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say

um. i “1

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 27

something kind and loving; but she judged that this would be
construed inbo a confession that she had been in the wrong,
and discipline forbade that. So she kept silence, and went
about her nﬁ‘airs with a. troubled heart. Tom sulked in a
corner, and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart his
aunt was on her knees to him, and he was momsely gratiﬁed by

 

the consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he
would take notice of none. He knew that e yearning glance
fell upon him, now and then, through a ﬁlm of tears, but he
refused recognition of it. He pictured himself lying sick unto
death and his aunt bending over him, beseeching one little
forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die

 

28 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER;

he pictured himself brought home from the river, dead, with his
curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest. How she would throw
herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like rain, and
her lips pray God to give her back her boy, and she would never,
neverabuse him any more! But he would lie there cold and
white and make no sign—a poor little suﬂ‘erer, whose griefs?
were at an end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos
of these dreams that he had to keep swallowing—he was so
like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which

 

 

 

 

 

A FLOATING DREAM.

overHOWed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from
the end of his nose. And sucha. luxury to him was this petting
of his sorrows, that he could not bear to have any worldly
cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it; it was too
sacred for such contact; and so presently, when his cousin
Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again
after an age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up
and moved in clouds and darkness out at one door as she
brought song and sunshine in at the other.

 

‘TIIE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

He wandered far from the
accustomed hgunts of boys,
and sought desolate places
that were in harmony with
his spirit. A log raft in
the river invited him, and
be seated himself on its
outer edge, and contem-
plated the dreary vastness
of the stream, wishingthe
while that he could only be
drowned, all at once and
unconsciously, without un-
dergoing the uncomfortable
routine devised by nature.
Then he thought of his
ﬂower. He got it out,
rumpled and wilted, and it
mightily increased his dis-
mal felicity. He wondered
if she would pity him if
she knew? Would she cry,
and wish that she had a
right to put her arms around
his neck and comfort him ?
0; would she tum coldly
away like all the hollow
world? This picture brought
such an agony of pleasurable
suffering that he worked it
over and over again in his
mind, and set it up in new
and varied lights, till he wore

 

A COLD WRLCOXEA

 

30 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

it threadbare. At last he rose up sighing, and departed in the
darkness. 7

About half-past nine or ten o’clock he came along the
deserted street to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused
a moment, no sound fell upon his listening ear; a mndle was
casting a dull glow upon the curtain of a second-story window.
Was the sacred presence there ? He climbed the fence,
threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood
under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion ;
then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing
himself upon his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast,
and holding his poor wilted ﬂower. And thus he would die—
out in the cold world, with no shelter over his homeless head, no
friendly hand to wipe the death—damps from his brow, no loving
face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came.
And thus she would see him when she looked out upon the
glad morning—and oh ! would she drop one little-tear upon his
: poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a
bright young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down P

The window went up; a maid—servant’s discordant voice
profaned the holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the
prone martyr’s remains !

The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort; there
was a whiz as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur
of a curse, a sound as of shivering glass followed, and a small,
vague form went over the fence and shot away in the gloom.

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying
his drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke
up ; -but if he had any dim idea of making any ‘ references to
allusions,’ he thought better of it, and held his peace—for
there was danger in Tom’s eye.

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and
Sid made mental note of the omission.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYBR. 31

CHAPTER IV.

THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and, beamed down upon .
the peaceful village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt
Polly had family worship; it began with a. prayer built from
the ground up of solid courses of Scriptural quotations, welded
together with a thin mortar of originality; and from the summit
of this she delivered a grim chapter of the Mosaic Iaw, as from
Sinai.

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work
to ‘ get his verses.’ Sid had learned his lesson days before.
Tom bent all his energies to the memorising of ﬁve verses; and
he chose part of the Sermon on the Mount, because he could
ﬁnd no verses that were shorter. At the end of half an hour
Tom had a, vague general idea of his lesson, but no more, for
his mind was traversing the whole ﬁeld of human thought, and
his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary took
his book to hear him recite, and he tried to ﬁnd his way
through the fog.

‘ Blessed are the-—~a,-—a—-’

‘ Poor--’

‘Yes—poor; blessed are the poor—a—a—J

‘ In spirit—-’ ~

‘In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they—they—

‘ Theirs—’

‘For theirs. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs—is

y

82 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
—they-—’ .

‘ Sh—’

‘ For they-u—-’

‘ S, H, A—’

‘ For they S, 11—. Oh, I don’t know what it is ! ’

‘ Shall!’

..,¢/A M, 5

 

USING THE ‘ nAnnow.’

‘01:, shall! for they shall—for they shallwa—a—shnll
mourn—a—a—blessed are they that shall—they that—3*
they that shall mourn, for they ahall—a—shall what? Why
don’t you tell me, Mary ?—what do you want to be so mean
for? ’

‘ Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I’m not teasing
you. I wouldn’t do that. You must go and learn it again.

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 8A WYER. 83

Don’t you be discouraged, Tom, you’ll manage it—and if you
do, I’ll give you something ever so nice. There, now, that’s a
good boy.’

‘ All right! What is it, Mary ? tell me what it is.’

‘Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it’s nice, it is
nice.’
‘ You bet you that’s so, Mary. All right, I’ll tackle it again.’

And he did ‘ tackle it again ; ’ and under the double pressure
of curiosity and prospective gain, he did it with such spirit that.
be accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him abran-new
‘ Barlow‘ knife, worth twelve and a. half cents; and the con-
vulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his
foundations. True, the knife would not cut anything, but it
was a ‘ sure enough ’ Barlow, and there was inconceivable
grandeur in that—though where the western boys ever got
the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to
its injury is an imposing mystery, and will always remain so,
perhaps. Tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and
was arranging to begin on the bureau, when he was called oﬁ'
to dress for Sunday-school.

Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and
he went outside the door and set the basin on a little bench
there; then he dipped the soap in the water and laid it down ;
turned up his sleeves ; poured out the water on the ground
gently, and then entered the kitchen, and began to wipe his
£306 diligently on the towel behind the door. But Mary
removed the towel and said:

‘ Now ain’t you ashamed, Tom? You mustn’t be so bad.
Water won’t hurt you.’

Tom was a triﬂe disconcerted. The basin was reﬁlled, and
this time he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution ;
took in a big breath and began. When he entered the kitchen

presently, with both eyes shut and groping for the towel with
D

34 .THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

his hands, an honourable testimony of suds and water was drip-
ping from his face. But when he emerged from the towel he
was not yet satisﬁwtory, for the clean territory stopped short
at his chin and his jaws like a mask ; below and beyond this line
there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward
in front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand,
and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother,
without distinction of colour, and his saturated hair was neatly
3, brushed, and its short curls wrought into a dainty and symme-
‘ trical general eﬂ‘ect. (He privately smoothed out the curls,
with labour and difﬁculty, and plastered his hair close down to
his head ; for he held curls to be effeminate, and his own ﬁlled
his life with bitterness.) Then Mary got out a suit of his
clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years
—they were simply called his ‘ other clothes ’—and so by that
we know the size of his wardrobe. The girl ‘ put him to rights ’
after he had dressed himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout
up to his chin, turned his vast shirt-collar down over his shoul—
ders, brushed him oﬁ‘, and crowned him with his speckled straw
hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and uncomfortable.
He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there was a
restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that gelled him.
He hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was
blighted ; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the
custom, and brought them out. He lost his temper, and said
he was always being made to do everything he didn’t want to do.
But Mary said persuasively:

‘ Please, Tom—that’s a good boy.’

So he got into his shoes, snarling. Mary was soon ready,
and the three children set out for Sunday-school, a place that
Tom hated with his whole heart; but Sid and Mary were
fond of it.

Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past ten; and

u.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 36 -

then church service. Two of the children always remained for
the sermon voluntarily; and the other always remained, too—-
for stronger reasons. The church’s high-backed uncushjoned
pews would seat about three hundred persons; the ediﬁce was
but a small, plain affair, with a. sort of pine-board tree-box on
top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom dropped back a step
and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:

‘ Say, Bill, got a yaller ticket? ’

‘ Yes.’

‘ What’ll you take for her ? ’

‘ What’ll you give ? ’

‘ Piece of lickrish and a ﬁsh-hook.’

‘Less see ’em.’ > .

Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property
changed hands. Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for
three red tickets, and some small triﬂe or other for a couple of
blue ones. He waylaid other boys as they came, and went on
buying tickets of various colours ten or ﬁfteen minutes longer.
He entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and noisy
boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a quarrel with
the ﬁrst boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave, elderly
man, interfered; then turned his back a moment, and Tom
pulled a boy’s hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his
book when the boy turned around ; stuck a pin in another boy,
presently, in order to hear him say ‘Ouchl’ and got a new

I reprimand from his teacher. Tom’s whole class were of a
pattern—restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they came to
recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly,
but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried
through, and each got his reward in small blue tickets, each
with a passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for
two verses of the recitation; Ten blue tickets equalled a red
one, and could be exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled

D2

- 86 Tim ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

a yellow one ; for ten yellow tickets the Superintendent gave a
very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in those easy times),
to the pupil. How many of my readers would have the industry
and application to memorise two thousand verses, even for a

 

Doré Bible? And yet Mmy had acquired two Bibles in this
way ; it was the patient work of two years: and a boy of German
parentage had won four or ﬁve. He once recited three thou-
sand verses without stopping; but the strain upon his mental
fwulties was too great, and he was little better than an idiot

we

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 37

from that day forth—a. grievous misfortune for the school, for
on great occasions befow company, the Superintendent (as Tom
expressed it) had 'always made this boy come out and ‘ spread
himself.’ Only the older pupils managed to keep their tickets
and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and
so the delivery of one of these prize: was a rare and noteworthy

 

 

 

NECEBSITIEE.

circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous
for that day that on the spot every scholar‘s heart was ﬁred
with a fresh-ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is
possible that Tom’s mental stomach had never really hungered
for one of those prizes, but unquestionably his entire being bad
for many a day longed for the glory and the éclat thntvcame
with it. . “

 

38 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

In due course the Superintendent stood up in front of the
pulpit, with a closed hymn-book in his hand and his foreﬁnger
inserted between its leaves, and commanded attention. When
a Sunday-school superintendent makes his customary little
speech, a hymn-book in the hand is as necessary as is the
inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer who stands
forward on‘the platform and sings a solo at a concert—though
why is a mystery; for neither the hymn—ka nor the sheet of
music is ever referred to by the suﬁ'erer. This superintendent
was a slim creature of thirty-ﬁve, with a sandy goatee, and
short sandy hair 3 he wore a stiff standing-collar whose upper
edge almost reached his ears, and whose sharp points curved
forward abreast the corners of his mouth—a fence that com-
pelled a straight look—out ahead, and a turning of the whole
body when a side view was required. His chin was propped on
a spreading cravat, which was as broad and as long as a bank
note, and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply
up, in the fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners—an eﬁ'ect
patientlyvand laboriously produced by the young men by sitting
with their toes pressed against a wall for hours together. Mr.
Walters was very earnest of mien, and very sincere and honest
at heart; and he held sacred things and places in such rever—
ence, and so separated them from worldly matters, that uncon-
sciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a
peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He
began after this fashion:

‘ Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and
pretty as you um, and give me all your attention for a minute
or two. There, that is it. That is the way good little boys
and girls should do. I see one little girl who is looking out of
the window—I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere
—perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the little
birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you how good it

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 39

makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces as-
sembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good.’

And so forth, and so on. It is not necessary to set down
the rest of the oration. It was of a pattern which does not
vary, and so it is familiar to us all.

The latter third of the speech was marred by the resump—
tion of ﬁghts and other recreations among certain of the bad
boys, and by ﬁdgetings and whisperings that extended far and
wide, washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible
rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every sound ceased suddenly
with the subsidence of Mr. Walters’ voice, and the conclusion
of the speech was received with a burst of silent gratitude.

A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an I
event which was more or less rare—the entrance of visitors;
Lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very feeble and aged man,
a. ﬁne, portly, middle-aged gentleman with iron-grey hair, and
a digniﬁed lady who was doubtless the latter‘s wife. V The lady
was leading a child. Tom had been restless and full of chaﬁngs
and repinings, conscience-smitten, too,~——he could not meet
Amy Lawrence’s eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But
when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with
bliss in a moment. The next moment he was ‘showing 03"
with all his might—ending boys, pulling hair, making faces, in
a. word, using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl,
and win her applause. His exultation had but one alloy—the ‘
memory of his humiliation in this angel’s garden; and that
record in sand was fast washing out under the waves of happi-
ness that were sweeping over it now. The visitors were given
the highest seat of honour, and as soon as Mr. Walters’ speech
was ﬁnished, he introduced them to the school. The middle—
aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage: no less an
one than the oountyjudge—altogether the most august creation
these children had ever looked upon; and they wondered what

40 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

\

kind of material he was made of; and they half wanted to hear
him roar, and were half afraid he might, too. He was from
Constantinople, twelve miles away—so he had travelled and
seen the worldmthese very eyes had looked upon the County
Court House, which was said to have s. tin roof. The awe
which these reﬂections inspired was attested by the impressive
‘ silence and the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge
Thatcher, brother of their own lawyer. Jeﬂ‘ Thatcher immedi—
ately went forward to be familiar with the great man, and be
envied by the school. It would have been music to his soul to
hear the whisperings.

‘ Look at him, Jim! he’s a going up there. Say look ! he’s
a going to shake hands with him; he is shaking hands with
him. By jinks, don’t you wish you was Jeﬁ? ’

Mr. Walters fell to ‘ showing 05 ’ with all sorts of ofﬁcial
bust-lings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments.
discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could
ﬁnd a target. The librarian ‘showed oﬂ',’ running hither
and thither with his arms full of books and making a deal of
the splutter and fuss that insect authority delights in. ~ The
young lady teachers ‘ showed off ’——bendin,g sweetly over pupils
that were lately being boxed, lilting pretty warning ﬁngers a;
had little boys and patting good ones lovingly. The young
gentleman teachers ‘showed oﬂ" with small scoldings and
other little displays of authority and ﬁne attention to discipline ;
and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up at
the library by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently
had to be done over again two or three times (with much
seeming vexation). The little girls ‘showed 03" in various
ways, and the little boys ‘ showed 06' ’ with such diligence that
the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scuﬁlings:
And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic ~
judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself in the

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 41

sun of his own grandeur, for he was ‘ showing oﬁ" too. There
was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Wnlters's ecstasy
complete, and that was a. chance to deliver a. Bible-prize and
exhibit a prodigy. Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but
none had enough—he had been around among the star pupils
inquiring. He would have given worlds, now, to have that
German lad back again with a sound mind.

c 0:»
A.

 

TOM OBTAIN! A PRIZE

And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer
came forward with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and
'ten blue ones, and demanded a Bible! This was a thunderbolt
~oflt of a clear sky. Walters was not expecting an application
from this source for the next ten years. But there was no
getting around it—here were the certiﬁed checks, and they were

 

 

42 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

good for their face. Tom was therefore elevated to a place with
the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was an-
nounced from head-quarters. Itwss the most stunning surprise
of the decade ; and so profound was the sensation that it liked
the new hero up to the judicial one’s altitude, and the school
had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one. The boys were
all eaten up with envy; but those that suﬁ‘ered the bittersst
pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves
had contributed to this hated splendour by trading tickets to
,Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling white-washing
privileges. These despised themselves, as being the dupes of
a wily fraud, 3. guileful snake in the grass.

The prize was delivered to Tom with as muchveﬂ‘usion as
the Superintendent could pump up under the circumstances;
but it lacked somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow’s
instinct taught him that there was a mystery here that could
not well bear the light, perhaps; it was simply preposterous
that this boy had warehoused two thousand sheaves of Scrip-
tural wisdom on his premises—«a dozen would strain his
capacity, without a doubt. Amy Lawrence was proud and
glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her face; but he
wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was a grain
troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went—came again ;
she watched; a furtive glance told her worlds—and then her
heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and the tears
came and she hated everybody; Tom most of all, she thought.

Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied,
his breath would hardly come, his heart quaked—partly be~
cause of the awful greatness of the man, but mainly because
he was her parent. He would have liked to fall down and
worship him, if it were in the dark. The Judge put his hand
on Tom’s head and called him a ﬁne little man, and asked him
what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 43

‘Ton.’

‘ Oh, no, not Tom—it is—‘

‘Thomas.’

‘Ah, that’s it. I thought there was more to it, maybe.
That’s very well. But you’ve another one I dare say, and
you’ll tell it to me, won’t you? ’

/-,. //, If
/.///

       

    

TOM AB A SUNDAY-M3001. HERD.

‘Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said
Walters, ‘ and say air. You mustn’t forget your manuers.’

‘Thomns Sawyer—sir}

‘That’s it! that’s a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly
little fellow. Two thousand verses in a great many—very,
very great many. And you never can be sorry for the trouble

y’ ‘ l
: M‘v’ “in:
l,

44 THE ADVENTURES OF TOIK SAWYER.

you took to learn them; for knowledge is worth more than
anything there is in the world; it’s what makes great men'and
good men; you’ll be a great man and a goodlnan yourself
some day, Thomas, and then you‘ll look back and say, It’s all
owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood;
it’s all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn; it’s
all owing to the good Superintendent, who encouraged me and
watched over me, and gave me a beautiful Bible, a splendid,
elegant Bible, to keep and have it all for my own, always; it’s
all owing to right bringing up! That is what you will say,
Thomas; and you wouldn’t take any money for those two
thousand verses—no, indeed you wouldn‘t. And now you
wouldn’t mind telling me and this lady some of the things
you’ve learned—no, I know you wouldn’t—for we are proud of
little boys that learn. Now no doubt you know the names of
all the twelve disciples. Won’t you tell us the names of the
ﬁrst two that Were appointed? ’

Tom was tugging at a button and looking sheepish. He
blushed now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters’s heart sank
within him. He said to himself, It is not possible that the
boy can answer the simplest question—why did the Judge ask
him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say:

‘ Answer the gentleman, Thomas—don’t be afmid.’

Tom still hung ﬁre.

‘ Now, I know you’ll tell me,’ said the lady. ‘ The names
of the ﬁrst two disciples were—J

‘stm sun Gonun ! ’

Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the
scene.

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWJ'ER. 45

CHAPTER V.

ABOUT hélf-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began

to ring, and presently the people began to gather for the
morning sermon. The Sunday-school children distributed

m "t

l' m [s 1 mm

mm: L m-
{ 1 A4“  i.
J. M " u

v

sw‘é'i'éf 2‘1 l
I

 

TEE HORNING SIB-ION.

themselves about the house, and occupied pews with their
parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt Polly came, and
Tom and Sid, and Mary sat with her—Tom being placed next

 

s
46 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘

the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open
window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible.
The crowd ﬁled up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster,
who had seen better days; the mayor and his wife—for they
. had a mayor there, among other unnecessaries ; the justice of
 the peace; the widow Douglass, fair, smart, and forty, a generous,
good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her hill mansion the only

 

THE MODEL BOY.

palace in the town, and the most hospitable and much the
most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg
could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward;
Lawyer Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the
belle of the village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and
ribbon-decked young heart-breakers; then all the young clerks

 

THE ADVENTURES OF T 031 SAWYERL 47

in town in a body——for they had stood in the vestibule sucking
their cane-heads, a circling wall of oiled and simpering
admirers, till the last girl had run their gauntlet; and last of
all came the Model Boy, Willie Muﬁ‘erson, taking as heedful
care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always brought
his mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons.
The boys all hated him, he was so good ; and besides, he had
been ‘ thrown up to them ’ so much. His white handkerchief
was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual on Sundays—

 

THE CHURCH CHOIR.

accidentally. 'Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon
boys who had as snobs. The congregation being fully assembled
now, the bell rang once more, to warn laggards and stragglers,
and then a solemn hush fell upon the church, which was only
broken by the tittering and whispering of the choir in the
gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all through
service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many
years ago, and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but '
I think it was in some foreign country.

 

48 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with
a relish, in a peculiar style which was much admired in that
part of the country. His yoice began on a medium key, and
climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point, where it bore
with strong emphasis upon the topmost word, and then plunged
down as if from a spring-board—

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church
‘sociables’ he was always called upon to read poetry; and
when he was through, the ladies would lift up their hands
and let them fall helplessly in their laps, and ‘wall’ their
eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, ‘ Words cannot
express it; it is too beautiful, too beautiful for this mortal
earth.’

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague
turned himself into a bulletin board, and read of ‘ notices ’ of
meetings and societies and things till it seemed that, the list
would stretch out to the crack of doom—a queer custom which

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 49

is still kept up in America, even in cities, away here in this
age of abundant newspapers. Often the less there is to justify
a traditional custom, the harder it is toget rid of it.

And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it
was, and went into details. It pleaded for the Church, and the
little children of the Church; for the other churches of the
village; for the village itself; for the county; for the State;
for the State oﬂieers; for the United States; for the churches
of the United States; for Congress; for the President; for the
oﬂ'lcers of the Government; for poor sailors, tossed by stormy
seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such as
have the light and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to
see nor ears to hear withal; for the heathen in the far islands
of the sea; and closed with a supplication that the words he
was about to speak might find grace and favour, and be as seed
sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a grateful harvest of .
good. Amen.

There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congrega-
tion sat down. The boy whose history this book relates did not
enjoy the prayer, he only endured it—if he even did that much.
He was restive all through it; he kept tally of the details of
the prayer, ,unconsciously—for he was not listening, but he
knew the ground of old, and the clergyman’s regular route over
it—and when a little triﬂe of new matter was interlarded, his
ear detected it and his whole nature resented it; he considered
additions unfair, and sooundrelly. In the midst of the prayer
a ﬂy had lit on the back of the pew in front of him, and
tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together;
embracing its head with its arms and polishing it so vigorously
that it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the
slender th’ead of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its
wings with its hind legs and smoothing them to its body as if

E

50 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

they had been coat-tails; going through its whole toilet as
tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly safe. As indeed it
was; for as sorely as Tom’s hands itched to grab for it they did
not dare——he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if
he did such a thing while the prayer was going on. But with
the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward;
and the instant the ‘ Amen ’ was out, the ﬂy was a prisoner of
war. His aunt detected the act, and made him let it go.

The minister gave out his text and droned along monoton-
ously through an argument that was so prosy that many a head
by-and-by began to nod—and yet it was an argument that
dealt in limitless ﬁre and brimstone, and thinned the pre-
destined elect down to a. company so small as to be hardly
worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon;
after church he always knew how many pages there had
been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse.
However, this time he was really interested for a little while.
The minister made a grand and moving picture of the
assembling together of the world’s hosts at the millennium,
when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little
child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral
of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought
of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the
on-looking nations ; his face lit with the thought, and he
said to himself that he wished he could be that child, if it was
a tame lion.

> Now he lapsed into suffering again as the dry argument
was resumed. Presently he bethongbt himself of a treasure he
had, and got it out. It was a. large black beetle with formid-
able jaws—a ‘ pinch-bug,’ he called it. It‘ was in aperoussion-
cap box. The ﬁrst thing the beetle did was to take him by the
ﬁnger. A natural ﬁllip followed, the beetle went ﬂoundering
into the aisle, and lit on its back, and the hurt ﬁnger went into

THE ADVENTURES 0!" T0)! 5.4 W YER. 51'

the boy’s mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless
legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it, but
it was safe out of his reach. Other people, uninterested in the
sermon, found relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too.
Presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling along, and at
heart, lazy with the summer softness and the quiet, weary of

 

A SIDE SHOW.

captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle; the

drooping tail liﬁed and wagged. He surveyed the prize;

walked around it ; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked

around it again; grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then

lifted his lip, and made a. gingerly snatch at ig just missing it;

made another, and another; began to enjoy the diversion;
- 2

ex z-ﬁ'u. EL‘

62 ' THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws, and
continued his experiments; grew weary at last, and then
indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little
by little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized
it. There was a sharp yelp, a ﬂirt of the poodle’s head,snd the
beetle fell a couple of yards away, and lit on its beck once
more. The neighbouring spectators shock with a gentle
inward joy, several faces went behind fans and handkerchiefs,
and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked foolish, and

 

RESULT OF PLAYING IN CHURCH.

probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart, too,
and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle, and began
a wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of
a circle, lighting with his fore-paws within an inch of the
creature, making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and
jerking his head till his ears ﬁapped again. But he grew tired
once more, alter a while; tried to amuse himself with a ﬂy, but
found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close to
the ﬂoor, and quickly wear-led of that; yawned, sighed, forgot

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. I 63

the beetle entirely, and sat down on it! Then there was a
wild yelp of agony, and the poodle went sailing up the aisle;
the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house
in front of the altar; he ﬂew down the other aisle ; he crossed
before the doors; he clamoured up the home-stretch; his
anguish grew with his progress, till. presently he was but a.
woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and the speed
of light. At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course
and sprang into its master’s lap: he ﬂung it out of the window,
and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and died in the
distante.

By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating
with suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead
standstill. The discourse was resumed presently, but it went
lame and halting, all possibility of impressiveness being at an
end; for even the gravest sentiments were constantly being
received with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover
of some remote pew-back, as if the poor person had said a rarely
ﬁlcetious thing. It was a genuine relief to the whole congre-
gation when the ordeal was over and the benediction pro
nounced. ‘

Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself
that there was some satisfaction about divine service when there
was a bit of variety in it. He had but one man-ring thought;
he was willing that the dog should play with his pinch-bug,
but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it oﬂ'.

’54 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

CHAPTER VI.

MONDAY morning found Tom" Sawyer miSerable. -Monday
morning always found him so,: because it began another week’s
slow suffering in school. He generally began that day with
wishing he had had no intervening holiday, it made the going
into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.

Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he
wished he was sick; then he could stay'home from school.
Here was a vague possibility. He canvassed his system. No
ailment was found, and he investigated again. This time he
thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he began to
encourage them with considerable hope. But they soon grew
feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reﬂected further.
Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth
was loose. This was lucky ; he was about to begin to groan, as a
‘ starter,’ as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came
into court with that argument his aunt would pull it out, and
that would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in
reserve for the present, and seek further. Nothing offered for
some little time, and then he remembered hearing the doctor
tell about a certain thing that laid up a patient for two or three
weeks and threatened to make him lose a ﬁnger. So the boy
eagerly drew his sore too from under the sheet and held it
up for inspection. But now he did not know the necessary
symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance it,
so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.

But Sid slept on, unconscious.

THE ADVENTURES 01" T03! SAWYER. 66

Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain
in the toe.

No result from Sid. .

Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took
a rest and then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of
admirable groans. '

Sid snored on.

Tom was aggavated. He said, ‘Sid. Sid !’ and shook him.
This course worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid
yawned, stretched, then brought himself up on his elbow with
a snort, and began to stare at Tom. Tom went on groaning.
Sid said:

‘Tom! say Tom!’

No response.

‘ Here, Tom! Tom! What is the matter, Tom ? ’ And he
shook him, and looked in his face anxiously.

Tom moaned out:

‘ Oh, don’t, Sid. Don’t joggle me.’

‘ Why, what’s the matter, Torn? I must call auntie.’

‘No, never mind. It’ll be over by-and-by, maybe, Don’t
call anybody.’

‘ But I must! Don’t groan so, Tom, it’s awful. How long
you been this way i’ ’

‘ Hours. Ouch! Oh, don’t stir so, Sid. You’ll kill me.’

‘ Tom, why didn’t you wake me sooner? 0h, Tom, don’t!
It makes my ﬂesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter ? ’

‘ I forgive you everything, Sid. (Groom) Everything
you’ve ever done to me. When I’m gone—’ '

‘ Oh, Tom, you ain’t dying, are you? Don’t, Tom. Oh,
don’t. Maybe——-’

‘ I forgive everybody, Sid. (Groan.) Tell ’em so, Sid.
And, Sid, you give 'my window-sash and my cat with one
eye to that new girl that’s come to town, and tell her——

56 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

' But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was
I suﬂ'ering in reality now, so handsomely was his imagination
working, and so his groans had gathered. quite a genuine tone.
Sid ﬂew downstairs and said:
‘ Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom’s dying!’
‘Dying 1 ’

 

WI LD-EYED TOM.

‘Yes’m. Don’t wait, come quick! ’

‘ Ruhbage! I don’t believe it I '

But she ﬂed upstairs nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at
her heels. And her face grew white, too, and her lips trembled.
When she reached the bed she gasped out:

‘ You Tom ! Tom, what’s the matter with you? ’

‘ Oh, auntie, I’ —’ -

 

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 57

‘ What’s the matter with you—what iethe matter with you,
child ? ’

‘ Oh, auntie, my sore toe’a mortiﬁed! ’ .

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed: little,
then cried a little, then did both together. This restored her,
and she said:

 

‘Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that
nimsense and climb out of this.’

The groans ceased, and the pain vanished from the toe.
The boy felt a little foolish, and he said:

‘Aunt Polly, it seemed mortiﬁed, and it hurt so; I never
minded my tooth at all.’

‘ Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your tooth ? ’

 

 

58 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWFBR.

fOne of them’s loose, and it aches perfectly awful.’

‘ There, there now, don’t begin that groaning again. Open
your mouth. Well, your tooth is loose, but you’re not going
to die about that. Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of
ﬁre out of the kitchen.’

Tom said: .

‘ Oh, please auntie, don’t pull it out, it don’t hurt any
more. I wish I may never stir if it does. Please don’t, auntie;
I don’t want to stay home from school.’

‘ Oh, you don’t, don’t you? So all this row was because
you thought you’d get to stay home from school and go a
ﬁshing ? Tom, Tom, I love you so, and you seem to try every
way you can to break my old heart with your outrageousness.’

By this time the dental instruments were ready. The old
lady made one end of the silk thread ﬁzst to Tom’s tooth with
a loop and tied the other to the bed-post. Then she seized
the chunk of ﬁre and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy’s
ﬁwe. The tooth hung dangling by the bed-post, now.

But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended
to school after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met
because the gap in his upper row of teeth enabled him to
expectorate in a new and admirable way. He gathered quite
a following of lads interested in the exhibition; and one that
had cut his ﬁnger and had been a centre of fascination and
homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without
an adherent, and sham of his glory. His heart was heavy,
and he said with a disdain which he did not feel, that it
wasn’t anything to spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy
.‘said ‘ Sour grapes! ’ and he wandered away a dismantled hero.

Shortly Tom came upon-the juvenile pariah of the village,
Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry
was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town,
because he was idle, and Lawless, and vulgar, and bad—and

,TIIE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 59

because all their children admired him so, and delighted in his
forbidden society and wished they dared to be like him. Tom
was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied
Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict
orders not to play with him. So he played with him. every
time he got e chance. Huckleberry was always dressed in

 

uncx u none.

the cast-oh“ clothes of full-grown men, and they were in
perennial bloom and ﬂuttering with tags. His hat was a vast
min with a wide crescent lapped out of its brim; his coaf,
when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels, and had the rear;
ward buttons far down the back; but one suspender supported
his trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged low and contained
nothing; the fringed legs dragged in the dirt when not rolled

 

60 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

up. Huckleberry came and went at his own free will. He
slept on door-steps in ﬁne weather, and in empty hogsheads in
wet; he did not have to go to school or to church, or call any
being master, or obey anybody: he could go ﬁshing or swim-
ming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it suited
him; nobody forbade him to ﬁght; he could sit up as late as
he pleased; he was always the ﬁrst boy that went barefoot in

 

H UCKLE BERRY FINN.

the spring and the last to resume leather in the fall ; he never
had to wash, not put on clean clothes; he could swear wonder-
fully. In a. word, everything that goes to make life precious,
that boy had. So thought every harassed, hampered, respect-
able boy in St. Petersburg. Tom hailed the romantic outcast :
‘ Hello, Huckleberry ! ’
‘ Hello yourself, and see how you like it.’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM' SA WYER. 61

‘ What’s that you got '1’ ’

‘ Dead cat.’

‘ Lemme see him, Huck. My, he’s pretty stiﬁ‘. Where’d
you get him ? ’

‘ Bought him oﬂ’n a boy.’

‘ What did you give?’ '

‘ I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the
slaughter-honse.’ . , I '

‘ Where’d you get the blue ticket ? ’

‘ Bought it oE’n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick.‘

‘ Say—what is dead eats good for, Huck ? ’

‘Good for? Cure warts with.’ ‘

‘ No? Is that so? I know something that’s better.‘

‘I bet you don’t. What is it ?’

‘ Why, spunk water.’

‘ ‘ Spunk water! I wouldn’t give a dem for spunk water.’

‘ You wouldn’t, wouldn’t you ? D’you ever try it? ’

‘ No, I hain’t. But Bob Tanner did.’

‘Who told you so? ’ . ' ,

‘Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeﬁ' told Johnny Baker,
and Johnny told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and
Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me. There, now! ’

‘ Well, what of it? They’ll all lie. Leastways all but'the
nigger, I don’t know him. But I never see a nigger that

‘ wmcld/n’t lie. Shncks! Now you tell me how Bob Tanner
done it, Huck.’

‘ Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump
where the rain water was.’

‘ In the daytime? ’

‘ Certainly.’ ~

‘ With his face to the stump? ’

‘ Yes. Least I reckon so.’

‘ Did he say anything? ’

62 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYE'R.

‘ I don’t reckon he did, I don’t know.’

‘ Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk water
such a blame fool way as that! Why, that ain’t a going to do
any good. You got to go all by yourself to the middle of the
woods, where you know there’s a spunk water stump, and just
as it’s midnight you back up against the stump and jam your
hand in and say: '

Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,
Spunk water, spunk water, swaller these warts,

and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut,
and then turn around three times and walk home without speak-
ing to anybody. Because if you speak, the chann’s busted.’

‘ Well, that sounds like a good way ; but that ainft the way
Bob Tanner done.’

‘No, sir, you can bet he didn’t; becuz he’s the wartiest boy
in this town; and he wouldn’t have a wart on him if he’d
knowed how to work spunk water. I’ve took off thousands of
warts 01? of l‘ny hands that way, Huck. I play with frogs so
much that I’ve always got considerable many warts. Sometimes
I take ’em OH with a bean.’

‘Yes, bean’s good. I‘ve done that.’

‘ Have you? What’s your way? ’

‘ You take and split the bean, and out the wart so as to get
some blood, and then you put the blood onone piece of the
bean, and take and dig a hole and bury it ’bout midnight at
the cross-roads in the dark of the moon, and then you burn up
the rest of the bean. You see that piece that’s got the blood
on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other
piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart, and

' pretty soon 03‘ she comes.’

‘ Yes, that’s it, Huck—that’s it ; though, when you’re

burying it, if you say, “ Down bean, oﬂ' wart ; come no more to

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 83

bother me l ” it’s better. That‘s the way Joe Harper does, and
he’s been nearly to Coonville, and most everywheres. But say
—how do you cure ’em with dead cats? ’

‘ Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard ‘
’long about midnight when somebody that was wicked has '
been buried; and when it’s midnight a devil will come, or
maybe two or three, but you can’t see ’em, you can only hear
something like the wind, or maybe hear ‘em talk; and when
they’re taking that feller away, you heave your cat after ’em
and say, “ Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat,
I’m done with ye! ” That’ll fetch any wait.’

‘ Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck ? '

‘ No, but old Mother Hopkins told me.’

‘ Well, I reckon it’s so, then, beeuz they say she’s a witch.‘

‘ Say! Why, Tom, I know she is. She witched pap. Pap
says so his own self. He come along one day, and he see she
was a Witching him, so he took up a rock, and if she hadn’t
dodged he’d 3 got her. Well, that very night he rolled oﬁ’n a
shed wher’ he was a layin’ drunk, and broke his arm.’

‘ Why, that’s awful. How did he know she was a. Witching
him ? ‘

‘ Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking
at you right stiddy, they’re a Witching you, specially if they
mumble. Beouz when they mumhle they’re saying the Lord’s
Prayer hackards.’

‘ Say, Hunky, when you going to try the cat ? ’

‘ To-night. I reckon they’ll come after old Hose Williams
to-night.’

‘ But they buried him Saturday. Didn’t they get him
Saturday night? ’

‘ Why, how you talk ! How could their charms work till
midnight 'x’ and then it's Sunday. Devils don’t slash around
much of a Sunday, I don’t reckon.’

-me

64 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

‘ I never thought of that. That’s so. Lemme go with
you ? ’

‘ Of course—if you ain’t afeard.’

‘ Afeard! ’Tain’t likely. Will you meow?’

‘Yes, and you meow back if you get a chance. Last time
you kep’ me a meowing around till old Hays went to throwing
rocks at me, and says, “ Dem that cat ! " and so I have a brick
through his window—but don’t you tell.’

‘ I won’t. I couldn’t meow that night becuz auntie was
watching me ; but I’ll meow this time. Say—what’s that? '

‘ Nothing but a tick.’

‘ Where’d you get him ? '

‘ Out in the woods.’

‘ What’ll you take for him?’

‘ I don’t know. I don’t want to sell him.’

‘ All right. It’s a mighty small tick, anyway.’

‘ Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don’t belong
to them. I’m satisﬁed with it. It’s a good enough tick for
‘ Sho, there’s ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of
em if I wanted to.’ I V

‘ Well, why don’t you ? Becuz you know mighty well you
can’t. This is a pretty early tick, I reckon. It’s the ﬁrst one -
I’ve seen this year.’

‘ Say, Huck, I’ll give you my tooth for him.’

‘ Less see it.’

Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unmlled it.
Huckleberry viewed it wistfully. The temptation was very
strong. At last he said:

‘ Is it genuwyne ? ’ ,

Tom lifted his lip' and showed the vacancy.

‘ Well, all right,’ said Huckleberry ; ‘ it’s a trade.’

Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 66

lately been the pinch-bug’s prison, and the boys separated, each
feeling wealthier than before.

When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse, he
strode in briskly, with the manner of one who had come with
all honest speed. He hung his hat on a. peg,nnd ﬂung himself
into his seat with business-like slacrity. The muster, throned

‘I/ r " F347;? (/4 j//’,'

VIM/M I r 4/;
/ . , i, 7
7, ,4
([721

x
;

      

 

   

 
 

I .
l

:5
v:

  

TOX ASTONISEIB THE SCHOOL.

on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled
by the drowsy hum of study. The interruption roused him:
‘ Thomas Sawyer! ’
'Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full it
meant trouble.
‘ Sir! ’

‘ Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual? ’ ’

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two

F

 

66 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

long tails of yellow hair hanging down aback that he recognised
by the electric sympathy of love; and by that form was the
only mica/rd place on the girl’s side of the school-house. He
instantly said:

‘ I mess]; TO TALK WITH Hucxussmr FINN! ’

The master’s pulse stood still, and he stated helplessly.
The buzz of study ceased; the pupils wondered if this fool-
hardy boy had lost his mind. The master said:

‘ You-you did what ? ’

‘ Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn.’

There was no mistaking the words.

‘Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I
have ever listened to ; no mere fernle will answer for this
offence. Take OE your jacket.’

The master’s arm performed until it was tired, and the
stock of switches notably diminished. Then the order followed :

‘ Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a.
warning to you.’

The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abs-sh
the boy, but in reality that result was caused rather more by
his wotshipful awe of his unknown idol and the dread pleasure
that lay in his high good fortune. He sat down upon the end
of the pine bench, and the girl hitched herself away from him
with a. toss of her head. Nudges and winks and whispers
traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the
long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book. By
and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school
murmur rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy
began to steal furtive glances at the girl. She observed it,
‘made a month’ at him, and gave him the back of her head
for the space of a minute. When she cautiously faced around
again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it away. Tom gently
put it back; she thrust it away again, but with less animosity.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 87

Tom patiently returned it to its place; then she let it remain.
Tom scrawled on his slate, ‘ Please take itr—I got more.‘ The
girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy
began to draw something on the slate, hiding his work with his
leit hand. F6! 8 time the girl refused to notice ; but her
human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly
perceptible signs. The boy worked on, apparently unconscious.
The girl made a sort of non-committal attempt to see, but the

 

’I'OK AB AH ARTIST.

boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last she gave
in, and hesitatingly whispered:

‘ Let me see it.’

Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with
two gable ends to it and a cork-screw of smoke issuing from the
chimney. Then the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon
the work, and she forgot everything else. When it was ﬁnished,
she gazed a moment, then whispered:

‘ It’s nice—make a. man.’

The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled

v 2

68 TEE ADVENTURES OI" TOM SAWYER

a derrick. He could have stepped over the house; but the
girl was not hypercritical; she was satisﬁed with the monster,
and whispered:

‘ It’s a~ beautiful man—now make me coming along.’

Tom drew an hourglass, with a full moon and straw limbs to
it, and armed the spreading ﬁngers with a portentous tan. The
girl said: ' '

‘ It’s ever so nice—I wish I could draw.’

‘ It’s easy,’ whispered Tom. ‘ I’ll learn you.’

‘Oh, will you? When?’

‘ At, noon. Do you go home to dinner? ’

‘ I’ll stay if you will.’

‘ Good—that’s a whack. What’s your name? ’

‘ Becky Thatcher. What’s yours? Oh, I know. It's
Thomas Sawyet.’

‘ That’s the name they lick me by. I’m Tom when I’m good.
You call me Tom, will you ? ’

‘ Yes.‘

Now Tom began to screw] something on the slate, hiding the
words from the girl. But she was not backward this time. She
begged to see. Tom said:

‘ Oh, it ain't anything.’

‘ Yes it is.’

‘ No it ain’t; you don’t want to see.’

‘Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me.’

‘ You’ll tell.’

‘ No I won’t—deed and deed and double deed I won’t.’

‘ You won’t tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as you
live ? ’

‘ No, I won’t ever tell anybody. Now let me.’:

‘ Oh, you. don’t want to see!’

‘Now that you treat me so I will See.’ And she put her
small hand upon his, and a little scufﬂe ensued, Tom pretending

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 09

to‘resist in earnest, but letting his hand slip by'deg-rees till
these words were revealed: ‘ I love you.’

‘ Oh, you bad thing! ’ And she hit his hand a smart rap,
but teddened and looked pleased nevertheless.

Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing
onhis ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that vice he was

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTERBUPTED COURTSEIP.

borne moss the house and deposited in his own seat, under a
peppering ﬁre of giggles! from the whole school. Then the
master stood over him during a few awful moments, and ﬁnally
moved away to his throne without saying a word. But although
Tom’s ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.

As the school quieted down, Tom made an honest eﬂ‘ort to
study, but the turmoil within him was too great. In turn he
took his place in the reading class and made a batch of it, then in

 

70 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

the geography class and turned lakes into mountains, mountains
into rivers, and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again;
then in the spelling class, and got ‘ turned down ’ by a succession
of mere baby words till he brought up at the foot and yielded
up the pewter medal which he had worn with ostentation for

months.

THE ADVEM'URES OF TOM SAWYER. 71

CHAPTER VII.

TH! harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more
his ideas wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he
gave it up. It seemed to him that the noon recess would never
come. The air was' utterly dead. There was not a breath
stirring. It was the sleepiest of sleepy days. The drowsing
murmur of the ﬁve-end-twenty studying scholars soothed the
soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees. Away oﬁ‘ in
the ﬂaming sunshine Cardiﬁ' Hill lifted its soft green sides
through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of
distance; a few birds ﬂoated on lazy wing high in the sir; no
other living thing was visible but some cows, and they were
asleep.

Tom’s heart whed to be ﬁ'ee, or else to have something of
interest to do to pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into
his pocket, and his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was
prayer, though he did not know it. Then fur-tively the per-
cussion-cap box came out. He released the tick, and put him
on the long ﬂat desk. The creature probably glowed with a
gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it
was premature; for when he started thankftu to travel 06',
Tom turned him aside with a pin, and made him take a new

Tom’s bosom friend sat next him, suﬂ‘ering just as Tom had
been, and now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this
entertainment in an instant. This bosom friend was Joe

72 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

Harper. The two boys were sworn friends all the week, and
embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a pin out of his
lappel, and began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The
sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they
were interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest
beneﬁt of the tick. So he put Joe’s slate on the desk and drew
a line down the middle of it from top to bottom.

‘Now,’ said he, ‘ as long as he is on your side you can stir
him up and I’ll let him alone; but if you let him get away and
get on my side, you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep
A him from crossing over.’

‘ All right, go ahead——sta.rt him up.’

The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the
equator. Joe harassed him a while, and then he got away and
crossed back again. This change of baseoccurred often. While
one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest, the
other would look on with interest as strong, the two heads
bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all
things else. At last luck seemed to. settle and abide with Joe.
The tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as
excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and
again, just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to
speak, and Tom’s ﬁngers would be twitching to begin, Joe’s pin
would deftly head him off and keep possession. At last Tom
could stand it no longer. The temptation was too strong. So
he reaohed out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry
in a moment. Said he:

‘ Tom, you let him alone.’

‘ I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe.’

‘ N o, sir, it ain’t fair; you just let him alone.’

‘ Blame it, I ain’t going to stir him much.’

‘ Let him alone, I tell you! ’

‘ I won’t ! ’

.TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB. 78

‘ You shall—he’s on my side of the line.’

‘ Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick ? ’

‘ I don’t care whose tick he is—he’s on my side of the line,
and you shan’t touch him.’

‘Well, I’ll just bet I will, though. He’s my tick, and I’ll
do what I blame please with him, or die 1 ’

Atremendous whack came down on Tom’s shoulders, and its
duplicate on Joe's; and for the spare of two minutes the dust
continued to ﬂy from the two jackets and the whole school to
enjoy it. The boys had been too absorbed to-notice the hush
that had stolen upon the school a while before when the master
came tip-toeing down the room and stood over them. He had
contemplated a good part of the performance before he contri-
buted his bit of variety to it. When school broke up at noon,
Tom ﬂew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered in her ear:

‘ Put on your bonnet and let on you’re going home; and
when you get to the corner, give the rest of ’em the slip, and
turn down through the lane and come back. I’ll go the other
way, and come it over ’em the same way.’

So the one went oﬂ' with one group of scholars, and the
other with another. In a little while the two met at the
bottom of the lane, and when they reached the school they had
it all to themselves. Then they sat together, with a slate before
them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil and held her hand in his,
guiding it, and so created another surprising house. When the
interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking. Tom was
swimming in bliss. He said:

‘ Do you love rats '1’ ’

‘ No, I hate them!’

‘ Well, I do too—hive ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing
round your head with a string.’

‘No, I don’t care for rats much, anyway. What I like is

chewing-gum l'

74 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now!’

‘ Do you ? I‘ve got some. I’ll let you chew it a while, but
you must give it back to me.’

That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and
dangled their legs against the bench in excess of content-
ment. ' I

‘Was you ever at a circus? ’ said Tom.

‘Yes, and my pa’s going to take me again some time, if-
I’m good.’

‘I been to the circus three or four times—lots of times.
Church ain’t shocks to a circus. There’s things going on at a.
circus all the time. I’m going to be a clown in a circus when
I grow up.’

‘Oh, are you! That will be nice. They’re so lovely, all
spotted up.’

‘ Yes, that’s so. And they get slathers of money—most a.
dollar a day, Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever en-
me‘l ? ’ .

‘ What’s that? ’

‘Why, engaged to be mmied.’

‘ No.’

‘ Would you like to 1'"

‘ I reckon so. I don’t know. What is it like P '

‘Like? Why, it ain’t like anything. You only just tell a
boy you won’t ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and
then you kiss, and that’s all. Anybody can do it.’

‘ Kiss? What do you kiss for? ’

‘ Why that, you know, is to—well, they always do that.’

‘ Everybody ? ’ '

‘ Why yes, everybody that’s in love with each other. Do
you remember what I wrote on the slate?’

‘ Ye—yes.’

‘ What was it ? ’

.THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA IVYER. 7 5:

‘ I shanit tell you.’

‘ Shall I tell you. ? ’

‘ Ye—yes—hut some other time.’

‘ N 0, now.’

‘ No, not now—to-morrow.’

‘ Oh, no, now, please, Becky. I’ll whisper it, I'll whisper it.
ever so easy.’

Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed
his arm about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly,
with his mouth close to her ear. And then he added:

‘ N ow you whisper it to rue—just the same.’

She resisted for a while, and then said:

‘ You turn your face away, so you can’t see, and then I will.
But you mustn’t ever tell anybody—Mom yon, Tom ? Now you
won’t—wilt you?’

' ‘ No, indeed indeed I won’t. Now, Becky.’

He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her
breath stirred his curls, and whispered, ‘ I—love—you ! ’

Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks
and benches, with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner
at last, with her little white apron to her face. Tom clasped
her about her neck and pleaded:

‘ Now Becky, it’s all done—all over but the kiss. Don’t
you be afraid of that—it ain’t anything at all. Please,
Becky.’

‘ And he tugged at her apron and her hands. .

By-and-by she gave up and let her hands drop; her face,
all glowing with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom
kissed the red lips and said :

‘ Now it’s all done, Becky. And always after this, you know,
you ain’t ever to love anybody but me, and you ain’t ever to
marry anybody but me, never never and for ever. Will

you ? ’

76 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ No, I‘ll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I’ll never
marry anybody but you, and you ain’t to ever merry anybody
but me, either.’

‘ Certainly. Of course. That’s part of it. And always,
comingto school, or when we’re going home, you’re to walk
with me, when there ain’t anybody looking—and you choose me
and I choose you at parties, because that’s the way you do when
you’re engaged.’

‘ It’s so nice. I never heard of it before.’

‘ Oh, it’s ever so gay! Why me and Amy Lawrence—’

The big eyes told Torn his blunder, and he stopped, con-
fused.

‘ Oh, Tom! Then I ain’t the ﬁrst you‘ve ever been en-
gaged to ! ’

The child began to cry. Tom said :

‘ Oh, don’t cry, Becky, I don’t care for her any more.

‘ Yes, you do,.Tom—you know you do.’

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed
him away and turned her face to the well, and went on crying.
Torn tried again, with soothing words in his mouth, and was
repulsed again. Then his pride was up, and he strode away

and went outside. He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a
while, glancing at the door every now and then, hoping she
would repent and come to ﬁnd him. But she‘did not. Then
he began to feel badly, and fear that he was in the wrong. It
was a hard struggle with him to make new advances now, b'nt
he nerved himself to it and entered. She was still standing
luck there in the corner, sobbing with her face to the wall.
Tom’s heart smote him. He went to her and stood a. mo-
ment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said,
hesitatingly:

‘ Becky, I—I don’t care for anybody but you.’

N o reply-th sobs.

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 77

‘ Becky? ’ pleadingly. ‘Becky, won’t you say something?’

More subs. -

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of
an andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it,
and said :

‘ Please, Becky, won’t you take it ? ’

 

um PLMDING.

She struck it to the ﬂoor. Then Tom marched out of the
house and over the hills and far away, to return to school no
more that day. Presently Becky began to suspect. She ran
to the door; he was not in sight; she ﬂew around to the play-
yard ; he was not there. Then she called:

‘ Tom I Come back, Tom 1'

 

‘78 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had
no companions but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to
cry again and npbraid herself; and hi this time the scholars
begun to gather again, and she had to hide her griefs and still
her broken heart», and take up the cross of a long dreary, aching
afternoon, with none among the strangers about her to exchange
sorrows with.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 79

CHAPTER VIII.

TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well
out of the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a
moody jog. He crossed a small ‘ branch ’ two or three times,
because of a prevailing juvenile superstition that to cross water
baﬂed pursuit. Half an hour later he was disappearing be-
hind the Douglas mansion on the summit of Cudiﬁ' Hill, and
the school-house was hardly distinguishable away 06 in the
valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his
pathless way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot
under a spreading oak. There was not even a. zephyr stirring; !
the dead noon-day heat had even stilled the songs of the I
birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken by no sound but ‘
the occasional far-OE hammering of a woodpecker, and this
seemed to render the pervading silence and sense of loneliness
the more profound. The boy’s soul was steeped in melancholy;
his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He
sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his
hands, meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a
trouble at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges,
so lately released. It must be very peaceful, he thonght,to
lie and slumber and dream for ever and ever, with the wind
whispering through the trees and caressing the grass and the
ﬂowers of the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve about,
ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record
he could be willing to go, and be done with it aIL Now as to

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER;

 

1'0! mnwrm.

this girl. What had he
done ? Nothing. He had
meant the best in the world,
and been treated like a dog
—like a very dog. She
would be sorry some day——
maybe when it was too late.
Ah, if he could only die
tomme 1

But the elastic heart of
youth cannot be kept oom-

. pressed into one constrained

shape long at a time. Tom
presently began to drift in~
sensibly back into the con-
cerns of this life again.
What if he turned his back,
now, and disappeared mys-
teriously ? What if he went
away—ever so far away, into
unknown countries beyond
the sees—end never come
back any more! How would
she feel then I The idea of

being a clown recurred to '
him now, only to ﬁll him
with disgust. For frivolity
endjokes,andspottedtights,
were an offence when they
intruded themselves upon a.
spirit that was exalted into
the vague, august realm of
the romantic. No, he would

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 81

be a soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illus—
trious. No, better still, he would join the Indians and hunt
buﬂ'nloes, and go on the war-path in the mountain ranges and
the trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the
future come back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous
with paint, and prance into Sunday—school, some drowsy surn-
mer morning, with a blood—curdling war-whoop, and sear the
eye-balls of all his companions with nnappeasable envy. But
no, there was something gaudier even than this.. He would
be a pirate! That was it! Now his future lay plain before
him, and glowing with unimaginable splendour. How his name
would ﬁll the world, and make people shudder! How gloriously
he would go ploughing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-
hulled racer, the ‘Spirit of the Storm,’ with his grisly ﬂag
ﬂying at the fore! And, at the zenith of his fame, how he
would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church,
brown'and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and
trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his belt bristling
with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cutlsss at his side, his
slouch hat with waving plumes, his black ﬂag unfurled, with
the skull and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy
the whisperings: ‘It’s Tom Sawyer, the Pirate !—the Black
Avenger of the Spanish Main ! ’

Yes, it was settled ; his careerwas determinmi. He would
run away from home and enter upon it. He would start the
very next morning. Therefore he must now begin to get
ready. He would collect his resources together. He went to
a rotten log near at hand, and began to dig under one end of
it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded
hollow. He put his hand there, and uttered this incantation,
impressively: .

‘ What hasn’t come here, come! What’s here, stay here 3 "

Then he scraped sway the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle.
o

\‘N‘II

88 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

He took it up and disclosed a shapely little treasure—house,
whose bottom and sides were of shingles. In it lay a. marble.
Tom’s astonishment was boundless! He scratched his head
with a perplexed air, and said: '

‘ Well, that beats anything ! ’

Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood eogi-
tating. The truth was, that a superstition of his had ﬁsiled
here, which he and all his comrades had always looked upon as
infallible. If you buried a marble with certain necessary
incantations, and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the
place with the incantation he had just used, you would ﬁnd
that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves
together there, meantime, no matter how widely they had been
separated. But now this thing had actually and unquestionably

' failed. Tom’s whole structure of faith was shaken to its founda-
tions. He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding,
- but never of its failing before. It did not occur to him that he
had tried it several times before himself, but could never ﬁnd
the hidingvplaces afterwards. He puzzled over the matter some
time,’ and ﬁnally decided that some witch had interfered and
broken the charm. He thought he would satisfy himself on
that point, so he searched around till he found a small sandy
spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He laid

himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and
called :

Doodle-bug, doodlebug, tell me what I want to know I
Doodlebug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know!

The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug
appeared for a second, and then darted under again in a fright.

‘He dasn’t tell! So it was a witch that done it. I just
knowed it.’

He well knew the futility of trying to contend against

’ TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM BAWYER. 83

witches, so he gave up discouraged. But it occurred to him
that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away,
and therefore he went and made a patient search for it. But he
could not ﬁnd it. Now he went back to his treasure-house,
and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing when
he tossed the marble away ; then he took another marble from
his pocket, and tossed it in the same way, saying:

‘ Brother, go ﬁnd your brother! '

He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked.
But it must have fallen short or gone too far, so he tried twice
more. The last repetition was successful. The two marbles
lay within a foot of each other.

Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down
the green aisles of the forest. Tom ﬂung oﬁ‘ his jacket and
trousers, turned a suspender into a belt, raked away some brush
behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath
sword, and a tin trumpet, and in a moment had seized these
things, and bounded away, bare-legged, with ﬂuttering shirt.
He presently halted under a great elm, blew an answering
blast, and then began to tip—toe and look warily out, this way
and that. He said cautiously—to an imaginary company :

‘ Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow.’

Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately
armed as Tom. Tom called:

‘ Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without
my pass ? ’

‘Guy of Guisborne wants no man’s pass! Who art thou
that—that——~’

‘ Dares to hold such language,’ said Tom, prompting, for
they talked ‘ by the book,’ from memory.

‘ Who art thou that dares to hold such language ? ’

‘I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiﬁ‘ carcass soon
shall know.’

a 2

84 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw ? Right gladly
will I dispute with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have
at thee l ’

They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on
the ground, struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a

grave, careful combat, ‘ two up and two down.’ Presently Tom
said:

 

BOBIN 3001) AND HIS FOE.

‘ Now if you've got the hang, go it lively! ’

So they ‘went it lively,’ panting and perspiring with the
work. By-nnd-by Tom shouted: '

‘ Fall! fall! Why don’t you fall?’

‘I shan’t! Why don’t you fall yourself? You’re getting
the worst of it.’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM METER. 85

‘Why, that ain't anything. I can’t £8.11. That ain’t the
way it is in the book. The bookfsays, “ Then with one back-
handed stroke he slew poor Guy of Guisbome ! ” You're to

turn around and let me hit you in the back.’
There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned,

received the whack, and fell.

 

DEATH OF ROBIN HOOD.

‘ Now,’ said Joe, getting up, ‘you got to let me kill you.
That’s fair.’
‘ Why, I can’t do that. It ain’t in the book.’

‘VWell, it’s blamed mean. That’s all.’
‘ Well, any Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the Millefs

son, and 1am me with a quarter-5W ; or I‘ll be the Sheriﬁ' of

i.» w 13%;.)

 

56 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

Nottingham, and you be Robin Hood a little while, and kill
me.’ '

This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried
out. Then Torn became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by
the treacherous mm to bleed his strength away through his
neglected wound. And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe
of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth, gave his bow into
his feeble hands, and Tom said, ‘Where this arrow falls there bury
poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree.’ Then he shot the
arrow, and fell back, and would have died; but he lit on a
nettle, and sprang up too gnily for a corpse.

The boys dressed themselves, hid their aoooutrements, and
went off grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and
wondering what modern civilisation could claim to have done
to compensate for their loss. They said they would rather
he outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than President of the
United States for ever.

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM MIVYER. 87

CHAPTER IX.

Ar half-past nine that night Tom and Sid were sent to bed as
usual. They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom
lay awake and waited in restless impatience. When it seemed
to him that it must be nearly daylight, he heard the clock
strike ten ! This was despair. He would have tossed and
ﬁdgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was afraid he might
wake Sid. So he lay still and stared up into the dark. Every—
thing was dismally still. By-and-by, out of the stillness little,
scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasise themselves.
The ticking of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old
beams began to crack mysteriously. The. stairs creaked faintly.
Evidently spirits were abroad. A measured, muﬂled snore
issued from Aunt Polly’s chamber. And now the tiresome
chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate
began. Next the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall
at the bed’s head made Tom shudder—it meant that somebody’s
days were numbered. Then the bowl of a. far-off dog rose on
the night air, and was answered by a fainter bowl from a remoter
distance. Tom was in an agony. At last he was satisﬁed that
time had ceased and eternity begun ; he began to done in. spite
of himself; the clock chimed eleven, but he did not hear it.
And then there came, mingling with his half-formed dreams, a
most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a neighbouring
window disturbed him. A cry of‘ Scat! you devil!’ and the
crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt’s wood-shed

88 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was
dressed and out of the window and creeping along the roof of
the ‘ el ‘ on all fours. He ‘ meow’d ’ with caution once or twice as
he went; then jumped tothe roof of the wood-shed, and thence
to the ground. Huckleberry Finn was there, with his dead cat.
The boys moved 05‘ and disappeared in the gloom. At the end

 

TOME 1008 0? 803m.

of half an hour, they were wading through the tall grass of the
graveyard.

It was a graveyard of the oldJashioned western kind. It
was on a hill, about a mile and a half from the village. It had

a crazy board fence around it, which leaned inwud in places,

A" ' .‘§‘<
-:,v ~. AM)” .
r , ﬂu

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 89

and outward the rest of the time, but stood upright nowhere

Grass and weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery. All the
old graves were sunken in. There was not a tombstone on the
place; round-topped, wornneaten boards staggered over the
graves, leaning for support and ﬁnding none. ‘ Sacred to the
memory of ’ So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it
could no longer have been read, on the most of them, now, even
if there had been light.

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it
might be the spirits of the dead complaining at being disturbed.
The boys talked little, and only under their breath, 'for the
time and the place and the pervading solemnity and silence
oppressed their spirits. They found the sharp new heap they
were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the protection
of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet of
the grave.

Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. ‘
The booting of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled .
the dead stillness. Tom’s reﬂections grew oppressive. He
must force some talk. So he said in a whisper:

‘ Hucky, do you believe 'the dead people like it for us to b
here ? ’ » '

Huckleberry whispered:

‘ I wisht I knowed. It’s awful solemn like, ain’t it ? ’

‘ I bet it is.’ ’

There was a-considerable pause, while the boys canvassed
this matter inwardly. Then Tom whispered:

‘ Say, Hunky—do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us
talking ? ’

‘ 0’ course he does. Least his sperrit does.’

Tom, after a pause:

‘ I wish I’d said Mister Williams. But I never meant any
harm. Everybody. calls him Hoss.’

90 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ A body can’t be too partic’lar how they talk ’bout these
yer dead people, Tom.’ I

This was a. damper, and conversation died again. Presently
'Tom seized his eomrade’s arm and said:

‘ Sh I ’

‘ What is it, Tom? ’ And the two clung together with
beating hearts.

‘ Sh! There ’tis again! Didn’t you hear it ? ’

c I’

‘There! Now you hear it!’

‘ Lord, Tom, they’re coming! They’re coming, sure. What’ll
we do ? ’

‘ I dono. Think they’ll see us ? ’

‘ 0h, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats. I wisht I
hadn’t come.’

‘ Oh, don’t be afeard. I don’t believe they’ll bother us.
We ain’t doing any harm. If we keep. perfectly still, maybe
they won’t notice us at all.’ -

‘ I’ll try to, Tom, but, Lord! I’m all of a shiver.’

‘ Listen ! ’

The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed.
A mufﬂed sound of voices ﬂoated up from the far end of the
graveyard.

‘ Look! see there! ’ whispered Tom. ‘What is it ? ’

‘ It’s devil-ﬁre. Oh, Tom, this is awful.’

Some vague ﬁgures approached through the gloom, swinging
an old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with
innumerable little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry
whispered with a. shudder:

‘ It’s the devils, sure enough. Three of ’em! Lordy, Torn,
we’re goners! Can you pray ? ’

‘ I’ll try, but don’t you be afeard. They ain’t going to hurt
us. “ Now I lay me down to sleep, I—”’

TIZE ADVENTURES 01" TOM SA Wm 91
‘ Shl’
‘ What is it, Huck?’

‘They’re humans! One of ’31:: is, anyway. One of ’em’s
old Muﬁ' Potter’s voice.’

‘ No—'tain’t so, in it? ’
‘I bet I know it. Don’t. you stir nor budge. Ha ain‘t

 

TOI'I “PORT A! PRAYER.

sharp enough to notice us. Drunk, same as usual, likely—
blnmed old rip! ’

‘All right, I’ll keep still. Now they’re stuck. Can’t ﬁnd
it. Here they come again. Now they’re hot. Cold again.
Hot again. Red hot! They’re p’inted right, this time. Say,
Huck, I know another o'them voices; it’s Injnn Joe.’

‘That’s so—that mnrderin’ half-breed! I’d druther they
was devils a dam night. What kin they be up to?’

hklwi‘n‘L‘

(j

92 THE ADVENTURES 01" To}! SA WYER.

The whispers died wholly out now, for the three men had
reached the grave, and stood within a few feet of the boys‘
hiding—place.

‘ Here it is,’ said the third voice ; and the owner of it held
the lantern up and revealed the ﬁwe 'of young Dr. Robinson.

Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a
rope and a‘couple of shovels on it. They cast down. their load
and began to open the grave. The doctor put the lantern at
the head of the grave, and came and sat down with his back
against one of the elm trees. He was so close the boys could
have touched him.

‘ Hurry, men!’ he said in a low voice. ‘The moon might
come out at any moment.’ ‘

They growled a response and -went on digging. For some
time there was no noise but the grating sound of the spades
discharging their freight of mould and graveL Itwas very
monotonous. Finally a spade struck upon the cofﬁn with a
dull, woody accent, and within another minute or two the men
had hoisted it out on the ground. They prised 03 the lid with
their shovels, got out the body and dumped it ruder on the
ground. The moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed
the pallid face. The barrow was got ready and the corpse
placed on it, covered with a blanket, and bound to its place
with the rope. Potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off
the dangling end of the rope, and then said:

‘Now the cussed thing’s ready, Sawbones, and you’ll just
out with another ﬁve, or here she stays.’

‘That‘s the talk!’ said Injun Joe.

‘ Look here ; what does this mean? ’ said the doctor. ‘ You
required your pay in advance, and I’ve paid you.’

‘Yes, and you done more than that,’ said Injun Joe, ap-
proaching the doctor, who was now standing. ‘ Five years ago
you drove me away from your father’s kitchen one night, when

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 93

I come to ask for something to eat, and you said I wam’t there
for any good ; and when I swore I’d get even with you if it took
a. hundred years, your father had me jailed for a vagrant. Did
you think I’d forget ? The Injun blood ain’t in me for nothing.
And now I’ve got you, and you got to settle, you know!’

He was threatening the doctor with his ﬁst in his face by
this time. The doctor struck out suddenly, and stretched the
ruﬁian on the ground. Potter dropped his knife and ex—
claimed :

‘ Here, now, don’t you hit my pard l ’ and the next mo—
ment he had grappled with the doctor, and the two were strug—
gling with might and main, trampling the grass and tearing
the ground with their heels. Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his
eyes ﬂaming with passion, snatched up Potter’s knife, and went
creeping, catlike and steeping, round and round about the
combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the doctor
ﬂung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams’s
grave and felled Potter to the earth with it; and in the same
instant the half—breed saw his chance, and drove the knife to
the hilt in the young man’s breast. He reeled and fell partly
upon Potter, ﬂooding him with his blood, and in the same
moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle, and the
two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.

Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was
standing over the two forms, contemplating them. The doctor
murmured inarticulately, gave along gasp or two, and was still.
The half-breed muttered:

‘ That score is settled, damn you.’

Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal
knife in Potter’s open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled
cofﬁn. Three—fonrwﬁve minutes passed, and then Potter
began to stir and moan. His hand closed upon the knife, he
raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall with a shudder. Then he

04 THE ADVENTURES 01" Tall! SAWYER.

sat up, pushing the ,body from him, and gazed at it, and then
around him confusedly. His eyes met Joe’s.

‘ Lord, bow is thisﬁJoe?’ he said.

‘ It’s a dirty business,’ said Joe, without moving. ‘ What
did you do it for? ’

‘I! I never done it ! ’

‘ Imk here ! that kind of talk won’t wash.’

 

HUFF POTTER OUTWITTED.

Potter trembled and grew white.

‘ I thought I’d got sober. I’d no business to drink to-
night. But it’s in my head yet—worse’n when we started here.
I’m all in a muddle; can’t recollect anything of it hardly. Tell
me, Joe—honest, now, old feller—did I do it ? Joe, I never
meant to ; ’pon my soul and honour I never meant to, Joe. Tell

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 96

- me how it was, Joe. 0h, its awful—and him so young and

promising.’

‘ Why you two was scuﬂling, and he fetched you one with
the headboard, and you fell ﬂat; and then up you come, all
reeling and staggering like, and snatched the knife and jammed
it into him just as he fetched you another awful clip, and here
you‘ve laid, as dead as a wedge till now. ’

‘ Oh, I didn’t know what I was a-doing. I wish I may die
this minute if I did. It was all on account of the whisky and
the excitement, I reckon. I never used a weapon in my life
before, Joe. I’ve fought, but never with weapons. They’ll all
say‘that. Joe, don’t tell! Say you won’t tell, Joe; that’s a
good feller. I always liked you Joe, and stood up for you too.
Don’t you remember? You won’t tell, will you, Joe ? ’ And
the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer,
and clasped his appealing hands.

‘ No, you’ve always been ﬁrir and square with me, Muff .
Potter, and I won’t go back on you. There, now, that’s as fair
as a man can say.’

‘ Oh, Joe, you’re an angel. I’ll bless you for this the longest
day I live.‘ And Potter began to cry.

‘ Come, now, that’s enough of that. This ain’t any time for
blubbering. You be of yonder way and H1 go this. Move,
now, and don’t leave any tracks behind you.’

Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run.
The half—breed stood looking aﬁer him. He muttered:

‘ If he’s as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the
rum as he had the look of being, he won’t think of the knife
till he’s gone so far he’ll be afraid to come hawk after it to such
a place by himself—chicken—heart! ’

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blan-
keted corpse, the lidless coﬂin, and the open grave, were under
no inspection but the moon’s. The stillness was complete

again, too.

I

96 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

CHAPTER X.

THE two boys ﬂew on and on toward the village, speechless with
horror. They glanced backward over their shoulders from time
to time apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed.
Every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and
an enemy, and made them catch their breath; and as they
sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village, the
barking of the amused watch dogs seemed to give wings to
their feet. 4 v

‘ If we can only get to the old tannery before we break
down ! ’ whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths. ‘ I
can’t stand it much longer.’

Huckleberry’s hard pantings were his only reply, and the
boys ﬁxed their eyes on the goal of their hopes, and bent to
their work to win it. They gained steadily on it, and at. last,
breast to breast, they burst through the open door, and fell,
grateful and exhausted, in the sheltering shadows beyond. By—
and-by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:

‘ Huckleberry, what do you reckon ’11 come of this?’

‘ If Dr. Robinson dies, I reckon hanging ’11 come of it.’

‘ Do you, though ? ’

‘Why, I know it, Tom.’ I

Tom thought a while ; then he said:

‘ Who’ll tell? We?’

‘ What are you talking about? S’pose something happened
and Injun Joe did/n’t hang? Why he’d kill us some time or
other, just as dead sure as we’re a—laying here.’

TH ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 97

‘ That’s just what I was thinking to myself, Huck.’

‘ If anybody tells, let Muﬁ‘ Potter do it, if he’s fool enough.
He’s generally drunk enough.’

Tom said nothing—went on thinking.
whispered:

‘ Huck, Muﬁ' Potter don’t know it. How can he tell?’

‘ What’s the reason he don't know it ? ’

‘ Because he’d just got that whack when Injun Joe done it.
D’you reckon he could see anything? D’you reckon he knowed
anything ? ’

‘ By hokey, that’s so, Tomi ’

‘ And besides, look-a-here—maybe that whack done for
Man ! ’

‘No, ’tain’t likely, Tom. He had liquor in him; I could
see that; and besides, he always has. Well, when pap’s full,
you might take and belt him over the head with a. church and
you couldn’t phase him. He says so his own self. So it’s the
same with Muﬂ' Potter, of course. But if a man was dead sober,
I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono.’

After another reﬂective silence, Tom said:

‘ Hucky, you sure you can keep mum ? ’

‘Tom, we got to keep mum. You know that. That Injun
devil wouldn’t make any more of drownding us than a couple of
cats, if we was to squeak ’bout this and they didn’t hang him.
Now look-mhere, Tom, less take and swear to one another—
that’s what we got to (lo—swear to keep mum.’

‘ I’m agreed. It’s .the best thing. Would you just hold
hands and swear that we—’

‘ Oh, no, that wouldn’t do for this. That’s good enough for
little rubbishy common things—specially with gels, cuz they
go back on you anyway, and blah if they get in a huff—
but there orter be writing ’bout a big thing like this. And
blood.’

Presently he

E

98 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

Tom’s whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and
dark, and awful; the hour, the circumstances, the surroundings,
were in keeping with it. He picked up a clean pine shingle
that lay in the moonlight, took a little fragment of ‘ red keel’
out of his pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully
scrawled these lines, emphasising each slow down-stroke by
damning his tongue between his teeth, and letting up the
pressure on the up-strokes:

"

 

Tm; ADVENTURES or TOM sawmm so

Huckleberry was ﬁlled with admiration of Tom’s ﬁanility in
writing and the sublimity of his language. He at once took a
pin from his lappel and was going to prick his ﬂesh, but Tom
said:
‘ Hold on! Don’t do that. ‘ A pin’s brass. It might have
verdigrease on it.’

‘ What’s verdigrease P ’

1 ‘It’s p’ison. That’s what it is. You just swaller some of
it once—you’ll see.’

So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and
each boy pricked theball of his thumb and squeezed outs. drop
of blood.

In time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his
initials, using the ball of his little ﬁnger for a pen. Then he
showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath
was complete. They buried the shingle close to the wall, with
some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and the fetters that
bound their tongues were considered to be locked and the key
thrown away.

A ﬁgure crept stealthin through a break in the other end
of the ruined building now, but they did not notice it.

‘ Tom,’ whispered Huckleberry, ‘ does this keep us from
ever telling—always ?’

‘ Of course it does. It don’t make any diﬁ'erence what
happens, we got to keep mum. We’d drop down dead—don’t

' you know that ? ’

‘ Yes, I reckon that’s so.’
They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently
a dog set up a long, lugubrious howl just outside—within ten
feet of them. The boys clasped each other suddenly, in an
agony of fright. '
‘ Which of us does he mean? ’ gasped Huckleberry.
‘I douo—peep through the crack. Quick!’
V n 2

100 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

‘No, you, Tom!’

‘ I can’t—I mu’t do it, Huck! ’

‘ Please, Tom. There ’tis again! ' .

‘Oh, lordy, I’m thankful!’ whispered Tom.
~ voice. It’s Bull Harbison.’ ‘ ' .

‘Oh, that’s good—l tell you, Tom, I was most scared to

death ; Pd :1 bet anything it was s. stray dog.’ -

The dog howled‘again. . The boys’ hearts sank once more.
‘ Oh, my! that ain’t no Bull Harbison ! ’ whispered Hunklei
berry. ‘ Do, Tom l ’ >

Tom, quaking» with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the
crack. His whisper was hardly audible when he said:

. -‘.0h, Huck, n-‘s A STBAY noo!‘

‘ Quick, Torn, quick! Who does he mean ? ’

‘ Huck, he must mean us both—we’re right. together}

‘ A ‘Oh, Tom, I reckon we’re goners. I reckon there ain’t no
mistake ’bout where I ’1! go to. I been so wicked.’

‘ Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and doing
everything a feller’s told not to do. I might 3 been good, like
Sid,» if I’d a tried—but no, I wouldn’t, of course. But if ever
I get off this time, I lay I’ll just walkw- in Sunday-schools l’

And Tom began to snuﬂie a little.

‘ You bad i ’ And Huckleberry began to snuﬁe foo.
"Confound it,'Tom Sawyer, you’re just old pie ’longside 0’ what
1 am. Oh, lord’y, lordy, lordy, I wisht I only had half your
chance.’

Tom choked off and whispered :.

‘ Look, Hucky, look! He’s got his back to us ! ’

Hucky looked with joy in his heart.

‘ Well he has, by jingoes! Did be before i’ '

‘I know his

Iillf Mr. Herbison had owned s slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken
of him as ‘Hsrbison'l Bull;’but a Ionorndog of tint me was ‘Bull
Harbison.‘

5.1 4444 A

Tm ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 101

‘ Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. Oh, this '
is bully, you know. Now, who can he mean? ’

The howling stepped. Tom pricked up his ears.

‘Skl What’s that ? ’ he whispered.

‘ Sounds like—like hogs grunting. No—it’s somebody
snoring, Tom.’

 

DISTUBBING MUFF’B SLEEP.

‘ That is it. Where’bouts is it, Huck? ’

‘ I b’leeve it’s down at t’other end. Sounds so, anyway.
Pap used to sleep there sometimes, ’long with the hogs, but,
laws bless you, he just lifts things when he snores. Besides, I
reckon he ain’t ever coming back to this town any more.’

The spirit of adventure rose in the boys’ souls once more.

‘ Hunky, do you das’t to go if I lead ? ’

102 ,THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ I don’t like to, much. Tom, s’pose it’s Injun Joe !’ '

Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong
again and the boys agreed to try, with the understanding that

«they would take to their heels if the snoring stopped. So
they went tip-toeing stealthﬂy down, the one behind the
other. When they had got to within ﬁve steps of the snorer,
Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The
man moaned, writhed a little, and his time came into the
moonlight. It was Mnﬁ' Potter. The boy's’ hearts had stood
still, and their hopes too, when the man moved, but their
fears passed away now. They tip-teed out, through the
broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little distance to
exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on
the night air again! They turned and saw the strange dog
standing within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and
Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.

‘ 0h, geeminy, it’s him I ’ cxclaimed both boys in a breath.

‘ Say, Tom, they say a stray dog come howling around
Johnny Miller’s house, ’bout midnight, as much as two weeks
ago; and a whippoorwill come in and lit on the bannisters and
sung, the very same evening; and there ain’t anybody dead
there yet.’

‘Well, I know that. And suppose there ain’t. Didn’t
Gracie Miller 5111 in the kitchen ﬁre and burn herself terrible
the very next Saturday?’ 

‘ Yes, but she ain’t dead. And what’s more, she’s getting
better, too.’ 

. ‘ All right; you wait and see. She’s 3 genes, just as dead
sure as Muﬁ' Potter's agoner. That's what the niggers say,
and they know all about these kind of things, Huek.’

Then they separated, oogitating.

When Tom crept in at his bedroom window, the night was
almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution, and fell

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 103

asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade.
He was not aware that the gentle snoring Sid was awake, and
had been so for an hour.

When Tom awoke Sid was dressed and gone. There was a
late look in the light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was
startled. Why had he not been called—persecuted till he was >
up as usual? The thought ﬁlled him with bodings. Within
ﬁve minutes he was dressed and downstairs, feeling sore and
drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had ﬁnished
breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke; but there were
averted eyes ; there was a silence and an air of solemnity that
struck a chill to the culprit’s heart. He sat down and tried to
seem guy, but it was up-hill work; it roused no smile, no
response, and he Lapsed into silence and let his heart sink down
to the depths.

Aﬂer breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost
brightened in the hope that he was going to be ﬂogged; but
it was not so. His aunt wept over him and asked him how he
could go and break her old heart so; and ﬁnally told him to
go on, and ruin himself and bring her grey hairs with sorrow
to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any more. This
was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom’s heart was
sorer, now than his body. He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness,
promised reform over and over again, and then received his
dismissal, feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness
and established but a feeble conﬁdence.

He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful
toward Sid; and so the latter’s prompt retreat through the
back gate was unnecessary. He moped to school gloomy and
sad, and took his ﬂogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing
hockey the day before, with the air of one whose heart was
busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to triﬁes. Then he
betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and

104 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM MWYEB.

his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony '
stare of suﬁ‘ering that has reached the limit and can no further
go. His elbow was pressing against some hard substance.
After a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position, and
took up this object with a sigh. It was in a paper. He nnrolled
it. A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart broke.
It was his brass andiron knob! This ﬁnal feather broke the
camel’s back.

- TEE AD KEN T {IRES 0F TOM SA WYER. 105

CHAPTER XI.

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly
electrified with the ghastly news. No need of the as yet
undreamed—of telegraph: the tale ﬂew from man to man, from
group to group, from house to house, with little less than
telegraphic speed. Of course the schoolmaster gave holiday
for that afternoon ; the town would have thought strangely of
him if he had not. A gory knife had been found close to the
murdered man, and it had been recognised by somebody as
belonging to Muﬂ‘ Potter—so the story ran. And it was said
that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing himself in
the ‘ branch ’about one or two o’clock in the morning, and that
Potter had at once sneaked oﬂl—suspicious circumstances, espe-
cially the washing, which was not a habit with Potter. It was
also said that the town had been ransacked for this ‘ murderer ’
(the public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and
arriving at a verdict), but that he could not be found. Horse-
men had departed down all the roads in every direction, and
the Sheriﬁ' ‘ was conﬁdent’ that he would be captured before
night.

All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom’s
heart-break vanished, and he joined the procession, not because
he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere else, but
because an awful, unaccountable fascination drew him on.
Arrived at the dreadful place, he wormed his small body through
the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It seemed to him an

106 .TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

age since hewas there before. Somebody pinched his aim. He
turned, and his eyes met Huckleben’y's. Then both looked
elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed any-
thing in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and
intent upon the grisly spectacle before them.

‘ Poor fellow!’ ‘Poor young fellow!’ ‘This ought to be
a lesson to grave-robbers! ’ ‘ Muﬁ‘ Potter '11 hang for this if

 

A EVBPIGIODB mama".

they catch him!’ This was the drift of remark ;' and the
minister said, ‘ It was a judgment; His hand is here.’

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon
the stolid face of Injun Joe. At this moment the crowd began
to sway and struggle, and voices shouted, ‘ It's him! it‘s him!
he’s coming himself! ’

; ‘w‘vmjgég

TIE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 1m

‘ Who? who? ’ from twenty voices.

‘ Muﬂ‘ Potter! ’

‘ Hallo, he’s stopped! look out, he's turning! Don’t let
him get away ! ’

People in the bunches of the trees over Tom's head said he

wasn’t trying to get away—he onlydmked doubtful and per-
plexed.

( ‘\\

/

 

mum JOE’E TWO worms.)

‘ Infernal impudence ! ’ said a bystander; ‘ wanted to come
and take a quiet look at his work, I reckon—didn’t expect any
company.’

The crowd fell. apart now, and the Sheriﬁ' came through,
ostentatiously, leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow‘s
face was haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon

/"1. k;.
,*-:‘-\‘.f a:
L,“

108 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

him. When he stood before the murdered man he shook as
with s. palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into
tears. .

‘I didn’t do it, friends,’ he sobbed; "pan my word and
honour I never done it.’

‘Who’s accused you ! ’ shouted a voice.

This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and
looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes.
He saw Injun Joe, and exclaimed: '

‘ Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you’d never—’

‘Is that your knife?’ and it was thrust before him by the
Sheriﬂ‘.

Potter would have fallen if they had not caughthim and
eased him to the ground. Then he said:

‘ Something told ms ’t if I didn’t come back and get———3
He shuddered ; then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished
gesture, and said, ‘ Tell ’em, Joe, tell ’em—it ain’t any use any
more.’

Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and
heard the stony-hearted liar reel oﬂ‘ his serene statement, they
expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God’s
lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the
stroke was delayed. And when he had ﬁnished and still stood
alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their oath and
save the poor betrayed prisoner’s life faded and vanished away,
for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan, and it
would be fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as
that.

‘ Why didn’t you leave? What did yon want to come here
for?’ somebody said.

‘ I couldn’t help it—I couldn’t help it,’ Potter moaned. ‘ I
wanted to run away, but I couldn’t seem to come anywhere but
here.’ And he fell to sobbing again.

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 1M

Injun Joe repeated his statement, as calmly, a few
minutes afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys,
seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were conﬁrmed in
their belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil. He was
now become, to them, the most halefully interesting object they
had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated
eyes from his face. They inwardly resolved to watch him,

 

TOX BREAKS.

nights, when opportunity should oﬂ'er, in the hope of getting a.
glimpse of his dread master.

Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man,
and put it in a waggon for removal; and it was whispered
through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little!
The boys thought that this happy circumstance would turn

W!
tux xi ugh;

110 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

suspicion in the right direction; but. they were disappointed,
for more than one villager remarked:

‘ It was within three feet of Muﬂ' Potter when it done it.’

Tom’s fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his
sleep for as much as a week alter this; and at breakfast one
morning, Sid said:

‘ Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much
that you keep me awake about half the time.’

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes. 

‘It’s a bad sign,’ said Aunt Polly, gravely. ‘ What you got
on your mind, Tom?’

‘Nothing. Nothing ’t I know of.’ But the boy’s hand
shook so that he spilled his coﬂ‘ee.

‘ And you do talk such stuﬁ',’ Sid said. ‘ Last night you
said “It's blood, it’s blood, that’s what it is! ” You said that
over and over. And you said, “ Don’t torment me so—I’ll tell.‘
Tell what? What is it you’ll tell? ’

Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling
what might have happened now, but luckily the concern passed
out of Aunt Polly’s face, and she came to Tom's reliei~ without
knowing it. She said :

‘ Sho l It’s that dreadful murder. I dream about it most
every night myself. Sometimes I dream it’s me that done
it.’

Mary said she had been aﬁ'ected much the same way. Sid
seemed satisﬁed. Torn got out of the presence as quick as
he plausibly could, and after that he complained of toothache
for a week, and tied up his jaws every night. He never knew
that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently slipped the ban-
dage free, and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while
at a time, and afterwards slipped the bandage back to its place
again. Tom’s distress of mind were of gradually, and the
toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. Ill

managed to make anything out of Tom’s disjointed mutterings,
he kept it to himself.

It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get
done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his
trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was
coroner at one of these inquiries, though it had been this
habit to take the lead in all new enterprises ; he noticed,
too, that Toni never acted as a. witness—and that was strange ;
and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a
marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them
when he could. Sid marvelled, but said nothing. However,
even inquests went out of vogue at last, and‘ ceased to torture
Tom’s conscience.

Every day or two during this time of son-ow Tom watched
his opportunity, and went to the little grated jail window and
smuggled such small comforts through to the ‘ murderer ’ as he
could get hold of. The jail was a triﬂing little brick den that
stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards were
afforded for it ; indeed, itwas seldom occupied. These oﬂ‘erings
greatly helped to ease Tom’s conscience.

The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun
Joe and ride him on a rail for body-snatching, but so formidable '
was his character that nobody could be found who was willing
to take the lead in the matter,so it was dropped. He had been
careful to begin both of his inqueabstatements with the light,
without confessing the grave-robbery that preceded it; there-
fore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at
present.

112 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XIL

ONE of the reasons why Tom’s mind had driﬁed away from its
secret troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter
. to interest itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming
to school. Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and
tried to ‘ whistle her down the wind,’ but hailed. He began to
ﬁnd himself hanging around her ﬁsther’s house, nights, and feel-
ing very miserable. She was ill. What if she should die!
There was distraction in the thought. He no longer took an
interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was
gone, there was nothing but dreariness left. He put his hoop
away, and his bat; there was no joy in them any more. His
’ aunt-was concerned; she began to try all manner of remedies
on him. She was one of those people who are infatuated with
patent medicines and all new-ﬁngled methods of producing
health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in
these things. When something fresh in this line came out she
was in a fever right away to try it; not on herself, for she was
never ailing; but on anybody else that came handy. She was
a subscriber for all the ‘ Health ’ periodicals and phrenological
frauds; and the solemn ignorance they were inﬂated with was
.breath to her nostrils. All the ‘ rot ’ they contained about ven-
tilation, and how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to
eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and
what frame of mind to keep oneself in, and what sort of cloth—
ing to wear, was all gospel to her, and she never observed that

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 113

her health journals of the current month customarily upset
everything they had recommended the month before. She was
as simivle-hear'ted and honest as the day was long, and so she
was an easy victim. She gathered together her quack periodi-
cals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death, went
about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with ‘hell

 

AUNT FULLY SEEKS rswmnon.

following aﬂer.’ But she never suspected that she was not an
angel of healing, and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the
suﬁ'ering neighbours.

' The water treatment was new, now, and Tom’s low condition
was a. windfall to her. She had him out at daylight every
morning, stood him up in the wood—shed and drowned him with
a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed him down with a towel

I

l‘ X.

  

114 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 8A WYBR.

like a. ﬁle, and so brought him to; then she rolled him up in a.
wet sheet and put him away under blankets till she sweated his
soul clean and ‘ the yellow stains of it came throhgh his pores,’
as Tom said.

Yet notwithstanding all this the boy grew more and more
melancholy and pale and dejected. She added hot baths, sit:
baths, shower baths, and plunges. The boy remained as dismal
as a hearse. She began to assist the water with a slim oatmeal
diet and blister plasters. She calculated his capacity as she
would a jug’s, and ﬁlled him up every day vrith quack cure-ails.

Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time.
This phase ﬁlled the old lady’s heart with consternation. This
indifference must be broken up at any cost. Now she heard
of Pain-killer for the first time. She ordered a lot at once.
She tasted it and was ﬁlled with gratitude. It was simply ﬁre
in a liquid form. She dropped the water treatment and every-
" thing else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer. She gave Tom a
teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the result.
Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again;
for the ‘ indiﬁ'erence ’ was broken up. The boy could not have
shown a wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a ﬁre under him.

Tom felt that itwas time to wake up; this sort of life might
be romantic enough in his blighted condition, but it was getting
to have too little sentiment and too much distracting variety
about it. So he thought over various plans for relief, and ﬁnally
hit upon that of professing to be fond of Pain-killer. He asked
for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended
by telling him to help himself and quit bothering her. If it
had been Sid she would have had no misgivings to alloy her
delight; but since it was Tom she watched the bottle clandesh
tinely. She found that the medicine did really diminish, but
it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of
a crack in the sitting-room ﬂoor with it.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WFER. 116

One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his
aunt’s yellow out came along, purring, eyeing the teaspoon
svarieiously, and begging for a taste. Tom said:

‘ Don’t ask for it unless you want it, Peter.’

' But Peter signiﬁed that he did want it.

‘ You better make sure.’

Peter was sure. i

‘Now you’ve asked for it, and I’ll give it to you, because
there ain’t anything mean about me; but if you ﬁnd you don’t
like it you mustn’t blame anybody but your own self.’

Peter was agreeable, so Tom prised his mouth open and
poured down the Pain—killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards
in the air, and then delivered a war-whoop and set oﬂ‘ round
and round the room, hanging against furniture, upsetting
ﬂower-pots, and making general havoc. Next he rose on his
hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment, with
his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his un-
appeamble happiness. Then he went tearing around the house,
again spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly
entered in time to see him throw a few double summersets,
deliver a ﬁnal mighty hurrah, and sail through the open window,
carrying the rest of the ﬂower-pots with him. The old lady
stood petriﬁed with astonishment, peering over her glasses;
Tom lay on the ﬂoor, expiring with laughter.

‘Tom, what on earth ails that cat?’

‘ I don’t know, aunt,’ gasped the boy.

‘ Why I never see anything like it. What did make him
not so ? ’

‘ ’Deed I don’t know, Aunt Polly; cats always act so when
they’re having a good time.’

‘ They do, do they ? ’ There was something in the. tone that
made Tom apprehensive.

‘ Yes’m. That is, I believe they do.’
1 2

110 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEB.

‘ You do ? ’

‘Yes’m.’ , '

The old lady was bending down, Tom watching with interest
emphasised by anxiety. Too late he divined her ‘driﬂ.’ The
handle of the telMale teaspoon was visible under the bed-
valanee. Aunt Polly took it, held it up. Tom winced, and

 

 

 

 

 

 

A sum GOOD Till.

dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the usual
handle—his ear—and cracked his head soundly with her
thimble.

‘ Now, sir, what did you want to treat thnt poor dumb beast.
so for? ' ' -

‘I done it out. of pity for him—because he hadn’t any
aunt.’

,
& AM‘QEC

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. ll7

‘Hadn’t any euntl—you nnmsknll. What has that got
to do with it ? ’

‘ Heaps. Because if he’d a had one she’dla burnt him out
herself! She’d a roasted his bowels out of him ’thout any more
feeling than if he was a human! ’

Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. Thiswas putting
the thing in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat might be
cruelty to a boy too. She began to soften: she felt sorry.
Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom’s head
and said gently:

‘I was meaning for the best, Tom. And Tom, it did do
you good.’ .

Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle
peeping through his gravity:

‘1 know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and so was
I with Peter. It done him good, too. I never see him get
around so since—’

‘Oh, go ’long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me
again. And you try and see if you can’t he a good boy for
once, and you needn’t take any more medicine.’

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that
this strange thing had been occurring every day latterly.
And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the
school-yard instead of playing with his comrades. He was
sick, he said; and he looked it. He tried to seem to he look-
ing everywhere but whither he was really looking—down the
road. Presently Jeﬁ‘ Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom’s face
lighted;‘he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowftu
away. When Jeﬂ‘ Thatcher arrivad, Tom accosted him, and
‘led up ’ warin to opportunities for remark about Becky, but
the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and
watched, hoping whenever a {risking frock came in sight, and
hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right

118 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

one. At last ﬁ'oeks ceased to appear,'and he dropped hope-
lessly into the dumps; he entered the empty school—house and
sat down to suﬂer. Then one more frock passed in at‘ the
gate, and Tom’s heart gave a great bound. The next instant
he was out, and ‘ going on ’ like an Indian ; yelling, laughing,
chnsing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb,
throwing handsprings, standing on his head—doing all the

 

 

 

 

 

‘ snowuw oer.’

heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a. furtive eye
out, all the while, to see if Becky Thatcher was noticing. But
she seemed to be unconscious of it all; she never looked.
Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there '1'
He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity ; came war-
whooping around, snatched a boy’s cap, hurled it to the roof of
the school-house, broke through a group of boys, tumbling

Mink

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 119

them in every direction, and fell spmwling himself under
Becky’s nose, almost upsetting her—and she turned, with her
nose in the air, and he heard her say, ‘ Mf ! some people think
they’re mighty smart—always showing off i ’

Tom’s cheeks bumed.- He gathered himself up and sneaked
oﬂ', crushed and crestfallen.

120 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XIII.

Tom’s mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate.
He was a forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him :
when they found out what theyhad driven him to, perhaps
they would be sorry; he had tried to do right and get along,
but they would not let him; since nothing would do them but
to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them blame Iii/m for the
consequences—Twhy shouldn’t they ? what right had the friend-
less to complain ? Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he
would lead a life of crime. There was no choice. By this
time he was far down Meadow lane, and the bell for school to
‘ take up ’ tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to
think he should never, never hear that old ﬁrmiliar sound any
more—it was very hard, but it was forced on him; since he was
driven out into the cold world, he must submit—but he forgave
them. Then the sohs came thick and list.

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, J Oe
Harper—hard-eyed, and with evidently a. great and dismal
purpose in his heart. Plainly here were ‘ two souls with but
a single thought.’ Tom, wiping his eyes with his sleeve,
began to blubber out something about a. resolution to escape
from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by roaming
abroad into the great world, never to return; and ended by
hoping that Joe would not forget him.

But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just

TH ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 121

been going to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for
that purpose. His mother had whipped him for drinking some
cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about; it
was plain that she was tired ofhim and wished himtogo;
if she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but
succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret
having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to
safer and die.

As the two boys walked sot-rowing along, they made a new
compact to stand by each other and be brothers, and never
separate death relieved them of their troubles. Then they
began to lay their plans. Joe was for being a hermit, and
living on crusts in aremote cave, and dying, some time, of cold,
and want, and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded
that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of
crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.

Three miles below St. Petersbnrg, at a point where the
Mississippi river was a triﬂe over a mile wide, there was a long,
narrow, wooded island, with a shallow bar at the head of it, and
this oﬁ‘ered well as a rendezvous. It was not inhabited; it lay
far over toward the further shore, abreast a dense and almost
wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson’s Island was chosen.
Who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a matter that
did not occur to them. Then they hunted up Huckleberry
Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to
him; he was indiﬂ'erent. They presently separated, to meet
at a lonely spot on the river bank two miles above the village,
at the favourite hour, which was midnight. There was a small
log raft there which they meant to capture. Each would bring
hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal in the
most dark and mysterious way—as beeame outlaws; and before
the afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the
sweet glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town

122 Tim ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

would ‘hear something.’ All who got this vague hint were
cautioned to ‘ be mum and wait.’

About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a
few triﬂes, and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small
bluﬁ' overlooking the meeting-place. It was starlight, and
very still. The mighty river lay like an ocean at rest. Tom
listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet. Then
he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under
the bluff. Tom whistled twice more ; these signals were
answered in the same way. Then a guarded voice said:

‘ Who goes there ? ’ r

‘Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main.
Name your names.’

‘Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror
of the Seas.’ Tom had furnished these titles from his favourite
literature.

‘ ’Tis well. Give the oountersign.’

Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simul-
taneously to the brooding night:

‘ Bwon ! ’

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the blnﬂ‘ and let himself
down after it, tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in
the eﬂ'ort. There was an easy, comfortable path along the
shore under the bluﬂ‘, but it lacked the advantages of didiculty
and danger so valued by a pirate.

The Terror of the Seas had broughta side of bacon, and
had about worn himself out with getting it there. Finn the
Red-Handed had stolen a skillet, and a quantity of half—cured
. leaf tobacco, and had also brought a. few oom-eobs to make
pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or ‘ chewed' but
himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it
would never do to start without some ﬁre. That was a wise
thought; matches were hardly known there in that day. They

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 123

ssw a. ﬁre smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards
above, and they went stealthin thither and helped themselves
to s chunk. They made an imposing adventure of it, saying
‘ Hist! ’ every now and then, and suddenly halting with ﬁnger
on lip; moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hike; and
giving orders in dismal whispers that if ‘the foe’ stirred, to

      

ON BOARD THEIR “BET PRIZE.

‘let him have it to the hilt,’ because ‘ dead men tell no tales.’
They knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the
village laying in stores or having a spree, but still that. was
no excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical
way.

They shoved oﬂ‘ presently, Tom in command, Huck at the
after our and Joe at. the forward. Tom stood amidships,

124 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB.

gloomy-brewed, and with folded arms, and gave his orders in
a low, stern whisper.
' ‘ Luﬁ‘, and bring her to the wind! ’

‘Aye, aye, sir ! ’

‘ Steady. stead-y-y—y l’

‘Steady it is, sir!’

‘Let her go oﬁ‘a point!’

‘ Point it is, sir ! ’

As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft
toward mid-stream, it was no doubt understood that these
orders were given only for ‘style,’ and were not intended to
mean anything in particular.

‘ What sail’s she carrying? ’

‘ Courses, tops’ls, and ﬂying-jib, sir! ’

‘ Send the r’yals up! Lay out aloﬁ there, half a dozen of
ye, forewpmast—stuns’ll Lively, now ! ’

‘ Aye, aye, sir! ’

‘Shake out that mainto-galans’ll Sheets and braces!
Now, my hearties ! ’

‘ Aye, aye, sir l ’

‘ Hellum-aplee— hard a-port! Stand by to meet her
when she comes! Port, port! Mow, men! With a. will!
Stead-Y-y-y!’

‘ Steady it is, sir I ’

The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys
painted her head right, and then lay on their oars. The river
was not high, so there was not more than a two- or three-mile
current. Hardly a word was said during the next thrw
quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before the
distant town. Two or three glimmering, lights showed where
it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of
star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event
that was happening. The Black Avenger stood still with

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 125

folded arms, ‘looking his last' upon the scene of his former
joys and his later suﬁ'erings, and wishing ‘she’ could see him
now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death with daunt-
less heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips.
It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jack-
son’s Island beyond eye-shot of the village, and so he ‘looked
his last’ with a, broken and satisﬁed heart. The other pirates
were looking their last, too; and they all looked so long that
they came near letting the current drift them out of the
range of the island. But they discovered the danger in time,
and made shift to avert it. About two o’clock in the morning
the raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head
of the island, and they waded back and forth until they had
landed their freight. Part of the little raft’s belongings con.
sisted of an old sail, and this they spread over a nook in the
bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions; but they them-
selves would sleep in the open air in good weather, as becamg
outlaws.

They built a ﬁre against the side of a great log twenty or
thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest, and then
cooked some, bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and used up half
of the corn ‘ pone ’ stock theyhad brought. It seemed glorious
sport to he feasting in that wild free way in the virgin forest
of an unexplored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts
of men, and they said they would never return to civilisation.
The climbing ﬁre lit up their limes and threw its ruddy glare
upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest temple, and upon
the varnished foliage and festooning vines. When the last
crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of corn
pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass,
ﬁlled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place,
but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as
the roasting camp-ﬁre.

126 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ Ain’t it gay ‘1” said Joe.
‘ It’s nuts! ’ said Tom. ‘ What would the boys say if they
could see us ? ’
‘ Say! Well they‘d just die to be here—hey, Hucky ? ’ y
‘I reckon so,’ said Huckleberry; “anyways I’m suited. I
don’t want nothing better’li this. I don’t ever get enough to

 

IHE PIRATE “KORE.

eat gen’ally— and here they can’t come and pick at afeller and
bullyrag him so.’

‘It’s just the life for me,’ said Tom. ‘You don’t have to
get up, mornings, and you don’t have to go to school, and wash,
and all that blame foolishness. You see a pirate don’t have
to do mything, Joe, when he's ashore, but a hermit he has to
be praying considerable, and then he don’t have any fun, any
way, all by himself that way.’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 127

{Oh yes, that’s so,’ said Joe, {but I hadn’t thought much
about it, you know. I’d a good deal rather be a pirate now
that I’ve tried it.’ . .

' ‘You see,’ said Tom, ‘people don’t go much on he'rmits,‘
, nowadays, like they used to in old times, but a pirate’s always-
respected. And a hermit’s got to sleep on the hardest place he
can ﬁnd, and put sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand
out in the rain, and—’

‘ What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for ? "
inquired Huck.

‘ I dunno. But they’ve got to do it. Hermite always do.
You’d have to do that if you was a hermit.’

‘ Dem’d if I would,’ said Huck.

‘ Well, what would you do ? ’

‘ I dunno. But I wouldn’t do that.’

‘ Why, Huck, you’d have to. How’d you get around it? ‘

‘ Why I just wouldn’t stand it. I'd run away.’

‘Run away! Well, you would be a nice old slouch of a
hermit. You’d be a. disgrace.’

The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed.
He had ﬁnished gouging out a cob, and now he ﬁtted a weed
stem to it, loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to
the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke ; he was in
the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The other pirates
envied him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to acquire
it shortly. Presently Huck said:

‘ What does pirates have to do ? ’

Tom said :

‘ Oh, they have just a bully time—take ships, and burn
them, and get the money and bury it in awful places in their
island where there’s ghosts and things to watch it, and ldll
everybody in the ships—make ’em walk a plank.’

128 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ And they carry the women to the island,’ said Joe; ‘ they
don’t kill the women.’

‘No,’ assented Tom, ‘they don’t kill the women—they’re
too noble. And the women’s always beautiful, too.’

‘And don’t they wear the bulliest clothes! 9h, no! All
gold and silver and di’monds,’ said Joe with enthusiasm.

‘Who?’ said Huck.

‘ Why, the pirates.’

Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.

‘ I reckon I ain’t dressed ﬁtten for a pirate,’ said he, with a.
regretful pathos in his voice ; ‘ but I ain’t got none but these.’

But the other boys told him the ﬁne clothes would come
fast enough after they should have begun their adventures.
They made him understand that his poor rags would do to
begin with, though it was customary for wealthy pirates to
start with a proper wardrobe.

Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal
upon the eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from
the ﬁngers of the Red—Handed, and he slept the sleep of the
consciencecfree and the weary. The Terror of the Seas and the
Black Avenger of the Spanish Main had more diﬂiculty in getting
to sleep. They said their prayers inwardly, and lying down,
since there was nobody there with authority to make them
kneel and recite aloud ; in truth, they had a mind not to say
them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as
that, lest they might call down a sudden and special thunder~
bolt from Heaven. Then at once they reached and hovered
upon the imminent verge of sleep—hut an intruder came now
that would not ‘ down.’ It was conscience. They began to
feel a vague fear that they had been doing wrong to run away;
and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the real
torture came. They tried to argue it away by reminding con-
science that they had purloined swestmeats and apples scores

THE ADVENTURES OF TORI SAWYER. 1295

of times; but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin
plausibilities. It seemed to them, in the end, that there was
no getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats
was only ‘hooking,’ while taking bacon and ham and such
valuables was plain, simple stealing—and there was a command
against that .in the Bible. So they inwardly resolved that so
long as they remained in the business, their piracies should not
again be sullied with the crime of stealing. Then conscience
granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates fell
peacefully to sleep.

130 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 8A WYER.

CHAPTER XIV.

V Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was.
‘ He sat up and rubbed his eyes and looked around; then he
comprehended. It was the cool grey dawn, and there was a
delicious sense of repose and peace in the deep pervading calm
and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred; not a sound
obtruded upon great Nature’s meditation. Beaded dew-drops
stood upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes
covered the ﬁre, and a thin blue wreath of smoke rose straight
into the air. Joe and Huck still slept. Now, far away in
the wood, a bird called; another answered; presently the
hammering of a woodpecker was heard. Gradually the cool
dim grey of the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds
multiplied and life manifested itself. The marvel of Nature
shaking oﬁ' sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the
musing boy. A little green worm (same cmwling over a
dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from time
to time, ‘sniiﬁug around,’ then proceeding again, for he was
measuring, Tom said ; and when the worm approached him of its
own accord he eat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and
falling by turns ssthe creature still came toward him or seemed
inclined to go elsewhere; and when at last it considered a
painful moment with its curved body in the air and then came
decisively down upon Tom’s leg and began a journey over him,
his whole heart was glad—for that meant that he was going to
have a. new suit of ylothes—without the shadow of a. doubt, a

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 181

gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared,
from nowhere in particular, and went about their labours; one
struggled manfully by with a dead spider ﬁve times as big as
itself in its arms, and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk. A
brown spotted lady-bug climbed the dizzy height of a grass-
blade, and Tom bent down close to it and said:

Lady—hug, lady-bug, ﬂy away home,
Your house is on ﬁre, your children’s alone ;

and she took wing and went oﬁ' to see about it—which did not
surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was
credulous about conﬂagtations, and he had practised upon its
simplicity more than once. A tumble-bug came next, heaving
sturdin at its ball, and Tom touched the creature,to see it
shut its legs against its body and pretend to be dead. The birds
were fairly rioting by this time. A eat-bird, the northern
mocker, lit in a tree over Tom’s head, and trilled out her
imitations of her neighbours in a rapture of enjoyment; then
a shrill jay swept down, a ﬂash of blue ﬂame, and stopped on
a twig almost within the boy’s reach, cocked his head to one
side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity; a
grey squirrel and a big fellow of the ‘ fox ’ kind came skurrying
along, sitting up at intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys,
for the wild things had probably never seen a human being
before, and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not. All -
Nature was wide awake and stirring now; long lances of
sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near, ,
and a few butterﬂies came ﬂuttering upon the scene. ‘
Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away
with a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing
after and tumbling over each other in the shallow limpid water
of the white sand—bar. They felt no longing for the little
village sleeping in the distance beyond the majestic waste of
I 2

132 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

water. A vagrant current or a slight rise in the river had
carried oﬁ‘ their raft, but this only gratiﬁed them, since its going
was something like burning the bridge between them and
civilisation.

They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed, glad—
hearted, and ravenous ; and they soon had the camp-ﬁre blazing
up gain. Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by,
and the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt
that water, sweetened with such a wild-wood charm as that,
would be a good enough substitute for coﬁ'ee. While Joe was
slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to hold
on a minute; they stepped to a. promising nook in the river
bank and threw in their lines; almost immediately they had
reward. Joe had not had time to get impatient before. they
were back again with some handsome bass, a couple of sun-
perch, and a small cat-ﬁsh—provisions enough for quite a family.
They fried the ﬁsh with the bacon and were astonished; for no
ﬁsh had ever seemed so delicious before. They did not know
that the quicker a freshwater ﬁsh is on the ﬁre after he is
caught the better be is; and they reﬂected little upon what a
sauce open-air sleeping, openoair exercise, bathing, and a large
ingredient of hunger make, too. >

They lay around in the shade aﬂer breakfast, while Huck
had a smoke, and then went of through the woods on an explor-
ing expedition. They trumped gaily along, over decaying logs,
through tangled underbrush, along solemn monarchs of the
forest, hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping
‘ regalia of grape-vines. Now and then they came upon snug
nooks carpeted with grass and jewelled with ﬂowers.

They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but
nothing to be astonished at. They discovered that the island
was about three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide, and
that the shore it lay closest to was only separated from it by a

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 183

narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide. They took a
swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle of the
afternoon when they got back to camp. They were too hungry
to stop b0 ﬁsh, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and
then threw themselves down in the shade to talk. But the
talk soon began to drag, and then died. The stillness, the
solemnity that brooded in the woods, and the sense of loneli-

 

THE TLEABANT STROLL.

ness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys. They fell to
thinking. A sort of undeﬁned longing crept upon them. This
took dim shape presently—it was budding home-sickness. Even
Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his door-steps and
empty hogsheads. But they were all ashamed of their weak-
ness, and none was brave enough to speak his thought.

For some time now the boys had been dully conscious of a

 

134 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

peculiar sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the
ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now
this mysterious sound became more pronounced, and forced a
recognition. The boys started, glanced at each other, and then
each assumed a listening attitude. There was along silence,
profound and unbroken ; then a deep, sullen boom came ﬂoating
down out of the distance.

‘What is it ? ’ exclaimed Joe, under his breath.

‘ I wonder,’ said Tom in a whisper.

‘ ’Tain’t thunder,’ said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, ‘ becnz
thunder—’

‘ Hark ! ’ said Tom ; ‘ listen—don’t talk.’

They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same
muﬁ‘led boom troubled the solemn hush.

‘ Let’s go and see.’ ‘

They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward
the town. They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out
over the water. The little steam ferry-boat was about a mile
below the village, drifting with the current. Her broad deck
seemed crowded with people. There were a great many skiﬁ's
rowing about or ﬂoating with the stream in the neighbourhood
of the ferry-boat, but the boys could not determine what the
men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of white smoke
burst from the ferry-boat’s side, and as it expanded and rose
in a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was home to the
listeners again.

‘ I know now! ’ exclaimed Tom ; ‘ somebody‘s drownded ! ’

‘That’s it,’ said Huck; ‘ they done that last summer when
Bill Turner got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water,
and that makes him come up to the top. Yes, and they take I
loaves of bread and put quicksilver in ’em and set ’em aﬂoat,

and wherever there’s anybody that’s drownded, they’ll ﬂoat right
there and stop.’

THE ADVENTURES OF T01}! SAWYER. 135

‘Yes, I've heard about. that,’ said Joe. ‘I wonder what
makes the bread do that.’

‘ Oh, it ain’t the bread so much,’ said Tom; ‘ I reckon it’s
mostly what they say over it before they start it out.’

‘But they don‘t say anything over it,’ said Huck. ‘I’ve
seen ’em, and they don’t.’

 

TEE amen FOR THE DROWNED.

‘Well, that’s funny,’ said Tom. ‘But maybe they say it
to themselves. Of course they do. Anybody might know
that.’ 

The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom
said, because an ignorant lump of bread, 'uninstructed by an
incantation, could not be expected to act very intelligently
when sent upon an errand of such gravity.

I ‘ K
x )x we 335w

136 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ By jings ! I wish I was over there now,’ said Joe.

‘ I do too,’ said Huck. ‘ I’d give heaps to know who
it is.’ '

The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing
thought ﬂashed through Tom’s mind, and he exclaimed:

‘ Boys, I know who’s drownded; it’s us ! ’

They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous
triumph ; they were missed; they were mourned; hearts were
breaking on their account; tears were being shed; accusing
memories of unkindnesses to these poor lost lads were rising up,
and unavailing regrets and remorse were being indulged ; and
best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole town, and
the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety was
concerned. This was ﬁne. It was worth while to be a pirate,
after all.

As twilight drew on, the ferry-boat went back to her accus-
tomed business and the skiﬁ‘s disappeared. The pirates returned
to camp. They were jubilant with vanity over their new
grandam and the illustrious trouble they were making. They
caught ﬁsh, cooked supper and ate it, and then fell to guessing
at what the village was thinking and saying about them ; and
the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account
were gratifying to look upon—from their point of view. But
when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually
ceased to talk, and sat gazing into the ﬁre, with their minds
evidently wandering elsewhere. The excitement was gone
now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts of certain
persons at home who were not enjoying this ﬁne frolic as much
as they were. Misgivings came; they grew troubled and un-
happy; a sigh or two escaped unawares. By-and-by Joe timidly
ventured upon a roundabout ‘ feeler ’ as to how the others might
look upon a. return to civilisation—not right now, but—

Tom withered him with derision! Huck, being uncom-

THE‘ADVENTURES OF TO}! SA WYER. 187

mitted as yet, joined in with Tom, and the waverer quickly
‘ explained,’ and was glad to get out of the scrape with as little
taint of chicken-hearted home~sickness clinging to his garments
as he could. Mutiny was eﬁ’ectually laid to rest for the

moment.
As the night deepened Huck began to nod, and presently

 

 

Tox's MYSTSRIOUS war-use.

to snore ; Joe followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow'motion-
less for some time, watching the two intently. At last he got
up cautiously on his knees, and went seamhing among the grass
and the ﬂickering reﬂections ﬂung by the camp-ﬁre. He picked
up and inspected several large semi-cylinders of the thin white
bark of a sycamore, and ﬁnally chose two which seemed to suit
him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something

138 TE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

upon each of these with his ‘ red keel ; ’ one he rolled up and put.
in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe’s hat and
removed itto a little distance from the owner. And he also put-
into the hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimnble.
value—among then: a lump of chalk, an india-rubber ball, three
ﬁsh-hooks, and one of that kind of marbles known as a ‘ sure
’nongh crystal.’ Then he tip-teed his way cautiously among
the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and straight—
way broke into a. keen run in the direction of the sand-bar.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 189

CHAPTER XV.

A FEW minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar,
wading toward the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached
his middle he was half way over: the current would permit no
more wading now, so he struck out conﬁdently to swim the re-
maining hundred yards. He swam quartering up stream, but
still was swept downward rather ﬁaster than he had expected.
However, he reached the shore ﬁnally, and drifted along till he
found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on
his jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck
through the woods, following the shore,with streaming garments.
Shortly before ten o’clock he came out into an open place oppo-
site the village, and saw the ferry-boat lying in the shadow of
the trees and the high bank. Everything was quiet under the
blinking stars. lie crept down the bank, watching with all his
eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes and
climbed into the skid that did ‘ yawl ' duty at the boat’s stern.
He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.

Presently the cracked bell tapped, and a voice gave the order
to ‘ cast oﬂ’.’ A minute or two later the skitf’s head was stand-
ing high up against the boat’s swell, and the voyage was begun.
Tom felt happy in his success, for he knew it was the boat’s
last trip for the night. ‘ At the end of a long twelve or ﬁfteen
minutes the wheels stopped, and Torn slipped overboard and
swam ashore in the dusk, landing ﬁfty yards down stream, out

140 THE ADVE; TUBES OF T 0.31 SAWYER.

of danger of possible stragglers. He ﬂew along unfrequented
alleys, and shortly found himself at his aunt’s back fence. He
climbed over, approached the ‘ ell,’ and looked in at the sitting-
room window, for a light was burning there. There sat Aunt
Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper’s mother, grouped together,
talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was between them

 

 

 

WHAT TO“ SAW.

and the door. Tom went to the door and began to softly liR:
the latch; then he pressed gently and the door yielded a
crack; he continued pushing cautiously, and quaking every
time it creaked, till he judged he might squeeze through on
his knees; and so he put his head through and began, war-ﬂy.
‘ What makes the candle blow so ? ’ said Aunt Polly. Tom
hurried up. ‘Why, that door’s open, I believe. Why. of

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 14]

course it is. No end of strange things now. Go ’long and
shut it, Sid.’

Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and
‘ breathed ’ himself for a time, and then crept to where he could
almost touch his aunt's foot.

‘ But as I was saying,’ said Aunt Polly, ‘he warn’t bad, so
to say—only mischeevous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum,
you know. He wam’t any more responsible than a colt. He
never meant any harm, and he was the best—hearted boy that
ever was ’—and she began to cry.

‘It was just so with my Joe—always full of his devilment,
and up to every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselﬁsh
and kind as he could be—and laws bless me, to think I went
and whipped him for taking that cream, never once recollecting
that I throwed it out myself because it was sour, and I never
to see him again in this world, never, never, never, poor
abused boy! ’ And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart. would
break.

‘ I hope Tom’s better 03' where he is,’ said Sid; ‘ but if he’d
been better in some ways—’

‘S'id!’ Tom felt the glare of the old lady’s eye, though
he could not see it. ‘ Not a word against my Tom, now that
he’s gone! God’ll take care of him—never you trouble your-
;self, sir. Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don’t know how to give him up,
I don’t lmow how to give him up! He was such a comfort to
me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, ’most.’

‘ The Lord giveth, and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed
be the name of the Lord! But it’s so hard—oh, it’s so
hard! Only last Saturday my Joe busted a ﬁre-cracker right
under my nose, and I knocked him sprawling. Little did I
know then, how soon—oh, if it was to do over again, I’d hug
him and bless him for it.’

‘Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I

142 THE ADVENTURES OF TO!!! SAWYER.

know just exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday
noon, my Tom took and ﬁlled the cat full of Pain-Killer, and I
did think the cretur would tear the house down. And God
forgive me, I cracked Tom’s head with my thimble, poor boy,
poor dead boy. But he’s out of all his troubles now. And the
last words I ever heard him say was to reproach—’

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she
broke entirely down. Tom was snuﬂiing now himself—and
more in pity of himself than anybody else. He could hear
Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word for him from time
to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than
ever before. Still he was suﬂiciently touched by his aunt’s
grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm
her with joy—and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing
appealed strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and lay
still. He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends
that it was conjectured at ﬁrst that the boys had got drowned
while taking a swim; then the small raft had been missed;
next, certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the
village should ‘hear something’ soon; the wise heads had
‘put this and that together,’ and decided that the lads had
gone 05 on that raft, and would turn up at the next town
below presently; but toward noon the raﬁ, had been found,
lodged against the Missouri shore some ﬁve or six miles below
the village—and then hope perished; they must be drowned,
else hunger would have driven them home by nightfall if not
sooner. It was believed that the search for the bodies had
been a fruitless eﬁ‘ort merely because the drowning must have
occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being good swimmers,
would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday
night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope
would be given over, and the funerals would be preached on
that morning. Tom shuddered. * '

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 143

Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good-night and turned to go.
Then with a mutual impulse the two bereaved women ﬂung
themselves into each other’s arms and had a good consoling
cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly was tender far beyond her
wont in her good-night to Sid and Mary. Sid snuﬂied a bit,
and Mary went off crying with all her heart. .

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly,
so appealiugly, and with such measureless love in her words
and her old trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears

 I again long before she was through.

He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she
kept making broken-hearted ejaculations from time to time,
tossing unrestfully, and turning over. .But at last she was
still, only moaning a little in her sleep. Now the boy stole
out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the candle—light
with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full of
pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by
the candle. But something occurred to him, and he lingered,
considering. His face lighted with a happy solution of his
thought ; he put the bark hastily in his pocket, then be bent
over and kissed the faded lips, and straightway made his stealthy
exit, latching the door behind him.

He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody
at large there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for
he knew she was tenantless except that there was a watchman,
who always turned in and slept like a graven image. He
untied the skiﬂ' at the stern, slipped into it, and was soon
rowing cautiously up stream. When he had pulled a mile
above the village, he started quarter-mg across, and bent him-
self stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on the other side
neatly, for this was a familiar bit of work to him. He was
moved to capture the skiﬁ', arguing that it might be considered
a ship and therefore legitimate prey for a pirate; but he knew

144 THE ADVENTURES 01" TOM SAWYER.

a thorough search would be made for it, and that might end in
revelations. So he stepped ashore and entered the wood. He
sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meantime to
keep awake, and then started wearin down the homeatretch.
The night was far spent. It was broad daylight before he
found himself fairly abreast the island-bar. He rested again
until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its
splendour, and then he plunged into the stream. Alittle later
he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and heard
Joe say:

‘ No, Tom’s true-blue, Huck, and he’ll come back. He
won’t desert. He knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate,
and Tom’s too proud for that sort of thing. He’s up to some-
thing or other. N ow I wonder what? ’

‘Well, the things is ours anyway, ain’t they ?’

‘ Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they
are if he ain’t back here to breakfast.’

‘Which he is!’ exclaimed Tom, with ﬁne dramatic effect,
stepping grandly into camp.

A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and ﬁsh was shortly pro-
vided, and as the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and
adorned) his adventures. They were a vain and boastful com—
pany of heroes when the tale was done. Then Tom hid himself
away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates
got ready to ﬁsh and explore.

THE ADVENTURES 01’ TOM SAWYBR. 145

CHAPTER XVI.

AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on
the bar. They went about poking sticks into the sand, and
when they found a. 5011: place they went down on their knees .

 

 

THI PIRATB' ma HARXET.

and dug with their hands. Sometimes they would take ﬁfty or
sixty eggs out of one hole. They were perfectly round, white
' L

 

146 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

things, a. triﬂe smaller than an English walnut. They had a
famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on Friday
morning. After breakfast they went whooping and prancing
out on the bar, and chased each other round and round,
shedding clothes as they went, until they were naked,and then
continued the frolic far away up the shoal water of the bar,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

W?" '/ e:

um Pun'ms' BATH.

against the stiﬁ‘ current, which latter tripped their legs from
under them from time to time, and greatly increased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in
each other’s faces with their palms, gradually approaching each
other with averted faces, to avoid the stmngling sprays, and
ﬁnally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his
neighbour, and then they all went under in a tangle of white

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 147

legs and arms, and came up blowing, sputtering, laughing,
and gasping for breath at one and the same time.

' When they were well exhausted, they would run out and
sprawl on the dry, hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves
up with it, and by-and-by break for the water again and go
through the original performance once more. Finally it
occurred to them that their naked skin represented ﬂesh- .
coloured ‘ tights ’ very fairly; so they drew a ring in the sand
and had a circus—with three clowns in it, for none would yield
this proudest post to his neighbour.

Next they got their marbles, and played ‘ knucks ’ and
‘n'ng—taw ’ and ‘ keeps,’ till that amusement grew stale. Then
Joe and Huck had another swim, but Tom would not venture,
because he found that in kicking 03' his trOusers he had kicked
his string of rattlesnake rattles oﬂ‘ his ankle, and he wondered
how he had escaped cramp so long without the protection of
this mysterious charm. He did not venture again until he
had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and
ready to rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into
the ‘ dumps,’ and fell to gazing longingly across the wide river
to where the village lay drowsing in the sun. Tom found
himself writing Becky in the sand with his bigtoe; he scratched
it out, and was angry with himself for his weakness. But he
wrote it again, nevertheless ; he could not help it. He erased
it once more, and then took himself out of temptation by driving
the other boys together and joining them. '

But Joe’s spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection.
He was so home-sick that he could hardly endure the misery
of it. The tears lay very near the sin-Ewe. Huck was melan-
choly too. Tom was down-hearted, but tried hard not to show
it. He had a secret which he was not ready to tell yet, but if
this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he would have
to bring it out. He said, with a great show of cheerfulness :

I. 2

148 Z'HE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.‘

I ‘ I bet there’s been pirates on this island before, boys.
We’ll explore it again. They’ve hid treasures here somewhere.
How’d you feel to light on a rotten chest full of gold and silver
—hey ? ’

But it roused only a faint enthusiasm, which faded out,
with no reply. Tom tried one or two other seductions ; but
they failed too. It was discouraging work. Joe sat poking up
the sand with a stick, and looking very gloomy. Finally he
said:

‘ Oh, boys, let’s give it up. I want to go home. It’s so
lonesome.’

‘ Oh, no, Joe, you'll feel better by-and-by,’ said Tom. ‘ Just
think of the ﬁshing that’s here.’

‘ I don’t care for the ﬁshing. I want to go home.’

‘ But, Joe, there ain’t such another swimming place any-
where.’ y

‘ Swimming’s no good ; I don’t seem to care for it, somehow,
when there ain‘t anybody to say I shnn’t go in. I mean to go
home.’ i
‘ Oh, shucks ! baby! You want to see your mother, I
reckon.’

‘ Yes, I do want to see my mother, and you would too, if
you had one. I ain’t any more baby than you are.’ And Joe
snuﬂ'led a little.

‘ Well, we’ll let the cry-baby go home to his mother, won’t
we, Hlick? Poor thing—does it want to see.its mother? And
so it shall. You like it here, don’t you, Huck? We’ll stay,
won’t we?’

Huck said ‘ Y-e-s’-— without any heart in it.

‘I’ll never speak to you again as long as I live,’ said Joe,
rising. ‘ There now i ’ And he moved moodin away and began
to dress himself.

‘ Who cares?’ said Tom. ‘ Nobody wants you to. Go

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 1n;

’long home and get laughed at. Oh, you’re a nice pirate!
Huck and me ain’t cry-babies. We’ll stay, won’t we, Huck?
Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can get along without.
him, per’aps.’

But Tom was uneasy nevertheless, and was alarmed to see
Joe go sullenly on with his dressing. And then it. was dis-
oomfort-ing to see Huck eyeing Joe’s preparations so wistfully,
and keeping up such an ominous silence. Presently, without
a parting word, Joe began to wade oﬁ‘ towud the Illinois
shore. Tom’s heart began to sink. He glanced at Huck.
Huck oould not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he
said:

‘ I want. to go, too, Tom; it was getting so lonesome any.
way, and now it'll be worse. Let’s us go too, Tom.’

‘ I won’t; you can all go ifyou want to. I mean to stay.‘

‘Tom, I better go.’

‘ Well, go ’long—who’s hindering you ? ’

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said:

‘Tom, I wisht you’d come too. Now you think it over.
We’ll wait for you when we get to shore.’

‘ Well, you’ll wait a blame long time, that’s alL’

Huck started sorrowftu away, and Tom stood looking alter
him, with a strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his
pride and go along too. He hoped the boys would stop, but
they still waded slowly on. It suddenly dawned on Tom that '
it was become very lonely and still. He made one ﬁnal
struggle with his pride, and then darted aﬁer his comrades,
yelling:

‘ Wait! wait! I want to hell you something!’

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got
to where they were, he began unfolding his secret, and they
listened moodin till at last they saw the ‘ point ’ he was driving
at, and than they set up a war-whoop of applause and said it

160 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

was ‘ splendid ; ’ and said if he had told them that at ﬁrst, they
wouldn’t have started away. He made a plausible excuse; but
his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret
would keep them with him any very great length of time, and
so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.

The lads came gaily back and went at their sports again
with a will, chattering all the time about Tom’s stupendous plan
and admiring the genius of it. After a dainty egg and ﬁsh
dinner, Tom said he wanted to learn to smoke now. Joe caught
at the idea, and said he would like to try too. So Huck made
pipes and ﬁlled them. These novices had never smoked any-
thing before but cigars made of grape-vine, and they ‘ bit’ the
tongue, and were not considered manly, anyway.

Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and
began to puﬁ' charily, and with slender conﬁdence. The smoke
had an unpleath taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom
said:

‘Why, it’s just as easy!
a learnt long ago.’

‘ So would I,’ said Joe. ‘ It’s just nothing.‘

‘Why, many a time I’ve looked at people smoking and
thought, Well, I wish I could do that; but I never thought
I could,’ said Tom. ‘That’s just the way with me, ain’t it,
Huck? You’ve heard me talk just that way, haven’t you,
Huck? I’ll leave it to Huck if I haven' .’

‘ Yes, heaps of times,’ said Huck.

‘ Well, I have too,’ said Tom; ‘ oh, hundreds of times.
Once down by the slaughter—house. Don’t you remember,
Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and Johnny Miller, and Jeﬁ'
Thatcher, when I said it. Don’t you remember, Huck, ’bont
me saying that?’

‘Yes, that’s so,’ said Huck ‘That was the day after I
lost a white alley—no, 'twas the day before!’

If I’d a know’d this was all, I’d

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 151

"; There, I told you so,’ said Tom. ‘ Huck reoolleots it.’ ,

‘ I‘h’leeve I could smoke this pipe all day,’ said Joe. ‘I
don’t feel sick.’

‘ Neither do I,’ said Tom. ‘ I could smoke it all day, but
I bet you J eﬁ' Thatcher couldn’t.’  ,

‘ Jeﬂ' Thatcher! Why, he’d keel over just with two draws.
Just let him try it once; he‘d see!’

‘I bet he would, and Johnny Miller—I wish I could see
Johnny Miller tackle it once.’ .

‘ Oh, don’t I? ’ said Joe. ‘ Why, I bet you Johnny Miller
couldn’t any more do this than nothing. Just one little sniiter
would fetch him.’

"Deed it would, Joe. Say—I wish the boys could see us
now.’

‘ So do I l ’

‘ Say—boys, don’t say anything about it, and some time when
they’re around I’ll come up to you and say, “ Joe, got a pipe ?
I want a smoke I ” And you’ll say, kind of careless like, as
if it warn’t anything, you’ll say, “ Yes. I got my old pipe, and
another one, but my tobacker ain’t very good 2 ” And I’ll say,
“ Oh, that’s all right, if it’s strong enough.” And then you’ll
out with the pipes, and we’ll light up just as aim, and then
just see ’em look! ’

‘ By jings that’ll be gay, Tom ! I wish it was now i ’

‘ So do I! And when we tell ’em we learned when we was
off pirating, won’t they wish they’d been along!’

‘ Oh, I reckon not. I’ll just bet they will ! ’

So the talk ran on; but presently it began to ﬂag a triﬂe,
and grow disjointed. The silences widened; the expectant/ion
marvellonsly increased. Every pore inside the boys’ cheeks
became a spouting fountain; they could scarcely bale out the
cellars under their tongues fast enough to prevent an inunda-
tion ; little overﬂowings down their throats occurred in spite

'152 ~ THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

of all-they could do, and sudden retchings followed every time.
Both boys were looking very pale and miserable now. Joe’s
pipe dropped from his nerveless ﬁngers. Tom’s followed.
Both fountains were going furiously, and both pumps baling
with might and main. Joe said feebly: 1

‘ I’ve lost my knife. I reckon I better go and ﬁnd it.’

Tom said, with quiven'ng lips and halting utterance:

 

TON LOOKING FOR JOE’S KNIFE.

‘I’ll help you. You go over that way, and I’ll hunt
around by the spring. No, you needn’t come, Huck—we can
ﬁnd it.’ -

So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he

'found it, lonesome, and went to ﬁnd his comrades. They
were wide apart in the woods, both very pale, both fast asleep.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB. 158

But something informed him that if they had had any trouble
they had got rid of it. '

They were not talkative at supper that night; they had
a humble look; and when Huck prepared his pipe after the
meal, and was going to prepare theirs, they said no, they were
not feeling very well—something they ate at dinner had dis-
agreed with them.

About midnight Joe awake, and called the boys. There was
a brooding oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode some-
thing. The boys huddled themselves together, and sought the
friendly companionship of the ﬁre, though the dull dead heat of
the breathless atmosphere was stiﬂing. They sat still, intent
and waiting. The solemn hush continued. Beyond the light of
the ﬁre everything was swallowed up in the blackness of dark-
ness. Presently there came a quivering glow that vaguely
revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished. By-and—
by another came, a. little stronger. Then another. Then a
faint moan came sighing through the branches of the forest,
and the boys felt a ﬂeeting breath upon their cheeks, and
shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit of the Night had
gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird ﬂash turned night
into day, and showed every little grass-blade, separate and dis-
tinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white
startled faces, too. A deep peel of thunder went rolling and
tumbling down the heavens, and lost itself in sullen rumblings
in the distance. A sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all
the leaves and snowing the ﬂaky ashes broadcast about the
ﬁre. Another ﬁerce glare lit up the forest, and an instant »
cmh followed that seemed to rend the tree-tops right over
the boys’ heads. They clung together in terror, in the thick
gloom that followed. A few big raindrops fell pattering upon
the leaves.

‘ Quick, boys, go for the tent! ’ exclaimed Tom.

154-

V THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

 

A HURRICANE.

They sprang away,
stumbling over roots
and among vines in the
dark, no two plunging
in the same direction.
A furious blast roared
through the trees, mak-
ing everything sing as
it went. One blinding
ﬂash after another came,
and peel on peal of
deafening thunder. And
now a drenching rain
poured down, and the
rising hurricane drove
it in sheets along the
ground. The boys cried
out to each other, but
the roaring wind and
the booming ' thunder-
blasts drowned their
voices utterly. How—
ever, one by one they
struggled in at last, and
took .shelter under the
tent, oold, scared, and
streaming with water;
but to have company
in misery seemed some-
thing to be grateful for.
They could not talk, the
old sail ﬂapped so furi-
ously, even if the other

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 155

noises would have allowed-them. ,Thev tempest higher
and higher, and presently the'sail tore loose from fasten-
ings, and went winging away on the blast. The boys
each others’ hands, and ﬂed, with many tumblings and bruises,
to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the river bank.
Now the battle was at its highest. Under the ceaseless con-
ﬂagration of lightning that ﬂamed in the skies,-everything
below stood out in clean-cut and shadowless distinctness the
bending trees, the billowy river, white with foam, the driving
spray of spume—ﬂakes, the dim outlines of the high bluﬁ's on
the other side, glimpsed through the drifting cloud-rack and

' the slanting veil of rain. Every little while some giant tree 1
yielded the ﬁght and fell crashing through the younger growth ; i
and the nnﬂagging thunder-peels came now in ear-splitting
explosive bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakany appalling. ‘
The storm culminated in one} matchless eﬂ'ort that seemed
likely to tear the island to pieces, burn it up, drown it totthe
tree-tops, blow it away, and deafen every creature in it, all at
one and the same moment. It was a. wild night for homeless
young heads to be out in.

But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired, with
weaker and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace re-
sumed her sway. The boys went back to amp a good deal awed;
but they found there was still something to be thankful for,
because the great sycamore, the shelter of their beds, was a ruin
now, blasted by the lightning, and they were not under it whe

' the catastrophe happened. ' :

Everything in camp was drenched, the camp-ﬁre as well;
for they were but heedless lads, like their generation, and
had made no provision against rain. Here was matter for
dismay, for they were soaked through and chilled. They were
eloquent in their distress; but they presently discovered that
the ﬁre had ‘eaten so far up under the great log ithad been

150 ' THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. °

built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from
the ground), that a. hand-breadth or so of it had escaped wetting;
so they patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered
from the under sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the ﬁre to
burn again. Then they piled on great dead bonghs till they
had a roaring furnace and were glad-hearted once more.
They dried their boiled ham and had a feast” and after that.

’ \\\.. " ‘

 

TERRIBLE madam .
they sat by the ﬁre and expanded and gloriﬁed their midnight
adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to sleep
on, anywhere around.

As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness
came over them and they went out on the sud-bar and lay
down to sleep. They got scorched out hy-und-hy, and drearily
set about getting breakfast. After the meal they felt rusty,
and emf-jointed, and a little home-sick once more. Tom saw

I

    

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 167

the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he
could. But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or
swimming, or anything. 'He reminded them of the imposing
secret, and raised a my of cheer. While it lasted he got them
interested inanew device. This was to knock 05 being pirates
for a while, and be Indians for a change. They were attracted
by this idea; so it was not long before they were stripped, and
striped from head to heel with black mud, like so many zebras—
all of them chiefs, of course-—and they went tearing through the
woods to attack an English settlement.

By-and—by they separated into three hostile tribes, and
darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful war-whoops,
ﬁnd killed and sealped each other by thousands. It was a gory
day. Consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one.

They assembled in camp toward supper-time, hungry and
happy. But now a diﬂiculty arose—hostile Indians could not
break the bread of hospitality together without ﬁrst
peace, and this was a simple impossibility without smoking a pipe
of peace. There was no other process that ever they had heard of.
Two of the savages almost wished they had remained pirates.
However, there was no other way, so with such show of cheerful—
ness as they could muster they called for the pipe and took their
whiﬁ', as it passed, in due form.

And behold they were glad they had gone into savagery,
for they had gained something; they found that they could
now smoke a little without having to go and hunt for a lost
knife ; they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfort—
able. They were not likely to fool away this high promise for
lack of effort. No, they practised cautiously after supper with
right ﬂair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening. They
were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they
would have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations.
We will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we
have no further use for them at present.

166 THE ADVENTURES 01" TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XVII.

Bur there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil
Saturday afternoon. The Hex-pars and Aunt Polly’s family
were being put into mourning with great grief and many tears.
An unusual quiet possessed the village, although it was ordi-
narily quiet enough, in all conscience. The villagers conducted
their concerns with an absent air, and talked little; but they
sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a burden to the
children. They had no heart in their sports, and gradually
gave them up. .

In the‘afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about
the deserted school-house yard, and feeling very melancholy.
But she found nothing there to comfort her. She solﬂoquised:

‘ Oh, if I only had his brass andiron-knoh again! But I
haven‘t got anything now to remember him by ; ’ and she choked
back a little sob. .

‘Presently she stopped, and said to herself:

' "'It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again, I
wouldn’t say that-—I wouldn’t say it for the whole world. But
he’s gone now; I’ll never, never, never see him any more.‘

This thought broke her down, and she wandered away with
the tears rolling down her cheeks. Then quite a group of
boys and girls—playmates of Tom’s and Joe’s—came by, and
stood looking over the paling fence and talking in reverent
tones of how Torn did so—aud—so the last time they'saw him,
and how Joe said this and that small triﬂe (pregnant with
awful prophecy, as they could easily see now!)—and each

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. l‘Slr,

speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at
the time, and then added something like, ‘ and I was E-sbmd-
ing just so—just as I am now, and as if you was him—'I'was
as close as that—and he smiled, just this way—and then'
something seemed to go all over me, like—awful, you know+~
and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I can see'
now! ’

Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last
in life, and many claimed that dismal distinction, and oﬁ‘ered
evidences more or less tampered with by the witness; and
when it was ultimately decided who did see the departed last,
and exchanged the last words with them, the lucky parties

- too‘k upon themselves a sort of saitred importance, and were
gaped at and envied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had
no other grandeur to offer, said, with tolerany manifest pride
in the remembrance:

‘ Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me onoe.’

But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys
could say that, and so that cheapened the distinction too much.
The group loitered away, still recalling memories of the lost
heroes in awed voices.

When the Sunday-school hour was ﬁnished the next mom-
ing, the bell began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way.
It was a very still Sabbath, and the mouthful sound seemed in
keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature. The
villagers began to gather, loitering a moment in the vestibule
to converse in whispers about the sad event. But there‘was
no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling. of
dresses, as the women gathered to their seats, disturbed! the:
silence there. None could remember when the little, church
had been so full before. There was ﬁnally a waiting pause,.an
expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by.
Sid and Mary, and then by the Harper family, all in. deep

160 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

black, and the whole .congregation, the old minister as well,
rose reverently and stood, until the mourners were seated in
the front pew. There was another communing silence, broken
at intervals by muﬂed sobs, and then the minister his
hands abroad and prayed. A moving hymn was sung, and the
text followed: ‘1 am the Resurrection and the Life.’

 

 

A TOUCHING SERVICE.

As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures
of the graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the
lost lads, that every soul there, thinking he recognised these
pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently
blinded himself to them always before, and had as persistently
seen only ﬁmlts and ﬂaws in the poor boys. The minister
related many a touching incident in the livesIof the departed,

 

ITHE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 161

too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the
people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those
episodes were, and remembered with grief that at the time
they occurred they had seemed rank raseslities, well deserving
of the cowhide. The congregation became more and more-
moved as the pathetic tale went on, till at last the whole com-
pany broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus
of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feel-
ings, and crying in the pulpit.

 

HAVING A GOOD TIME.

There was a rustle iu the gallery which nobody noticed; a
moment later the church door creaked; the minister raised his
streaming eyes above his handkerchief, and stood transﬁxed!
First one and then another pair of eyes followed the minister’s,
and then, almost with one impulse, the congregation rose and
stared while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle,
Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a min of drooping rags,
sneaking sheepishly in the rear. They had been hid in the
unused gallery, listening to their own funeral semen !

Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon
their restored ones, smothered them with kisses, and poured out

it

 

162 TH ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

thanksgivings, while poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfort-
able, not knowing exactly what to do or where to hide from so
many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and started to slink
away, but Tom seized him and said:

‘ Aunt Polly, it ain’t fair. Somebody’s got to be glad to see
Huck.’

 

TOM'S PROUDEHT IOHEST.

‘ And so they shall ! I’m glad to see him, poor motherless
thing!’ And the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon
him were the one thing capable of making him more uncomfort-
able than he was before.

Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice:

‘ “ Praise God from whom all blessings ﬂow ”——smG !——and
put your hearts in it l ’

 

THE ADVENTUHS OF TOM SA WYER. 183

And they did. 01d Hundred swelled up with a triumphant
burst, and while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate
looked around upon the envying juveniles about him, and
confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of
his life.

As the ‘sold’ congregation trooped out, they said they
would almost be willing to be made ridiculous again to hear
Old Hundred sung like that once more.

Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day~soeording to Aunt
Polly’s varying moody—than he had earned before in a year;
and he hardly knew which expressed the most gratefulness to
God and aﬁ'ection for himself. '

x2

164 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

CHAPTER XVIII.

THAT was Tom’s great secret—the scheme to return home with
his brother pirates and attend their own funerals. They had
paddled over to the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Satur-
day, landing ﬁve or six miles below the village ; they had slept
in the woods at the edge of the town till nearly daylight, and
had then crept through back lanes and alleys and ﬁnished their
sleep in the gallery of the church among a chaos of invalided
benches.

At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were
very loving to Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There
was an unusual amount of talk. In the course of it Aunt
Polly said: -

‘ Well, I don't say it wasn’t a ﬁne joke, Tom, to keep every-
body suﬂ‘ering ’most a week so you boys had a good time, but
it is a pity you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suﬁ'er so.
If you could come over on alog to gotoyour funeral, you could
have come over and give me a hint some way that you warn’t
dead, but only run oﬂ‘.’

‘Yes, you could have done that, Tom,’ said Mary; ‘and I
believe you would if you had thought of it.’

‘ Would you, Tom?’ said Aunt Polly, her face lighting
wistfully. ‘ Say, now, would you, if you’d thought of it? ’

‘ I—well, I don’t know. ’Twould a spoiled everything.’

‘ Tom, I-hoped you loved me that much,’ said Aunt Polly,
with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy. ‘ It would been

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 166

something if you’d cared enough to think of it, even if you
didn’t do it.’

‘Now, auntie, that ain’t any harm,’ pleaded Many; ‘it’s
only Tom’s giddy way—he is always in such a msh that he
never thinks of anything.’ .

‘ More’s the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would
have come and done it, too. Tom, you’ll look back, some day, i
when it’s too late, and wish you’d cared a little more for me-
when it. would have cost you 'so little.’

 

TOM TIRES T0 BEHEHBER.

‘ Now, auntie, you know I do care for you,’ said Tom.

‘ I’d know it better if you acted more like it.’

‘ I wish now I’d thought,’ said Tom, with a repentant
tone; ‘but I dreamed about you, anyway. That’s something,
ain’t it ? ’

‘ It ain’t much—a cat does that much—but it’s better than
nothing. What did you dream?’

‘ Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over:
there by the bed, and Sid was sitting by the wood-box, and
Mary next to him.’

 

166 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams
could take even that much trouble about us.‘
a ‘ And I dreamt that Joe Harper’s mother was here.’

‘Why, she was here! Did you dream any more?’ .

‘ Oh, lots. But it’s so dim now.’

‘ Well, try to, recollect—can’t you ? ’
. ‘ Somehow it seems to me that the wind—the wind blowed
the—the—’ '

"l‘ry harder, Tom ! The wind did blow something. Come!’

Tom pressed his ﬁngers on his forehead an anxious minute,
and then said:

‘ I’ve got it now! I’ve got it now! It blowed the handle! ’

‘ Mercy on us ! Go on, Tbm—go on X ’

‘ And it seems to me that you said, “ Why, I believe that
that door ” ’

‘ Go on, Tom ! ’

‘Just let me study a moment~just a moment.
you said you believed the door was open.’

‘ AsI’m a sitting here, I did! Didn’t I, Mary ? Go on! ’

‘ And then—and then—i-well I won’tbe certain, but it seems
like as if you made Sid go and—and—’

‘ Well? Well? What did I make him do, Tom ? What
did I make him do?‘ ‘

‘ You made him—you

 

Oh, yes—

 

Oh, you made him shut it!’

. ‘ Well, for the land’s sake! I never heard the beat of that
in all my days! Don’t tell me there ain’t anything in dreams
a'ny more. Sereny Harper shall know of this before I’m an
hour older. I’d like to see her get around this with her rubbage
’hout superstition. Go on, Tom ! ’

V ‘Oh, it’s all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you
said I wam’t bad, only mischeevous and hamm-scarum, and
not any more responsible than—than—I think it was a colt,
Or something.’

0

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 167

‘And so it was! Well, goodness gracious! Go on, Tom!’

‘ And then you began to cry.’

‘ So I did. So I did. Not the ﬁrst time, neither. And
then———-’

‘Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just
the‘ same, and she wished she hadn’t whipped him for taking
cream when she’d throwed it out her own self—’

‘ Tom! The sperrit was upon you! You was a prophesying
——that‘s what you was doing! ' Land alive !—go on, Tom!’

‘ Then Sid he said—he said—‘

‘ I don’t think I said anything,’ said Sid.

‘ Yes, you did, Sid,’ said Mary.‘

‘ Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say,
Tom ? ’

‘ He said—I think he said he hoped I was better off where
I was gone to, but if I’d been better sometimes ’

‘ There, d’you hear that? It was his very words!’

. ‘And you shut him up sharp.’

‘ I lay I did! There must a been an angel there. There
was an angel there, some-wheres! ’

‘ And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a ﬁre.
cracker, and you told about Peter and the Pain-killer—’

‘Just as true asIlive!’ ' '-

‘ And then there was a whole lot of talk ’bout the
river for us, and ‘bout having the funeral Sunday, and then
you and old Mrs. Harper hugged and cried, and she weirt.’

‘It happened just so! ‘ It happened just so, as sure as I’m a
sitting in these very tracks. Tom, you couldn’t told it more like
if you’d a seen it! And then what? Go on, Tom ! ’

‘ Then I thought you prayed for me—and I could see you
and hear every word you said. And you went to bed, and I
was so sorry, that I took and wrote on a piece of sycamore bark,
‘.‘ We ain’t dead—we are only of being pirates,” and put it on

 

168 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB.

the table by the candle; and then you looked so good, laying
there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned over and kissed
you on the lips.’

‘ Did you, Tom, did you? I just forgive you everything for
that! ’ And she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that
made him feel like the guiltiest of villains.

‘It was very kind, even though it was only a~dream,’ Sid
soliloquised just audibly.

‘ Shut up, Sid! A body does just the same in adream ashe‘d
do if he was awake. Here’s a big Milum apple I’ve been saving
for you, Tom, if you was ever found again—now go ’long to
school. I’m thankful to the good God and Father of us all I’ve
got you back, that’s long-suffering and merciful to them that
believe on Him and keep His word, though goodness knows I’m
unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His blessings
and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there’s
few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest when
the long night comes. Go ’long, Sid, Mary, Tom—take your.
selves off—you’ve hendered me long enough.’

The children left for school, and the old lady to call on
Mrs. Harper, and vanquish her realism with Tom’s marvellous
dream. Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought
that was in his mind as he left the house. It was this:

‘ Pretty thin—as long a dream as that, without any mistakes
in it 1 ’

What a hero Tom was become now! He did not go
skipping and prancing, but moved with a digniﬁed swagger, as
became a pirate who felt that the public eye was on him. And
indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see the looks orhear the
remarks as he passed along, but they were food and drink to
him. Smaller boys than himself ﬂocked at his heels, as proud
to be seen with him and tolerated by him as if he had been the
drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading
a menagerie into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEH. 169

know he had been away at all; but they were consuming with
envy, nevertheless. They would have given anything to have that
swarthy, sun-tanned skin of his, and his glittering notoriety ;
and Tom would not have parted with either for a circus.

At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and
delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the

 

TH E 11 E30.

two heroes were not long in becoming insuﬂ‘erahly ‘stuck-up.’
They began to tell their adventures to hungry listeners—but
they only began; it was not a thing likely to have an end, with
imaginations like theirs to furnish material. And ﬁnally, when
they got out their pipes and went serenely pulling around,
the very summit of glory was reached.

Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky
Thatcher now. Glory was sufﬁcient. He would live for glory.

. x
r ,, M k‘pLEiIK‘ZiC

170 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be wantingto
‘ make up.’ Well, let her—she should see that he could be as
indiﬁ‘erent as some other people. Presently she arrived. Tom
pretended not to see her. He moved away and joined a group
of boys and girls, and began to talk. Soon he observed that
she was tripping 311in back and forth with ﬂushed ﬁwe and

 

 

A FLIRTATION.

dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing school-mates, and
Screaming with laughter when she made a capture; but he
noticed that she always made her captures in his vicinity, and
that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at sngh
times, too. It gratiﬁed allthe vicious vanity that was in him ;
and so, instead of winning him it only ‘ set him up ’ the more
and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that he

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB. 171

knew she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking,.and
moved in'esolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing
{urtively and wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that
now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than
to anyone else. She felt a sharp pang, and grew disturbed and
uneasy at once. She tried to go away, but her feet were ’
treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She said to
a girl almost at Tom‘s elbow~witb sham vivacity:

‘ Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn’t you come to
Sunday-school ? ’ -

‘ I did come—didn’t you see me? ’

‘Why, no! Did you? Where did you sit? ’

‘ I was in Miss Peter’s class, where I always go. I saw you.’

‘ Did you? Why, it’s funny I didn’t see you. I wanted
to tell you about the picnic.’ . ‘

‘ Oh, that’s jolly. Who’s going to give it? ’

‘ My ma’s going to let me have one.’

‘ Oh, goody; I hope she’ll let me come.’
. ‘ Well, she will. The pienie's for me. She'll let anybody
come that I want,‘ and I want you.’ >

‘ That’s ever so nice. When is it going to be ? ’

‘ By-and—by. Maybe about vwcation.’

‘ Oh, won’t it be fun! You going to have all the girls and
boys ? ’ l
‘ Yes, everyone that’s friends to me—or wants to be ; ’ and
she glanced ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along
to Amy Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island, and
how the lightning tore the great sycamore tree ‘ all to ﬂinders ’
while he was ‘ standing within three feet of it.’
‘ . ‘ Oh, may I come?’ said Gracie Miller.

‘ Yes.’

‘ And me?’ said Sally Rogers.

‘ Yes.’

172 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ And- me, too?’ said Susy Harper. ‘ And Joe ?’

‘ Yes.’

And so on, with clapping of . joyful hands, till all the group
had begged for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom

I turned coolly away, still talking, and, took Amy with him.
Becky’s lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes; she hid
these signs with a forced gaiety and went on chattering, but
the life had gone out of the picnic now, and out of everything
else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself, and
had what her sex call ‘ a good cry.‘ Then she sat moody, with
wounded pride till the bell rang. She roused up now, with a
vindictive cast in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake,
and said she knew what she’d do.

At recess Tom continued his ﬂirtation with Amy with
jubilant self-satisfaction. And he kept drifting about to ﬁnd
Becky and lacerate her with the performance. At last he spied
her, but there was a sudden falling of his mercury. She was
sitting cosin on a little bench behind the school—house, looking
at a picture—book with Alfred Temple; and so absorbed were
they, and their heads so close together over the book, that they
did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world beides.
Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's vein He began to hate
himself for throwing away the chance Bee y had offered for a
reconciliation. He called himself a fool, and all the hard
names he could think of. He wanted to cry with vexation.
Amy chatted happily along as they walked, for her heart was
singing, but Tom’s tongue had lost its function. He did not
hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expect-
antly he could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as
aﬁen misplaced as otherwise. He kept driﬁzing to the rear of
the school-house again and again, to sear his eye-balls with the
hateful spectacle there. He could not help it. And it
maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky

THE ADVENTURES OF I 01!! SAWYER. 178

Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of
the living. But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she
was winning her ﬁght, too, and was glad to see him suffer as
she had suﬁ'ered.

Amy‘s happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at
things he had mlattend to; things that must be done; and
time was ﬂeeting. But in vain—the girl chirped on. Tom

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

:“.‘////’Q'{lll/J ’
‘ V ‘ ,(I
\ A4

IV) V 5’ [9

/.‘.‘<4 ~ we“ /-

w /, a” 4..

Heirv— W/{a-Jégg’V/ﬂﬂaw
BECKY BBTALXATEE.

thought, ‘ Oh, hang her, ain’t I ever going to get rid of her? ’
At last he must be attending to those things; and she said
artlessly that she would be ‘ around’ when school let out. An
he hastened away, hating her for it. -

‘ Any other boy!’ Tom thought, grating his teeth. ‘Any
boyiin the whole town but that Saint Louis smarty, that thinks

L19 HUSE:

174 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

he dresses so ﬁne and is aristocracy! Oh, all right. I licked
you the ﬁrst day you ever saw this town, mister, and I’ll lick
you again! You just wait till I catch you out ! I‘ll just take
and ’

 

And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary
boy—pummelling the air, and kicking and gouging.

‘ Oh, you do, do you ? you holler ’nough, do you? Now,
then, let that learn yon ! ’ ‘

And so the imaginary ﬂogging was ﬁnished to his satisfaction.

Tom ﬂed home at noon. His conscience could not endure
any more of Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could
bear no more of the other distress. Becky resumed her picture-
inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes dragged along and
no Tom came to suﬁ'er, her triumph began to cloud and she
lost interest; gravity and absent-mindedness followed, and
then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up her ear at
a footstep, but it was a false hope; no Tom came. At last she
grew entirely miserable, and wished she hadn’t carried it so
far. When poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did
not know how, and kept exclaiming: ‘Oh, here's a. jolly one!
look at this!’ she lost patience at last and said, ‘ Oh, don’t
bother me! I don’t care for them!’ and burst into tears, and
got up and walked away.

Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort
' her, but she said :

‘ Go away and leave me alone, can’t- you. I hate you ! ’

So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done—-
for she had said she would look at pictures all through the
nooning——and she walked on, crying. Then Alfred went musing
into the deserted school-house. He was humiliated and angry.
He easily guessed his way to the truth—the girl had simply
made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer.
He was far from hating Tom the less when this thought

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA Wm ~175

occurred to him. He wished there was some way to get that
boy into trouble without much risk to himself. Tom’s spelling-
book fell under his eye. Here was his opportunity. He glam
fully opened to the lesson for the afternoon, and poured ink
upon the page. Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at
the moment, saw the act and moved on, without discovering
herself. She started homeward, now, intending to ﬁnd Tom

 

COUNTER-[RBI l‘A’l‘ION.

and tell him: Tom would be thankful, and their troubles would
be healed. Before she was half way home, however, she had
changed her mind. The thought of Tom’s treatment of her
when she was talking about her picnic came scorching back,
and ﬁlled her with shame. She resolved to lethim get whipped

on the damaged spelling-book’s account, and to hate him for
ever into the bargain.

 

178 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XIX.

TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the ﬁrst thing his
aunt said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows
to an unpromising market :

‘ Tom, I’ve a notion to skin you alive.’

‘ Auntie, what have I done?’

‘ Well, you’ve done enough. Here I go over to Sereny
Harper, like an old softy, expecting I’m going to make her be-
lieve all that rubbsge about that dream, when, lo and behold
you, she’d found out from Joe that you was over here and heard
all the talk we had that night. Tom, I don’t know what is to
become of a boy that will act like that. It makes me feel so
bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper, and make
such a fool of myself, and never say a word.’

This was a new aspect of the thing. His smnrtness of the
morning had seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very in-
genious. It merely looked mean and shabby now. He hung
his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment ;
then he said:

‘ Auntie, I wish I hadn’t done it—hut I didn’t think.’

‘ Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything

i but your own selﬁshness. You could think to come all the way
over here from Jackson’s Island in the night to laugh at our
troubles, and ’you could think to fool me with a lie about a
dream ; but you couldn’t ever think to pity us and save us from
sorrow.’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 177

‘ Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn’t mean to be
mean; I didn’t, honest. And besides, I didn’t come over here
to laugh at you that night.’

‘ What did you come for, then?’

‘ It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we
hadn’t got drowned.’

 

‘11- AIN’T A In, AUNTIE.’

‘Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world
if I could believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but
you know you never did—rand I know it, Tom.’

‘ Indeed and ’deed I did, auntie—~13 wish I may never stir if
I didn’t.’

‘ Oh, Tom, don’t lie—don’t do it. It only makes things a.
hundred times worse.’

 

176 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ It ain’t a lie, auntie ; it’s the truth. I wanted tokeep you
from grieving—that was all that made me come.’

‘ I’d give the whole world tobelieve that—it would cover up
a power of sins, Tom. I’d ’most be glad you’d run of andabted
so bad. But it ain't reasonable; because, why didn’t you tell
me, child?’

‘ Why, you see, auntie, when you got to talking about the
funeral, I just got all full of the idea of our coming and hiding
in the church, and I couldn’t, somehow, bear to spoil it. So I
just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mnm.’

‘ What bark ? ’

‘ The bark I had wrote on to tell you we’d gone pirating.
I wish, now, you’d waked up when I kissed you—I do,
honest.’

The hard lines in his aunt’s ﬁwerelaxed, and sudden tender-
ness dawned in her eyes.

‘Did you kiss me, Tom? ’

‘ Why, yes, I did.’

‘ Are you sure you did, Tom?’

‘Why, yes, I did, auntie—certain sure.‘

‘ What did you kiss me for, Tom ? ’

‘ Because I loved you so, and you laid ‘there 'moaning, and
I was so sorry.’

The words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide
a tremor in her voice when she said:

‘ Kiss me again, Tom !—and be off with you to school, now,
and don’t bother me any more.’

The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out
the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then
she stopped with it in her hand, and said to herself:

‘ No, I don’t dare. Poor boy, I reckon he’s lied about it—
but it’s a blessed, blessed lie, there‘s such comfort come from it.
I hope the Lord—I [mow the Lord will forgive him, because

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 179

it was such good-hernna in him to tell it. But I don’t
want to ﬁnd out it’s a lie. I won’t look.’

She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute.
Twice she put out her hand to take the garment again, and
twice she refrained. Once more she ventured, and this time

 

mom mam-In.

she fortiﬁed herself with the thought: ‘ It’s a good lie—it’s a
good lie—I won’t let it grieve me.’ So she sought the jacket
pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom’s piece of bark
through ﬂowing tears, and saying :

‘ I could forgive the boy, now, if he’d oommitted a million

sins ! ’

 

.~
[80 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM S4WYEB.

CHAPTER XX.

THERE was something about Aunt Polly’s manner, when she

kissed Tom, that swept sway his low spirits and made him

light-hearted and happy again. He started to school, and had
I

 

A SUDDEN FROST.

the luck of coming upon Beaky Thatcher at the head of Meadow
Land. Hi mood always determined his manner. Without a

moment’s hesitation he ran to her and said :

 

 

I

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYBR. 181

‘ I acted mighty mean to-day, Becky, and I’m so sorry. I
won’t ever, ever do that way again, as long as l live—please
make up, won’t you ? ’

The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:

‘1’“ thank you to keep yourself to yourself, Mr. Thomas
Sawyer. I’ll never speak to you again.’

She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned
that he had not even presence of mind enough to say ‘Who
cares, Miss Smarty ?’ until the right time to say it had gone by.
So he said nothing. But he was in a. ﬁne rage, nevertheless.
He moped into the school-yard wishing she were a boy,‘and
imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He pre-
sently encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he
passed. She hurled one in return, and the angry breach was
complete. It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that
she could hardly wait for school to ‘take in,’ she was so im-
patient to see Tom ﬂagged for the injured spelling-book. If
she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred Temple,
Tom’s oﬁ‘ensive ﬂing had driven it entirely away.

Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing
trouble herself. The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle
age with an unsatisﬁed ambition. The darling 'of his desires
was to be a doctor, but poverty had decreed that he should be
nothing higher than a village schoolmaster. Every day he took
a mysterious book out of his desk, and absorbed himself in it
at times when no classes were reciting. He kept that book
under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but
was perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never
came. Every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of
that book; but no two theories were alike, and there was no
way of getting at the facts in the case. Now as Becky was
passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she noticed
that the key was in the look! It was a precious moment. She

182 THE ADVENTURES 01“ T03! MWYER.

glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she
had the book in her hands. The title-page—Professor some-
body’s ‘ Anatomy ’-—can-ied uo iuformationto her mind; so she
begnnto turn the leaves. She came at once upon ahandsomely
engraved and coloured frontispieee-a human ﬁgure, stark naked.
At that moment a shadow fell on the page, and Tom Sawyer
stepped in at the door, and caught a glimpse of the picture.

 

GADGET IN THE A“.

Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck
to tear the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust the
volume into the desk, turned the key, and hurshwut crying
with shame and vexation: ‘

‘Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak
up on a person and look at what they’re looking at"

 

.THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 188

‘ How could I know you was looking at anything ? ’

‘You oughtto be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you
know you’re going to tell on me; and, oh, what shall I do,
what shall I do! I’ll be whipped, and I never was whipped in
school.’

Then she stamped her little foot and said: .

‘ Be so mean if you want to l I know something that’s going
to happen. You just wait, and you’ll see! Hateful, hateful,
hateful! ’—and she ﬂung out of the house with a new explosion
of crying. '

Tom stood still, rather ﬂustered by this onslaught. Presently
he said to himself:

‘ What a curious kind of a fool a girl is. Never been licked in
school l Shucks, what’s a licking! That’s just like a girl—
they’re so thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I
ain't going to tell old Dobbins on this little fool, because there’s
other ways of getting even on her that ain’t so mean; but
what of it ?' Old Dobbins will ask who it was tore his book.
Nobody’ll answer. Then he'll do just the way he always does-
ask ﬁrst one and then t’other, and when he comes to the right
girl he’ll know it, without any telling. Girls’ faces always tell
on them. They ain’t .got any backbone. She’ll get licked.
Well, it’s a kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because
there ain’t any way out of it.’ Tom conned the thing amoment
longer, and then added: ‘ All right, though; she’d like to see
me in just such a fix—let her sweat it out l ’ »

Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a
few moments the master arrived and school‘ took in.’ Tom did

- not feel a strong interest in his studies. Every time he stole a
glance at girls’ side of the room Becky’s face troubled him.
Considering all things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it
was all he could do to help it. He could get up no exultation
that was really worthy the name. Presently the spelling-book.

4184 -THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYBR.

discovery» was made, and Tom’s mind was entirely full of his
own matters for a while after that. Becky roused up from her
lethargyof distress, and showed good interest in the proceedings. .
She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by
denying that he spilt the ink on the'book himself; and she
was right. The denial only seemed to make the thing worse
for Tom. Becky supposed she would be glad of that, and she
tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she was not
certain. When the worst came to the worst, she hadnn impulse
to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an eﬂ'ort
and forced herself to keep still, because, said-she to herself, ‘ he’ll
tell about me tearing the picture, sure. I wouldn't say a word,
not to save his life! ’

Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all
broken-hearted, for he thought it was possible that he had un—
knowingly upset the ink on the spelling-hook himself, in some
skylarking bout-~he had denied it for form’s sake and
because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from
principle. . -

. A whole hour drifted by; the master sat nodding in his
throne, the air was drowsy with the hum of study. By-end-by
Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up, yawned, then unlocked
his desk, and reached for his book, but seemed undecided whether
to take it out or leave it. Most of the pupils glanced up languidly,
but there were two among them that watched his movements
with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins ﬁngered his book absently for
a while, then took it out, and settled himself in his chair to
read.
Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and -
helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head.
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her. Quick! something
must be done! done in a ﬂash, too! But the very imminence
.of the emergency paralysed his invention. Good! he had an

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 185

inspiration! He would run and snatch the book, spring through

the door and ﬂy! but his resolution shook for one little instant,

, and the chance was lost—the master opened the volume. If
Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again! Too late ;
there was no help for Becky now, he said. The next moment
the master faced the school. Every eye sunk under his gaze ;
there was that in it which smote even the innocent with fear;

. there was silence while one might count ten. The master was
gathering his wrath. Then he spoke:

‘ Who tore this book?’

There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop.
The stillness continued; the master searched face after face
for signs of guilt.

‘ Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?’

A denial. Another pause.

‘ Joseph Harper, did you?’

Another denial. Tom’s uneasiness grew more and more in-
tense under the slow torture of these proceedings. The master
«scanned the ranks of boys, considered a while, then turned to
the girls:

‘ Amy Lawrence ? ’

A shake of'the head.

- ‘ Gracie Miller ? ’

The same sign.

3 ‘ Susan Harper, did you do this ? ’

Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom
was trembling from head to foot with excitement, and a sense
of the hopelessness of the situation.

‘ Rebecca Thatcher ’—(Tom glanced at her face; it was
white with terror)—‘ did you tear—no, look me in the face ’—
(her hands rose in appeal)—‘ did you tear this book i”

A thought shot like lightning through Tom’s brain. He
sprang to his feet and shouted—

186' THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ I done it!’

The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly.
Tom stood a moment to gather his dismembered faculties; and
when he stepped forward to go to his punishment, the surprise,
the gratitude, the adoration that shone upon him out of poor
Becky’s eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred ﬂoggings. In—

 

BEBULT 0P TOM’S TBUTKWLXESS.

spired by the splendour of his own act, he took without an out-
cry the most merciless ﬂaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever
administered I"; and also received with mdiﬂerenoe the added
cruelty of a command to remain two hours aﬁel- school should
be dismissed—for he knew who would wait for him outside till
his captivity was done, and not count the tedious time as loss
either.

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 187

Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against
Alfred Teinple; for with shame and repentance Beckylmd told
him all, not forgetting her own treachery ; but even the long-
ing for vengeance had to give way soon to pleasanter musings,
and he fell asleep at last, with Becky’s latest words lingering
dreamin in his ear:

‘ Tom, how could you be so noble!’

 

PURE EXJOYHENT.

188 ,THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XXI.

VACATION was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe,
grew severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the
school to make a good showing on ‘ Examination ’ day. His rod
and his ferule were seldom idle now—at least among the smaller
pupils. Only the biggest boys, and young ladies of eighteen
and twenty, escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins’s lashings were very
vigorous ones too; for although he carried, under his wig, a
perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age,
and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As the
great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to
the surface; he seemed to take a vindictive pleasure inpunish—
ing the least shortcomings. The consequence was, that the
smaller boys spent their days in terror and suﬁ'ering and their
nights in plotting revenge. They threw away no opportunity
to do the master a mischief. But he kept ahead all the time.
The retribution that followed every vengeful success was so
sweeping'aud majestic that the boys always retired from the
ﬁeld badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit
upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore-in
the sign-painter’s boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help.
He had his own reasons for being delighted, for the master
boarded in his father’s family and had given the boy ample
cause to hate him. The master’s wife would go on a visit to
the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to inter-
fere with the plan ; the master always prepared himself for great.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 189

occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the sign-painter’s
boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper con-
dition on Examination Evening he would ‘manage the thing ’
while he napped in his chair ; then he would have him awakened
at the right time and hurried away to school.

In the fulness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At
eight in the evening the school-house was brilliantly lighted
and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and ﬂowers.
The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform,
with his black-board behind him. He was looking tolerably
mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and six rows in
front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town and
by the parents of the pupils. To his 19R, back of the rows of
citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were
seated the scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the
evening ; rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intoler-
able state of discomfort; rows of gawky big boys; snow-hanks
of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslin, and con-
spicuously conscious of their bare arms, their grandmothers’
ancient trinkets, their hits of pink and blue ribbon," and the
ﬂowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was ﬁlled with
non-participating scholars.

The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheep-
ishly recited, ‘ You’d scarce expect one of my age, to speakin
public on the stage,’ &c., ac'companyinghimself with the painfully
exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used
w—supposiug the machine to be a. triﬂe out of order. But he
got through safely, though cruelly scared, and got a ﬁne round
of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.

A little shame~faced girl lisped ‘ Mary had alittle lamb,’
&c., performed a compassion-inspiring curteey, got her meed of
applause, and sat down ﬂushed and happy.

Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited conﬁdence, and

190‘ THE ADVENTURES OF T011! :84 WYER.

soared into the unquenchahle and indestructible ‘Give me
liberty or give- me death’ speech, with ﬁne fury and frantic
gesticulntion, and broke down in the middle of it. A ghastly
stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under him, and he was
like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the
house—but he had the house’s silence too, which was even

 

ON EXHIBITION.

worse than its sympathy. The master frowned, and this com-
pleted the disaster. Tom struggled a while and then retired,
utterly defeated. There was a weak attempt at applause, but
it died early.

‘ The Boy stood on the Burning Deck ’ followed; also ‘The
Assyrian Came Down,’ and other declamntory gems. Then
there were reading exercises and a spelling ﬁght. The meagre

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. v 191

Latin class recited with honour. The prime feature of the
evening was in order, now—original ‘ compositions ’ by the
young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of
the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied
with dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with laboured
attention to ‘ expression ’ and punctuation. The themes were
the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by
their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless
all their ancestors in the female line clear back to the Crusades.
‘Friendship’ was one; ‘ Memories of other Days;’ ‘ Religion
in History; ' ‘ Dream-land ; ’ ‘ The Advantages of Culture; ’
‘ Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted ; ’
‘ Melancholy ;’ ‘ Filial Love ; ’ ‘ Heart Lougings,’ &c. &c.

A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and
petted melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of
‘ ﬁne language; ’ another was a tendency to lug in by the ears
particularly prized words and phrases until they were worn en-
tirely out; and a peculiarity that conspicuously marked and
marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon that
wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of

'them. No matter what the subject might be, a brain-racking
' effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or other that the
moral and' religious mind could contemplate with ediﬁcatiou.
The glaring insincerity of these sermons was not suﬂicient to
compass the banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is
not suﬂicient to-day; it never will be sufﬁcient while the world
stands, perhaps. There is no school in all our land where the
young ladies do not feel obliged to close their compositions
with a sermon; and you will ﬁnd that the sermon of the most
frivolous and least religious girl in the school is always the
longest and the most relentlessly pious. But enough of this.

Horner truth is unpalatable.
Let us return to the ‘Examination.’ The ﬁrst composition

192 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEB.

that was feed was one entitled ‘ Is this, then, Life ? ’ Perhaps
the reader can endure an extract from it :—

‘In the common walks of life, with what delightful emo-
tions does the youthful mind look forward to some anticipated
scene of festivity! Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted
pictures of joy. In fancy, the voluptuous votary of fashion sees
herself amid the festive throng, “ the observed of all observers.”
Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through
the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is brightest, her step is
lightest in the gay assembly.

‘In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the
welcome hour arrives for her entrance into the Elysian world,
of which she has had such bright dreams. How hairy-like
does everything appear to her enchanted vision! Each new
scene is more charming than the last. But aﬁer a while she
ﬁnds that beneath this goodly exterior all is vanity; the ﬂattery
which once charmed her soul now grates harshly upon her ear;
the ball—room has lost its charms; and with wasted health and
embittered heart she turns away with the conviction that
earthly pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul ! ’

And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratiﬁcation from
timeto time during the reading, accompanied by whispered
ejaculations of ‘ How sweet! ’ ‘ How eloquent!’ ‘ So true!’
&c., and after the thing had closed with a peculiarly aﬂiicting
semen, the applause was enthusiastic.

Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the
‘ interesting ’ paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and
read a ‘ poem.’ Two stanms of it will do :—~-

A Mrssoual MAIDEN’S Esaan m ALABAMA.

Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well!
But yet for a while do I leave the now i .
Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell1
And burning recollections throng my brawl

THE ADVENTURES 01“ T01}! SA WYER. 193

For I have wandered through thy ﬂowery woods;
Have roamed and road near Tallapoosa’s stream;
Have listened to Tallassee’s warring ﬂoods,
And wooed on Coosa’s side Aurora’s beam.

“Yet shame I not to hear an o'er—full heart,
Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes ;
'Tis from no stranger land I now must part,
, ’Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs.
Welcome and home were mine within this State,
Whose vales I leave—whose spires fade ﬁst from me ;
And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and me,
, When, dear Alabama! they turn cold on thee!

There were very few there who knew what ‘ te‘te ’ meant, but
the poem was very satisfactory nevertheless.

Next appeared a. dark-complexioned, black-eyed, black—haired
young lady, who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic
expression, and began to read in a measured, solemn tone:

A VISION.

‘ Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne
on high not a single star quivered; but the deep intonations of
the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear; whilst
the terriﬁc lightning revelled in angry mood through the
cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to scorn the power exerted
over its terrors by the illustrious Franklin ! Even the boisterous
winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and
blustered about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of
the scene. At such a time,» so dark, so dreary, for human
sympathy my very spirit sighed; but instead thereof,

“ My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide—
My joy in grief, my second bliss in joy," came to my side.

She moved like one of those. bright beings pictured in the
o

194 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM .mWYER.

sunny walks of fancy’s Eden by the romantic and young, 3
queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent love—
liness. So soft was her step, it failed tomake even a sound,
and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch,
Leather unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away
unperceived—unsought. A strange sadness rested upon her
features, like icy tears upon the robe of December, as she

\\\

. I?
Mg?
, 4

a
Sis:
at.“

“2*
,3“

are

 

PRIZE AUTHOR.

pointed to the contending elements without, and bade me
contemplate the two beings presented.’

This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript,
and wound up with a sermon so destructive of all hope to non-
Preshyterians, that it took the ﬁrst prize. This composition
was considered to be the vetyﬁnest eﬁ'ort of the evening.

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 195

The mayor of the village,
in delivering the prize 00
the author of it, made a
warm speech, in which
he said that it was by far
the most ‘ eloquent’ thing
he had ever listened to,
and that Daniel Webster
himself might well be
pmud of it.

It may be remarked,
in passing, that the num-
ber of compositions in
which the word ‘ beau-
teous’ was over-fondled,
and human experience
referred to as ‘lifs’s page,’
was up to the usual aver-
age.

Now the master, mel-
' low almost to the verge
of genialit-y, put his chair
aside, turned his back to
the audience, and began
to draw a map of America
on the black-hoard, to
exercise the geography
class upon. But he made
a sad business of it with
his unsteady hand, and a
smothered titter rippled
over the house. He
knew what the matter
was, and set himself - to

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.ﬂk‘,

 

 

196 THE' ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

right it. He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only '
distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more
pronounced. He threw his entire attention upon his work, now,
as if determined not to he put down by the mirth. He felt
that all eyes were fastened upon him ; he imagined he was suc-
ceeding, and yet the tittering continued; it even manifestly in-
creased. And well it might. There was a garret above, pierced
with a scuttle over his head ; and down through this scuttle came
a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string ; she had a rag
tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she
slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string,
she swung downward and clawed at the intangible air. The
tittering rose higher and higher, the cat was within six inches
of the absorbed teacher’s head ; down, down, a little lower, and
she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and
was snatched up into the garret in an instant with her trophy
still in her possession! And how the light did blaze abroad
from the master‘s bald pate, for the sign—winter’s boy had
gilded it!

That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged.
Vacation was come.

. Norm—The pretended ‘ eompositions' quoted in this chapter are

' taken without alteration from a volume entitled ‘ Prose and Poetry, by
a. Western Lady,’ but they are exactly and precisely after the school-
girl pattern, and hence are much happier than any more imitations
could be.

~ THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 197

CHAPTER XXII.

TOM. joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being
attracted by the showy character of their ‘ regalia.’ He promised
to abstain from smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he.
remained a member. Now he found out anew thing—namely,
that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the
world to make a body want to go and do that very thing.
Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and
swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the
hope of a chance to display himself in his red sash kept him
from withdrawing from the order. Fourth of July was coming:
but he soon gave that lip—gave it up before he had worn his
shackles over forty-eight hours, and ﬁxed his hopes upon old
Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was apparently on his
death~bed, and would have a big public funeral, since he was
so high an oﬂicial. During three days Tom was deeply
concerned about the Judge’s condition, and hungry for news
of it. Sometimes his hopes ran high, so high that he would
venture to get out his regalia and practise before the looking—
glass. But the- Judge bad a most discouraging way of
ﬂuctuating. At last he was pronounoed upon the mend, and
then convalescent. Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of
injury, too. He handed in his resignation at once, and that
night the Judge suﬁ'ered a relapse and died. Tom resolved
that he would never trust a man like that again. The funeral

'1” THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

was a ﬁne thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated to
kill the late member with envy.

Tom was s free boy again, however; there was something
in that. He could drink and Near now, but found to his
surprise that he did not want to. The simple fact that he
could took the desire away, and the charm of it.

 

HAPPY FOR TWO DAYS.

Tom presently wondered to ﬁnd that his coveted vacation
was beginning to hang a little heavily on his hands.

He attempted a diary, but nothing happened during three
days, and so be abandoned it.

The ﬁrst of all the negro minatrel shows came to town, and
made a sensation. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of
performers, and were happy for two days.

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 199

Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for
it rained hard; there was no procession in consequence, and
the greatest man in the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton,
an actual United States Senator, proved an overwhelming dis-
appointment, for he was not twenty-ﬁve feet high, nor even
anywhere in the neighbourhood of it.

A circus came. The boys played circus for three days
afterwards in tents made of mg carpeting—admission, three
pins for boys, two for girls—and then circusing was abandoned.

A phrenologist and a mesmeriser came—and went again
and left the village duller and drearier than ever.

There were some boys’ and girls’ parties, but they were so
few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids
between ache the harder.

Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to
stay with her parents during vacation—so there was no bright .
side to life anywhere. .

The dreadful secret of the murderwasachronic misery.
It was a very cancer for permanency and pain.

Then came the measles.

During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the
world and its happenings. He was very ill, be was interested
in nothing. When he got upon his feet at last and moved
feebly down town, a melancholy change had come over every-
thing and every creature. There had been a frevival,’ and
everybody had ‘ got religion; ’ not only the adults, but even
the boys and girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for
the sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed
him everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament,
and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle. He
sought Ben Rogers, and found him. visiting the poor with a
basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis, who called his
attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a

200 In ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEB.

warning. Every boy he encountered added another ton to his
depression ; and when, in desperation, he ﬂew for refuge at last
to the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a
Scriptural quotation, his heart broke, and he crept home and to
bed, realising that he alone of all the town was lost, for ever
and for ever. ~

And that night there came on a terriﬁc storm, with driving

 

 

 

 

 

 

ENJOYIHG THE VACATION.

min, awful claps of thunder, and blinding sheets of lightning.
He covered his head with the bedclothes and waited in a. horror
of suspense for his doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt
that all this hubbub was about him. He believed he had
taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of
'endumnoe, and that this was the result. It might have

 

IRE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA. WYER. 201

seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition to kill a bug
with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incon.
grnous about the getting up such an expensive thunder-
storm as this to knock the turf. from under an’ insect like
himself. .

By-and-by the tempest spent itself and died without
accomplishing its object. The boy’s ﬁrst impulse Was to be

 

MELON-EATING.

grateful, and reform. His second was to wait—for there might
not be any more storms.

The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed.
The three weeks he spent on his back this time seemed an
entire age. When he got abroad at last he was hardly grateful
that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his

 

209 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

estate, how oonipanionleas and forlorn he was. He drilled
liatlessly dawn the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge
in ajuvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the
presence of he: victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck
Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon. Poor lads! they,
like Tom, had suffered a relapse.

 

MOTHER HOPKINS.

 

.THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 908

CHAPTER XXIII.

AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred, and vigorously. The
murder trial came on in the court. It became the absorbing
topic of village talk immediately. Tom could not get away
from it. Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his
heart, for his troubled conscience and fears almost persuaded
him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as
‘ feelers ;’ he did not see how he could be suspected of knowing
anything about the murder, but still he could not be comfort-
able in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver
all the time. He took Huck to a lonely plane to have a talk
with him. It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a.
little while; to divide his burden of distress with another
suﬂ‘erer. Moreover, he wanted to assure himself that Huck had
remained discreet:

‘ Huck, have you ever told anybody about that ? ’

‘ 'Bout what? ’

‘ You know what.’

‘ 0h—’course I haven’t!

‘ Never a word ? '

‘ Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you
ask ? ’
‘ ‘Well, I was afeard.’

‘Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn’t be alive two days if that
got found out. .You know that.’

Tom felt more comfortable. After a pause :

904 VTEE ADVENTURES OF TOIK SAWYER.

‘ Huck, they couldn’t anybody get you to tell, could they?’
‘ Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil
to drownd me they oould get me to tell. They ain’t no diﬁ'erent
way.’ ‘
‘ Well, that’s all right then. I reckon we’re safe as long
as we keep mum. But. let’s swear again, anyway. It’s more
Enter! ’

 

 

 

 

THE PRIVATE CONIERENOE.

‘ I’m agreed.’

So they swore again with dread solemnities.

‘ What is the talk around, Huck? I’ve heard a power of it.’

‘ Talk ? Well, it’s just Muff Potter, Mnﬁ' Potter, Muﬂ‘
Potter all the time. It keeps me in a sweat, constant, 50’: I
want to hide som’ers.’

 

.THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 206

‘Thst’s just the same way they go on round me. I reckon
he’s a goner. Don’t you feel sorry for him sometimes i’ ’

‘ Most always—most always. He ain’t no account; but
then he ain’t ever done anything to hurt- anybody. Just ﬁshes
a little to get money to get drunk on—and loafs around con- .
siderable; but, lord, we all do that—leastways most of us,—
preachers and such like. But he's kind of good—he give me
half a ﬁsh, once, when there warn’t enough for two; and lots of
times he’s kind of stood by me when I was out of luck.’

‘ Well, he’s mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks
on to my line. I wish we could get him out of there.’

‘ Myl we couldn’t get him out, Tom. And besides,
’twouldn’t do any good; they’d ketch him again.’

‘Yes—so they would. But I hate to hear ’em abuse him
so like the dickens when he never done—that.’

‘I do too, Tom. 'Lord, I hear ’em say he’s the bloodiest-
looking villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn’t ever
hung before.’

‘Yes; they talk like that all the time. I’ve heard ’em say
that if he was to get free they’d lynch him.‘

‘ And they’d do it, too.’

The boys had along talk, but it brought them little comfort.
As the twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about
the neighbourhood of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an
undeﬁned hope that something would happen that might clear
away their difﬁculties. But nothing happened; there seemed to
be no angels or fairies interested in this luckless captive.

The boys did as they had often done before—went to the
cell grating and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He
was on the ground ﬂoor, and there were no guards.

His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their con-
sciences before—it cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt
cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when Potter said:

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

 

AT THE CELL-GRATING.

‘ You’ve been mighty
good to me, boys—bet-
ter’n anybody else in this
town. And I don’t forget.
it,I don’t. Oﬁen I says
to myself, says I, “ I used
to mend all the boys’
kites and things, and
show ’em where the good
ﬁshin’ places was, and he-
friend ’em what I could,
and now they’ve all forgot
old Muﬂ‘ when he’s in
trouble, but Tom don’t,
and Huck don’t—they
don’t forget him,” says I,
“ and I don’t forget them.”
Well, boys, I done an
awful thing—drunk and
crazy at. the time, that’s
the only way I account
for it, and now I got to
swing for it, and it’s right.
Right, and best too, I
reckon; hope so, anyway.
Well, we won’t talk about
that. I don’t wantto make
you feel bad ; you’ve be-
friended me. But what I
want to say, is, don’t you
ever get drunk, then you
won’t ever get here. Stand
a little furder west; so,

,THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 90":

that’s it; it’s a prime comfort to see faces that’s friendly when
a body’s in such a muck of trouble, and there don’t none come
here but yourn. Good friendly hoes—good friendlyfaces. s Get
up on one another’s backs, and let me touch ’em. That’s it.
Shake hands-youm’ll come through the bars, but mine’stoo
big. Little hands, and weak—but they’ve helped .Muﬂ‘ Potter:
5 power, and they’d help him more .if they could.’

Torn went home miserable, and.his dreams that night were
full of horrors. The next day and the day after he hung
about the court-room, drawn by an almost irresistible. impulse
to go in, but forcing himself to stay out. Huck was-having
the same experience. They studionsly avoided eaeh~other.
E1011 wandered away from time to time, but the same dismal
fascination always brought them back presently.. Tom kept his
ears open when idlers sauntered out of the court-room, but
invariably heard distressing news; the toils were closing more
and more relentlessly around poor Potter. ,At theend of the
second day the village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe’s
evidence stood ﬁrm and unshaken, and that there was not the
slightest question as to what the jury’s verdict would be.

Tom was out late that night, and mine to bed through the
window. He was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was‘
hours before he got to sleep. All the village ﬂocked to the
court-house the next morning, for this was to be the great day.
Both sexes Were about equally represented in the packed:
audience. After along wait the jury ﬁled in and took their
plaoes; shortly afterwards, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and
hopeless, was brought in with chains upon-him, and seated
where all the curious eyes could stare at him; no less con-‘
spicuous was Injun Joe, stolid as ever. There was another'
pause, and then the judge arrived, and the sheriﬁ' proclaimed
the opening of the court. The usual whisperings among the
lawyers and gathering together of papers followed. These

908 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of
preparation that was as impressive as it was fascinating. '

Now a witness was called who testiﬁed that he found Muﬁ‘
Potter washing in the brook at an early hour of the morning
that the murder was discovered, and that he immediately
sneaked away. After some further questioning, counsel for the
prosecution said: . r

‘ Take the witness.’ .

The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped
them again when his own counsel said:

‘ I have no questions to ask him.’

The next witness proved the ﬁnding of the knife near the
corpse. Counsel for the prosecution said :

‘Tnke the witness.’

‘ I have no questions to ask him,’ Potter’s lawyer replied.

A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in
Potter’s possession. '

‘ Take the witness.’

Counsel, for Potter declined to question him.

The faces of the audience began to betray annoyance. Did
this attorney mean to throw away his client’s life without an
eﬁ‘ort? ‘

Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter’s guilty be-
haviour when brought to the scene of the murder. They were
allowed to leave the stand without being cross-questioned.

Every detail'of the damaging circumstances that occurred
in the graveyard upon that morning which all present re-
membered so well was brought out by credible witnesses, but
none of them were cross-examined by Potter’s lawyer. The
perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in
murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench. Counsel for
the prosecution now said:

‘ By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. . 909

suspicion, we have fastened this awful crime beyond all possi-
bility of question upon the unhappy prisoner at the her. We
rest our case here.’

A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in
his hands, and rocked his body softly to and fro, while a
painful silence reigned in the court-roomy Many men were
moved, and many women’s compassion testiﬁed itself in tears.
Counsel for the defence rose and said:

‘ Your Honour—In our remarks at the opening of this trial,
we foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this
fearful deed while under the inﬂuence of a blind and irrespon-
sible delirium produced by drink. We have changed our
mind; we shall not offer that plea. [Then to the clerk]:
Call Thomas Sawyer.’

A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not
even excepting Potter’s. Every eye fastened itself with wonder-
ing interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the
stand. The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared;
The oath was administered. 

‘ Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of
June, about the hour of midnight?’

Tom glanced at Injun Joe’s iron face, and his tongue failed
him. The audience listened breathless, but the words refused
to come. After a few moments, however, the boy got a little
of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his
voice to make part of the bones hear:

‘ In the graveyard! ’

‘A little bit louder, please. Don’t be afraid. You were————’

‘ In the graveyard.’

A contemptuous smile ﬂitted across Injun Joe’s face.

‘ Were you anywhere near Horse Williams’s grave?’

‘ Yes, sir.’

‘ Speak up—just a triﬂe louder. How near were you? ’

P

210 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ Near as I am to you.’

‘ Were you hidden or not? ’

‘ I was hid.’

‘ Where P ’ ‘

‘ Behind the elms that’s on the edge of the grave.’
Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.

‘ Anyone with you ? ’

    

SPRAKG 1'03 THE WINDOW-

 

‘ Yes, sir. I went there with '

‘Wait—wait a moment“ Never mind mentioning your
companion’a name. We will produce him at the proper time.
Did you carry anything there with you ‘1’ ’

Tom hesitated and looked confused.

‘Speak out, my boy—don’t be diﬁident. The truth is
always respectable. What did you take there?’

{im wit

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. ‘.’ll

‘ Only a—a—dead eat.‘

There was a. ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

‘ We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy,
tell us everything that occurred—tell it in your own way—don’t
skip anything, and don't. be afraid.’

Tom began—besitatingly at ﬁrst, but, as he warmed to his
subject his words ﬂowed more and more easily; in a little
while every sound ceased but his own voice; every eye ﬁxed
itself upon him ; with parted lips and bated breath the audience
hung upon his words, taking no note of time, rapt in the
ghastly fascinations of the tale. The strain upon pent emotion
reached its climax when the boy said, ‘ And as the doctor fetched
the board around and Muff Potter fell, Injun Joe jumﬁed with
the knife and ’ '

Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a' win.
dow, tore his way through all opposers, and was gone!

 

P2

212 THE ADVENTURES 01' TOM SAWle'If.

CHAPTER XXIV.

TOM was a glittering hero once more—the pet of the old, the
envy of the young. His name even went into immortal print,
for the village paper magniﬁed him. There were some that
believed he would be President yet, if he escaped hanging.

As usual, the ﬁckle, unreasoning world took Muﬁ' Potter to
its bosom, and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him
before. But that sort of conduct is to the world’s credit; there-
fore it is not well to ﬁnd fault with it.

Tom’s days were days of splendour and exultation to him,
but his nights were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all
his dreams, and always with doom ’in his eye. Hardly any
temptation could persuade the boy to stir abroad after night-
fall. Poor Huck was in the same state of wretchedness and
terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer the night
before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid that
his share in the business might leak out yet, notwithstand-
ing Injun Joe’s ﬂight had saved him the suﬁ'ering of testifying
in court. The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise
secrecy, but what of that? Since Tom’s harassed conscience
had managed to drive him to the lawyer’s house by night and
wring a dread tale from lips that had been sealed with the dis—
mallest and most formidable of oaths, Huck’s conﬁdence in the
human race was well-nigh obliterated. Daily Muff Potter’s
gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken : but nightly he wished
he had sealed up his tongue. Half the time Tom was afraid

TH}: ADVENTURES OF TOM SAIVYER. ' 218

Injun Joe would never be captured;.the other half he was
afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw a safe
.breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the
corpse.

Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured,
but no Injun Joe was found. One of those omniscient and
awe-inspiring marvels, a. detective, came up from St. Louis,
moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that
sort of astounding success which members of that craft usually
achieve. That is to say, he ‘ found a clew.’ But you can’t
hang a ‘ clew ’ for murder, and so after that detective had got
through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was
before.

The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly
lightened weight of apprehension.

214 TH ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XXV.

THERE comes a time in every rightly constructed boy’s life
when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for
hidden treasure. This desire suddenly came upon Tom one
day. He sallied out to ﬁnd Joe Harper, but ﬁdled of success.
Next he sought Ben Rogers ; he had gone ﬁshing. Presently
he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red—Handed. Huck would
answer. Tom took him to a private place, and opened the
matter to him conﬁdentially. Huck was willing. Huck was
always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered
entertainment and required no capital, for he had a troublesome
superabundance of that sort of time which is not money.

‘ Where ’11 we dig ? ’ said Huck.

‘ 0h, ’most anywhere.’

‘ Why, is it hid all around?’ '

‘ No, indeed it ain’t. It’s hid in mighty particular places,
Huck—sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under
the end of a limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow

falls at midnight; but mostly under the ﬂoor in ha’nted
houses.’

‘Who hides it?’

‘ Why, robbers, of course-wwho’d you reckon ? Sunday-
school sup’rintendents ? ’

‘ Idon’t know. If 'twas mine I wouldn’t hide it; I’d spend
it and have a. good time.’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 215

‘So would I; but robbers don’t do that way, they always
hide it and leave it there.’

‘ Don’t they come after it any more? ’

‘ No, they think they will, but they generally forget the
marks, or else they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time
and gets rusty; and by-and-by somebody ﬁnds an old yellow
paper that tells how to ﬁnd the marks—a paper that’s got to be
ciphered over about a. week because it's mostly signs and hy’ro—
glyphics.’ ‘

‘ Kym—which ? ’

‘ Hy’roglyphicv-pictupes and things, you know, that .don’t
seem to mean anything.’

‘Have you got one of them papers, Tom?’

‘ No.’ -

‘ Well, then, how you going to ﬁnd the marks?’

‘ I don’t want any marks. They always bury it under a
ha'nted house, or on an island, or under a dead tree that’s got
one limb sticking out. Well, we’ve tried J ackson's Island a
little, and we can try it again some time; and there’s the old
ha’nted house up the Still House branch, and there’s lots of
dead-limb trees—dead loads of ’em.‘

‘ Is it under all of them ? ’

‘How you talk! No! ’

‘ Then how you going to know which one to go for?"

‘ Go for all of ’em.’ I

‘ Why, Tom, it’ll take all summer.’ .

‘ Well, what of that? Suppose you ﬁnd a brass pot, with a
hundred dollars in it, all rusty and gay, or a rotten chest full of
di'monds. How’s that?’ ‘

Huck’s eyes glowed.

‘ That’s bully, plenty bully enough for me. Just you
gimme the hundred'dollars, and I don’t want no di’monds.’

‘ All right. But I bet you I ain’t going to throw off on

216 TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

di’monda. Some of ’em’a worth twenty dollar: apiece. There
ain’t any, hardly, bnt’s worth six bits or a dollar.’

‘ No! Is ﬂint so ? ’ '

‘ Cert’nly—anybody ’ll tell you so! Hain’t you ever seen
one, Huck ? ’ ' I

‘ Not as I remember.’

 

A KIND, P003 FELLOW .

‘ Oh, kings have slnthers of them.’

Well, I don’t know no kings, Tom.’

‘ I reckon you don’t. But if you was to go to Europe you’d
see a raft of ’em hopping around.’

‘ Do they hop ? ’

‘ Hop F—yom- granny! No !’

‘ Well, what did you say they did for ? ’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 'SAWYER. 217

‘ Shucks ! I only meant you’d see ’em—not hopping, of
course—what do they want to hop for? But I mean you’d just
see' ’em—scattered around, you know, in a kind of a general
way. Like that old hump-backed Richard.’

‘ Richard 1 What’s‘his other name i‘ ’

‘ He didn’t have any other name. Kings don’t have any
but a given name.’

‘ No ? ’

‘ But they don't.’

‘Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don’t want to
be a king and have only just a given name, like a nigger. But
say—where you going to dig ﬁrst? ’ ‘

‘ Well, I don’t know. S’pose we tackle that old dead-limb
tree on the hill t’other side of Still House branch?’

‘I’m agreed.’

So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their
three-mile tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw
themselves down in the shade of a neighbouring elm to rest
and have a smoke.

‘ I like this,’ said Tom.

- ‘ So do I.’

‘ Say, Huck, if we ﬁnd a. treasure here, what you going to
do with your share l”

‘Well, I’ll have pie and a glass of soda. every day, and I’ll
go to every circus that comes along. I bet I’ll have a gay
time.’

‘ Well, ain't you going to save any of it?’

‘Save it? What for?’

‘ Why, so as to have something to live on by—and-by.’

‘ Oh, that ain’t any use. Pap would come back to thish
yer town some day and get his claws on it if I didn’t hurry up,
and I tell you he’d clean it out pretty quick. What you going
to do with yonrn, Tom ? ’ ‘

Blﬁ THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ I’m going to buy a new drum, and a sure-’nough sword,
and a red necktie, and a bull pup, and get married.’ I

‘ Married ! ’

‘ That’s it.’

‘ Tom, you——why you ain’t in your right mind.’

‘ Wait—you’ll see.’ -

‘ Well, that’s the foolishest thing you could do. Lookat pop
and my mother. Fight! why they used to ﬁght all the time.
I remember, mighty well.’

‘ That ain’t anything. The girl I’m going to marry won’t
ﬁght.’

‘Tom, I reckon they’re all alike. They’ll all comb a body.
Now you better think ’bout this a while. I tell you you
better. What’s the name of the gal?’

‘ It ain’t a gal at all—it’s a. girl.’

‘ It’s all the same, I reckon ; some says gal, some says girl
—-—both’s right, like enough. Anyway, what’s her name, Tom? ’

‘ I’ll tell you some time—not now.’

‘ All rightp—that’ll do. Only if you get married I’ll be
more lonesomer than ever.’

‘ No, you won’t, you’ll come and live with me. Now stir
out of this, and we’ll go to digging.’ ' -

They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result.
They toiled another half hour. Still no result. Huck said: V

‘ Do they always bury it as deep as this?’

‘ Sometimes—not always. Not generally. I reckon we
haven’t got the right place.’

So they chose a new spot and began again. The labour
dragged a little, but still they made progress. They pegged
away in silence for some time. Finally Huck leaned on his
shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve,
and said:

‘ Where you going to dig next, after we get this one ? ’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 219

‘l reckon maybe we’ll tackle the old tree that’s over yonder
on Cardiﬂ‘ Hill, back of the widow’s.’

‘ I reckon that’ll be a good one. But won’t the widow take
it away from us, Tom? It’s on her laud.7

‘She take it away lr Maybe she’d like to try it once.
Whoever ﬁnds one of these hid treasures, it belongs to him.
It don‘t make any diﬂerence whose land it’s on.’

That was satisﬁmtory. The work went on. By-and—by
Huck said:

‘ Blame it! we must be in the wrong place again. What
do you think?‘

‘It is mighty curious, Huck. I don’t understand it.
Sometimes witches interfere. I reckon maybe that’s what’s the
trouble now.’ i

‘ Shucksl witches ain’t got no power in the daytime.’

‘ Well, that’s so. I didn’t think of that. Oh, I know
what the matter is ! What ablamed lot of fools we are! You
got to ﬁnd out where the shadow of the limb falls at midnight,
and that’s where you dig l ’

‘Then, consound it, we’ve fooled away all this work for
nothing. Now, hang it all, we got to come back in the night.
It’s an awful long way. Can you get out?’

‘ I bet I will. We’ve got to do it to—night, too, because if
somebody sees these holes they’ll know in a. minute what’s here
and they’ll go for it.’

‘ Well, I’ll come around and meow to-night."

‘ All right. Let’s hide the tools in the bushes.’

The boys were there that night about the appointed time.
They sat in the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an
hour made solemn by old traditions. Spirits whispered in the
rustling leaves, ghosts lurked in the murky nooks, the deep
haying of a hound ﬂoated up out of the distance, an owl
answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were subdued

220 THE 41) VENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

by these solemnities, and talked little. By-and-by they judged
that twelve had come ; they marked where the shadow fell and
began to dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their interest
grew stronger, and their industry kept pace with it. The hole
deepened and still deepened, but every time their hearts
jumped to hear the pick strike upon something, they only
suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone or a
chunk} At last Tom said: '

‘ It ain’t any use, Huck, we’re wrong again.’
‘ Well; but we can‘t be wrong. We spotted the shadder to
a dot.’ '

‘ I know it, but then there’s another thing.’

‘ What’s that?’ - ‘

‘Why we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was
too late or too early.’ ‘ - - ~ ‘

Huck dropped his shovel.

‘ That's it,’ said he. ‘ That’s the very trouble. We got to
give this lone up. We can’t ever tell the right time, and
besides, this kind of thing’s too awful, here this time of night
with witches and ghosts a ﬂuttering around so. I'feelas if
something’s- behind me all the time; and I’m afeard‘to turn
around, becnz maybe there’s others in‘front a waiting for a.
' chance. I been creeping all ever ever since I got here.’

‘Well, I’ve been pretty much so too, Huck. They ’most
always put in a. dead man when they bury a treasure under a
tree, to look out for it.’

‘ Lordy ! ’

‘ Yes, they do. I’ve always heard that.’

“ Tom, I don’t like to fool around much where there’s dead
people. A body’s bound to get into trouble with ’em, sure.’

‘I don't like to stir ’em up, either. S’pose this one here
was to stick his skull out and say something ! ’

‘ Don’t, Tom! It’s awful!’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 221 

‘ Well it just is. Huck, I don’t feel comfortable :1 bit.’

‘Say, Tom, let’s give this place up, and try somewheres
else.’

‘ All right, I reckon we better.’
> ‘ What’ll it be?’

Tom considered a while, and then

 

THE HA’NTED HOUSE.

‘The ha’nted house. That‘s it.‘

‘ Blame it, I don't like ba'nted houses, Tom. Why, they’re
a dern sight worse’n dead people. Dead people might talk, my-
be, but they don’t come sliding around in a shroud when you
ain’t noticing, and peep over your shoulder all of a sudden and

grit their teeth the way a ghost does. I couldn’t stand such a
thing as that, Tom—nobody could.’

222 ‘ THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

‘ Yes ; but, Huck, ghosts don’t travel around only at night
—they won’t bender us from digging there in the daytime.’

‘ Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don’t
go about that ha’nted house in the day nor the night.’

‘Well, that’s mostly because they don’t like to go where a.
man’s been murdered; anyway. But nothing’s ever been seen
around that house except in the night—just some blue light
slipping by the windows—no regular ghosts.’

‘ Well, where you see one of them blue lights ﬂickering
around, Tom, you can bet there’s a ghost mighty close behind
it. It stands to reason. Becuz you know that they don’t any-
body but ghosts use ’em.’ '

‘ Yes, that’s so. But anyway they don’t come around in the
daytime, so what’s the use of our being afeared ? ’

‘ Well, all right. We’ll tackle the ha’nted house if you say
so; but I reckon it’s taking chances.’

They had started down the hill by this time. There in the
middle of the moonlit valley below them stood the ‘ ha’nted ’
house, utterly isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds
smothering the very door-steps, the chimney crumbled to ruin,
the window-sashes vacant, a corner of the. roof caved in. The
boys gazed a while, hslf expecting to see a blue light ﬂit pasta.
window; then talking in a low tone, as beﬁtted the time and
the circumstances, they struck far oﬁ‘ to the right, to give the
haunted house a wide berth, and took their way homeward
through the woods that adorned the rearward side of Cardiﬁ‘

Hill.

. THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 293

CHAPTER XXVI.

ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree;
they had come for their tools. Tom was impatient to go tothe
haunted house; Huck was measurably so, also, but suddenly
saidw— ' . '

‘Looky here, Tom, do you know what day it is?’

Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then
quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them——

‘ My ! I never once thought of it, Huck! ’

‘ Well, I didn’t, neither, but all at once it popped on to me
that it was Friday.‘ ‘

‘ Blame it ; a body can’t be too careful, Huck. We might
u got into an awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday.’

‘ Might! Better say we would! There’s some lucky days,
maybe, but Friday ain’t.’

‘ Any fool knows that. I don’t reckon you was the ﬁrst that
found it out, Huck.’

‘Well, I never said I was, did I? And Friday ain’t all,
neither. I had a rotten bad dream last night—dreamt about
rats.’

‘No 1 Sure sign of trouble. Did they ﬁght?‘

‘ No.’ ‘

‘ Well, that’s good, Huck. When they don’t ﬁght it’s only
a sign that there’s trouble around, you know. All we got. to do
is to look mighty sharp and keep out of it. We’ll drop this
thing for to-day, and play. Do you know Robin Hood, Huck?’

224 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘No. Who’s Robin Hood? ’
‘Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in

England—~and the best. He was s. robber.’

‘CmckyJwisht I was. Who did he rob?’

‘ Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and
such like. But he never bothered the poor. He loved ’em.
He always divided up with ’em perfectly square.’

 

THE (3meT AND BEST.

‘ Well, he must ’a.’ been a brick.’
‘I bet you he was, Huck. 0h, he was the noblest manthat

ever was. They ain’t any such men now, I can tell you. He
could lick any man in England with one hand tied behind him;
and he could take his yew bow and plug a ten cent piece every
time, a mile and a half.’

‘ What’s a yew bow?’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 225

‘ I don’t know. It’s some kind of a bow, of course. And if
he hit that dime only on the edge he would set down and cry
~—and curse. But we’ll play Robin Hood—it‘s noble fun. I’ll
learn you.’

‘ ‘ I’m agreed.’
So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then

 

BUSINESS.

casting a. yearning eye down upon the haunted house and pass-
ing a remark about the morrow’s prospects and possibilities
there. As the sun began to sink into the west they took their
way homeward athwnrt the long shadows of the trees, and soon-
were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff Hill.

011 Saturday, shortly after. noon, the boys were at the dead

226 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

tree again. They had a smoke and a. chat in the shade, and
then dug a little in their last hole, not with great hope, but
merely because Tom said there were so many cases where
people had given up a treasure. after getting down within six
inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and turned
it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this
time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went
away feeling that they had not triﬂed with fortune, but had
fulﬁlled all the requirements that belong to the business of
treasure-hunting.

When they reached the haunted house, there was something
so weird and grisly about the dead silence that reigned there
under the baking sun, and something so depressing about the
loneliness and desolation of the place; that they were afraid, for
a. moment, to venture in. Then they crept to the door and took
a trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown, ﬂoorless room, un-
plastered, an ancient ﬁre—place, vacant windows, a ruinous stair-
case; and here, there, and everywhere, hung ragged and aban—
doned cobwebs. They presently entered softly, with quickened
pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest
sound, and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.

In a little while familiarity modiﬁed their fears, and they
gave the place a. critical and interested examination, rather ad-
miring their own boldness, and wondering at it, too. Next
they wanted to look upstairs. This was something like cutting
oﬁ' retreat, but they got to daring each other, and of course
there could be but one result—they threw their tools into a corner
and made the ascent. Up there were the same signs of decay.
In one corner they found a closet that promised mystery, but
the promise was a fraud—there was nothing in it. Their

scoumge was up now, and well in hand. They were about to
go down and begin work when—

‘Sh!’ said Tom.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 227

‘ What is it i’ ’ whispered Huck, blanching with fright.

‘Sh! There! Hearit?’

‘Yes! Oh, my ! Let’s run 1 ’

‘ Keep still 1 Don‘t you budge ! They’re coming right
toward the door.’ I

The boys stretched themselves upon the ﬂoor with their
eyes to knot-holes in the planking, and lay waiting in a misery
of fear.

‘ They’ve sto'pped—. No—coming—. Here they are.
Don’t whisper another word, Huck. My goodness, I wish I was
out of this! ’

Two men entered. Each boy said to himself:

‘ There’s the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that’s been about
town once or twice lately—never saw t’other man before.’

‘ T’other ’ was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing
very pleasant in his face. The Spaniard was wrapped in a mp6;
he had bushy white whiskers, long white hair ﬂowed from under
his sombrero, and he wore green goggles. When they came in,
‘ t’other ’ was talking in a low voice ; they sat down on the
ground, facing the door, with their backs to the wall, and the
speaker continued his remarks. His manner became less
guarded, and his words more distinct as he proceeded.

‘ No,’ said he, ‘I’ve thought it all over, and I don’t like it.
It’s dangerous.’

‘Dangerous!’ grunted the ‘deaf and dumb’ Spaniard, to
the vast surprise of the boys. ‘ Milksop ! ’

This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was Injun
Joe’s! There was silence for some time Then Joe said:

‘ What’s any more dangerous than that job up yonder ?—-
but nothing’s come of it.’

‘ That’s diﬁ‘erent. Away up the river so, and not another
house about. ’Twon’t ever be known that we tried, anyway,
long as we didn’t succeed.’

a 2

228 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘Well, what’s more dangerous than coming here in the
daytime ?—-anybody would suspicion us that saw us.’

‘I know that. But there wam’t any other place as handy
after that fool of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted
to yesterday, only it warn’t any use trying to stir out of here
with those infernal boys playing over there on the hill right
in full view.’

‘Those infernal boys’ quaked again under the inspiration
of this remark, and thought how lucky it was that they had
remembered it was Friday and concluded to wait a day.
They wished in their hearts they had waited a year. The
two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a
long and thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said:

‘ Look here, lad, you go back up the river where you belong.
Wait there till you hear from me. I’ll take the chances on
dropping into this town just once more, for a look. We’ll do
that “dangerous ” job after I've spied around a little and think
things look well for it. Then for Texas! We'll leg it
together-1’ ‘

This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning,
and Injun Joe said: ‘

‘ I’m dead for sleep! It’s your turn to watch.’

He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore.
His comrade stirred him once or twice, and he became quiet.
Presently the watcher began to nod; his head drooped lower
and lower; both men began to snore now. - '

The boys drew a long grateful breath. Torn whispered—

‘ Now’s our chance—~come ! ’

Huck said: ‘ I can’t—I’d die if they was to wake.’

Tom urged—Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and
softly, and started alone. But the ﬁrst step he made wrung
such a hideous creak from the crazy ﬂoor that he sank down
almost dead with fright. He never made a second attempt.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 229

The boys lay there counting the: dragging moments till it
seemed to them that time must be done and eternity growing
grey; and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun
was setting.

Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around—-
smiled grimly upon his comrade,‘ whose head was drooping
upon his knees—stirred him up with his foot, and said—

‘ Here! You‘re a watchman, ain’t you ! All right, though
—nothing's happened.’

‘ My! Have I been asleep ? ’

‘ Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be moving,
What’ll we do with what little swag we’ve got leﬁ? ’

‘ I don’t know—leave it here as we’ve always done, I reckon.
No use to take it away till we start south. Six hundred and
ﬁfty in silver’s something to carry.’

‘ Well—all right—it won’t matter to come here once more.’

‘ No—but I’d say come in the night as we used to do—it’s
better.’

‘ Yes, but look here; it may be a good while before I get
the right chance at that job; accidents might happen, ’tain’t
in such a very good place; we’ll just regularly bury it——and
bury it deep.’ .

‘ Good idea,’ said the comrade, who walked across the
room, knelt down, raised one of the rearward hearthstones, and
took out a bag that jingled pleasantly. He subtracted from it
twenty or thirty dollars for himself and as much for Injun Joe,
and passed the bag to the latter, who was on his knees in the
corner, now, digging with his bowie-knife.

The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an
instant. With gloating eyes they watched every movement.
Luck l—the splendour of it was beyond all imaginationl Six
hundred dollars was money enough to make half a dozen boys
rich l Here was treasure-hunting under the happiest auspices-—

230 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 8.4 W YER.

there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to
dig. They nudged each other every moment—eloquent nudges
and easily understwd, for they simply meant, ‘ Oh, but ain’t
you glad now we’re here ! ’

Joe’s knife struck upon something.

‘ Hello! ' said he.

 

HIDDEN TREASURES UNEARTHED.

‘ What is it? ’ said his comrade.

‘ Half-rotten plank—no, it’s a. box, I believe. Here, bear
a hand, and we’ll see what it’s here for. Never mind, I’ve
broke a hole.’

He reached his hand in and drew it out.

‘ Man, it’s money! ’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF ‘TOM SA WYER. 231

The two men enmined the handful of coins. They were
gold. The boys above were as excited as themselves, and as
delighted.

Joe’s comrade said : ‘ '

‘ We’ll make quick work of this. There’s an old rusty pick
over amongst the weeds in the corner, the other side of the
ﬁre-place—I saw it a minute ago.’

He ran and brought the. boys' pick and shovel. Injun Joe
took the pick, looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered
something to himself, and then began to use it. /

The box was soon unearthed. It was not very large; it was
iron-bound and had been very strong before the slow years had
injured it. The men contemplated the treasure a while in
blissful silence.

‘ Pard, there’s thousands of dollars here,’ said Injun Joe.

‘ ’Twas always said that Murrel’s gang used around here
one summer,’ the stranger observed. '

‘I know it,’ said Injun Joe; ‘ and this looks like it, I should
say.’

‘ Now you won’t need to do that job.’

- The half-breed frowned. Said he:

‘ You don‘t know me. Least you don’t know all about that
thing. ’Tain’t robbery altogether—it’s revenge! ’ and a wicked
light ﬂamed in his eyes. ‘I’ll need your help in it. When it’s
ﬁnished—then Texas. Go home to your Nance and your kids,
and stand by till you hear from me.’

‘ Well, if you say so. What’ll we do with this—bury it
again ? ’

‘ Yes ’ [ravishing delight overhead]. ‘ No! by the great
Sachem, no! ’ [profound distress overhead]. ‘I’d nearly forgot.
That pick had fresh earth on it!’ [The boys were sick with
terror in a moment.] ‘ What business has a pick and a shovel
here ? What business with fresh earth on them ? Who brought

232 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

them here—and where are they gone ? Have you heard any-
body ?—seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them
to come and see the ground disturbed ? Not exactly—not
exactly. We’ll take it to my den.’

‘Why, of course! Might have thought of that before.
You mean Number One ? ’

‘ No—Number Two—under the cross. The other place is
bad—too oommon.’

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE BOYS‘ SALVATION.

‘ All right. It’s nearly dark enough to start.’
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window,
cautiously peeping out. Presently be said:

‘Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon
they can be upstairs? ’

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 233

The boys’ breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on
his knife, halted a moment, undecided, and then turned to-‘
ward the stairway. The boys thought of the closet, but their
strength was gone. The steps came creaking up the stairs-r
the intolerable distress of the situation woke the stricken reso-
lution of the lads—they were about to spring for the closet,
when there was a crash of rotten timbers, and Injun Joe landed
on the ground amid the debris of the mined stairway. He
gathered himself up cursing, and his comrade said:

‘Now what’s the use of all that? 'If it’s anybody, and
they're up there, let them stay there—who cares? If they
want to jump down, now, and get into trouble, 'who objects ? It
will be dark in ﬁﬁeen minutes—and then let them follow us if
they want to; I’m‘willing. In my opinion, .whoever hove
those things in here caught a sight of us, and took us for
ghosts or devils or something. I’ll bet they’re running yet.’

Joe grumbled a while ; then he agreed with his friend that
what daylight was left ought to be economised in getting things
ready for leaving. Shortly afterwards they slipped out of the
house in the deepening twilight, and moved toward the river
with their precious box. ‘-

Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and
stared alter them through the chinks between the logs of the
house. Follow? Not they—they were content to reach
ground again without broken necks, and take the townward
track over the hill. They did not talk much, they weretoo
much absorbed in hating themselves—hating the ill-luck that
made them take the spade and the pick there. But for that
Injun Joe never would have suspected. He would have hidden
the silver with the gold to wait there till his ‘revenge’ was
satisﬁed, and then he would have had the misfortune to ﬁnd
that money turn up missing. Bitter, bitter luck that the tools
were ever brought there! They resolved to keep a look-out

234 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM MWYER.

for that Spaniard v'vheu he should‘eome to town spying out‘for
chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to ‘Number‘
Two,’ wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought oc-
curred to Tom: '

‘ Revenge? What if he means us, Huck !’
I ‘ Oh, don’t!’ said Huck nearly fainting. ' '
' 'They talked it all over, and as they entered town ,they
agreed to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else
——at least that he might at least mean nobody but Tom, since
only Tom had testiﬁed.

Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in
danger! Company would be a palpable improvement, he
thought.

 

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 285

CHAPTER XXVI I. '

THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom’s dreams
that night. Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure,
and four times it wasted to uothingness in his ﬁngers as sleep
forsook him, and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of
his misfortune. As he lay in the early morning recalling the
incidents of his great adventure, he noticed that they seemed
curiously subdued and far away, somewhat as if they had hap-
pened in another world, or in a. time long gone by. Then it
oceurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a
dream! There was one very strong argument in favour of this
idea—namely, that the quantity of coin he had seen wastoo
vast to be real. He had never seen as much as ﬁfty dollars in
one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and station
in life, in that he imagined that all references to ‘hundreds’
and ‘ thousands ’ were mere fanciful forms of speech, and that
no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed
for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to
be found in actual money in anyone’s possession. If his
notions of hidden treasure had been analysed they would have
been found to consist of a handful of real dimes, and a bushel
of vague, splendid, ungraspable dollars.

But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper
and clearer under the attrition of thinking them over, and so
he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the
thing might not have been a dream after all. This un-

sac THE ADVENTURES OF TOM RAWYER.

certainty must be swept away. He would snatch a hurried
breakfast, and go and ﬁnd Huck.

Huck was sitting on the gunvrale of a ﬂat boat, listlesst
dangling his feet in the water, and looking very melancholy.
Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the subject. If he did

F'

 

THE NEXT DAY'H CONFERENCE.

not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been
only a. dream.

‘ Hello, Huck! ’

‘ Hello, yourself.’

Silence for a minute. ‘ .

‘ Tom, if we’d a left the blame tools at the deadtree we’d ’5’
got the money. Oh, ain’t it awful? ’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 287

"Tain’t a dream, then, ’tain't a dream! Somehow I ’most
wish it was. Dog’d if I don’t, Huck.’

‘ What ain’t a dream?’

‘ Oh, that thing yesterday. I been half thinking it was.’

‘D’ream! If them stairs hadn’t broke down you‘d ’e‘ seen
how much dream it was! I’ve had dreams enough all night,
with that patch-"eyed Spanish devil going for me all through
’em—rot him! ’

‘No, not rot him. Fm him! Track the money!’

‘ Torn, we’ll never ﬁnd him. A feller don’t have only one
chance for such a pile, and that one’s lost. I’d feel mighty
shakey if I was to see him, anyway.’

‘Well, so’d I ; but I’d like to see- him, anyway, and track
him out—to his Nuinber Two.’

‘Number Two; yes, that’s it. I hen thinking ’bont that.
But I can’t make nothing out of-it.~ AWhat do you reckon
it is?’

‘I done. ' It’s too deep. Say, Huok'maybe it’s the num-
ber of a house!’ ' '

‘Goody l—No, Tom, that ain’t it. If it is, it ain’t in this
one-horse town. They ain’t no numbers here.’

‘ Well, that’s so. Lemme think 8 minute. Here—it’s the
number of a room— ~in a tavern, you know 1 '

‘Oh, that’s the trick! They ain’t only two taverns. We
can ﬁnd out quick.’

‘ You stay here, Huck, till I come.’

Tom was 05 at once. He did not care to have Huck’s
company in public places. He was gone half an hour. He
found that in the best tavern, Number Two had long been
occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied. In the ,
less ostentatious house Number Two was a mystery. The
tavern-keeper’s young son said it was kept looked all the time,
and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except

388 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYE’R.

at night; he did not know any particular reason for this state
of things; had had some little curiosity, hot it was rather
feeble; had made the most of the mystery by entertaining
himself with the idea that that room was ‘ha’nted;’ had no-
ticed that there was a light in there the night before.

‘That’s what I’ve found out, Huck. I reckon that’s the
very Number Two we’re after.’ '

‘I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you going to do?’

‘ Lemme think.’ ’

Tom thought e long time. Then he said:

‘I’ll tell you. The back door of that Number Tim is the
door that comes out into that little ,close alley between the
tavern and the old rattle-trap of a brick store. Now you get
hold of all the door keys you can ﬁnd, and I’ll nip all of
auntie‘sxand the ﬁrst dark night we’ll go there and try “em.
And mind. you keep a. look-out for Injun Joe, because he
said he, was going to drop into town and spy around once more
for a. chance to get his revenge. If you see him, you
follow him; and if he don’t go to that Number Two, that ain’t
the place.’

‘ Lordy, I don’t want to foller him by myself!’

‘ Why, it’ll be night, sure. He mightn’t ever see you—end
if he did, maybe he’d never think anything.’

‘Well, if it’s pretty dark I reckon I’ll track him. I dono
—I dono. I’ll try.’ V

‘You bet I’ll follow him, if it’s dark, Huck! Why, he
might ’3’ found out he bouldn’t get his revenge, and be going
right after that money.’

‘ It’s so, Tom, it’s so. I’ll fuller him; I will, by jingoes ! ’

‘Now you’re talking! Don’t you ever weaken, Huck, end
I won’t.’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 289

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THAT night Tom and Buck were ready for their adventure.
They hung about the neighbourhood of the tavern until alter
nine, one watching the alley at a distance and the other the
tavern door. Nobody entered the alley or left it; nobody re-
sembling the Spaniard entered or left the tavern door The night
promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home, with the under-
standing that if aconsiderable degree of darkness came on, Huck
was to come and ‘ meow,’ whereupon he would slip out and try the
keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch
and retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshend about twelve.

Tuesday the boys had the same ill-luck. Also Wednesday.
But Thursday night promised better. .Tom slipped out in
good season with his aunt’s old tin lantern, and a large towel
to blindfold it with. He hid the lantern in Huck’s sugar
hogshead, and the watch began. An hour before midnight
the tavern closed up, and its lights (the only ones thereabouts)
were put out. No Spaniard had been’seen. Nobody had
entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious. The
blackness of darkness reigned; the perfect stillness was inter.
rupted only by occasional mntterings of distant thunder.

Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it
closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the
gloom towards the tavern. Huck stood sentry and Tom felt
his way into the alley. Then there was a season of waiting
anxiety that weighed upon Huck’s spirits like a mountain.

246 THE ADVENTURES OF T0)! SAWYER.

He began to wish he could see a ﬂash from the lantem~it
would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom
was alive yet.

It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he
must have fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had
burst under terror and excitement. In his uneasiness Huck
found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley, fearing
all sorts of dreadful things, and momentarily expecting some
catastrophe to happen that would take' away ,his' breath.
There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
inhale it, by Ithimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself
out, the way it was beating. Suddenly 'there was a ﬂash of
light, and Tom came tearing by him: ‘

‘ Run!’ 'said he; ‘ run, for your life! ’ "

He needn’t have repeated it; once was enough ; Huck was
making thirty or forty miles an hour before the repetition
was uttered. The boys never stopped till they reached the
shed of a' deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the
village. Just as they got within its slhlter the storm burst and
the rain poured down. .'As soon as Tom got his breath he said:

"Huck, it was awful!' I tried two of the keys just as soft
as I could; but they seemed to make such a power of racket
that I couldn’t hardly get my breath, I was so scared. They
wouldn’t turn in the lock, either. Well, without noticing what
I was doing, I tookhold of the knob, and open comes the
door! It warn’t locked! I hopped in, and shook off the towel,
and, gm: mer’s ghost!’

‘ What l—what’d you see, Tom ?’

‘ Huck, I most stepped on to Injun Joe’s hand!’

‘ N o l ’

‘Yes. He was laying there, sound asleep on the ﬂoor, with
his old patch on his‘eye and his arms spread out.’

‘ Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up ?’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.‘ 241

‘No, never budget]. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that
bowel and started! ’

‘I’d never ’3’ thought of the towel, I bet ! ’

‘Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty nick if

I lost it.’
‘ Say, Tom, did you see that box .9 ’

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE HAUNTED ROOM.

‘ Huck, I didn’t wait to look around. I didn’t see the box,
I didn't see the cross. I didn’t see anything but a bottle and
a tin cup on the ﬂoor by Injun Joe ! Yes, and I saw two barrels
and lots more bottles in the room. Don't you see, now, what’s
the matter with that ha’nted room ? ' I I

‘ How .7 ’ I .

242 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

..‘ Why, it’s ha’nted with whisky! Maybe all the Tem-
perance Taverns have got a ha’nted room, hey, Huck? ’

‘ Well, I reckon maybe that’s so. Who’d a thought such a
thing? But say, Tom, now’l a mighty good time to get that
box, if Injun Joe’s drunk.’

‘ It is, that! You try it!’

Huck shudder-ed.

‘ Well, no—I reckon not.’

‘ And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of
Injun Joe ain’t enough. If there’d been three he’d be drunk
enough, and I’d do it.’

There was a long pause for reﬂection, and then Tom said:

‘Looky here, Huck, let’s not try that thing any more till
we know Injun Joe’s not in there. It’s too scary. Now if we
watch every night, we’ll be dead sure to see him go out some
time or other, then we’ll snatch that box quicker’n lightning.’

‘ Well, I’m agreed. I’ll watch the whole night long, and
I’ll do it every night, too, if you’ll do the other part of the
job.’

‘ All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper
Street a blank and meow—and if I’m asleep, you throw some
gravel at the window, and that’ll fetch me.’

‘ Agreed, and good as wheat ! ’

‘ N ow, Huck, the storm’s over, and I’ll gohome. It’ll begin
to be daylight in a couple of hours. You go back and watch
that long, will you ? ’

‘ I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha’nt that tavern
every night for a year. I’ll sleep all day and I’ll stand watch
all night.’

‘ That’s all right. Now where are you going to sleep ? ’

‘ In Ben Rogers’s hay-loft. He lets me, and so does his pap’s
nigger man, Uncle J eke. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever
he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 248

something to eat if he can spare it. That’s a mighty good
nigger, Tom. He likes me. becuz I don’t ever not as if I was
above him. Sometimes I’ve set right down and eat with him.
But you needn’t tell that. A body’s got to do things when he’s
awful hungry he wouldn’t want to do as a steady thing.’

‘Well, if I don’t mt you in the daytime I'll let you
sleep. I won’t come bothering around. Any time you see
something’s up in the night, just skip right around and meow.’

l2

244 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE ﬁrst thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad
piece of news—Judge Thatcher’s family had come back to town
the night before. Both Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into
secondary importance for a moment, and Becky took the chief
place in the boy’s interest. He saw her, and they had an
exhausting good time playing ‘hi—spy’ and ‘gully-keeper’
with a crowd of their schoolmates. The day was completed
and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased
her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and.
long—delayed picnic, and she consented. The child’s delight
was boundless, and Tom’s not more moderate. The invitations
were sent out before sunset, and straightway the young folks
of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation and
pleasurable anticipation. Tom’s excitement enabled him to
lreep awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes
of hearing Huck’s ‘meow’ and of having his treasure to
astonile Becky and the picnickers with, the next day ; but, he
was disappointed. No signal came that night.

Morning came eventually, and by ten or eleven o’clock
a giddy and rollicking company were gathered at Judge
Thatcher's, and everything was ready for a start. It was not
the custom for elderly people to mar picnics with their
presence. The children were considered safe enough under the
wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few yoimg
gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts. The old steam

;
x
<
l

y
l
l
y
1
y

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 245

ferry-boat was chartered for the occasion : presently the guy
throng ﬁled up the main street laden with provision baskets.
Sid was sick and had to miss the fun ; Mary remained at home
to entertain him. The last thing Mrs. Thatcher said to Becky
was:
- “You’ll not get back till late. Perhaps you’d better stay
all night with some of the girls that live near the ferry landing,
child! ’

‘ Then I’ll stay with Susy Harper, mamma.’ 

‘ Very well. And mind and behave yourself, and don’t be
any trouble.’

Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky:

‘Say—I’ll tell you what we’ll do. ’Stead of going to Joe
Harper’s, we’ll climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow
Douglas’s. She’ll have ice-creaml She has it ’most every day
-—dead loads of it. And she’ll be awful glad to have us.’

‘ Oh, that will be fun !’

Then Becky reﬂected a moment, and said :

‘ But what will mamma say?’

‘ How’ll she eVer know i’ ’

The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said re-
luctantly:

‘ I reckon it’s wrong—but—’

‘But; shucks! Your mother won’t know, and so what’s
the harm? All she wants is that you’ll be safe ; and I bet you
she’d ’a’ said go there if she’d ’a’ thought of it. I kn'ow she
would ! ’

The Widow Douglas’s splendid hospitality was a tempting
bait. It and Tom’s persuasions presently carried the day. So
it was decided to say nothing to anybody about the night’s
programme.

Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe Huck might come
this very night and give the signal. The thought took a deal

246 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

of the spirit out of his anticipations. Still he could not beat
to give up the thirst Widow Douglas’s. And why should he
give it up, he reasoned—'the signal did not come the night
before, so why should it be any more likely to come to-night?
The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure;
and, boy like, he determined to yield to the stronger inclina-
tion and not allow himself to think of the box of money
another time that day. ,

Three miles below town the ferry-boat stopped at the mouth
of a‘woody hollow and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore,
and soon the forest distances and craggy heights echoed far
and near with shoutings and laughter. All the different ways
of getting hot and tired were gone through with, and by-and-
by the rovers struggled back to camp fortiﬁed with responsible
appetites; and then the destruction of the good things began.
After the feast. there was a refreshing season of rest and chat
in the shade of spreading oaks. By-and—by somebody shouted:

" Who’s ready for the cave?’

Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and
straightway there was a general scamper up the hill. The
mouth of the cave was up‘ the hillside —an opening shaped
like a letter A. Its massive oaken door stood unbarred.
Within was a. small chamber, chilly as an ice—house, and
walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with
a cold sweat. It was romantic and mysterious to stand here
in the deep gloom and look out upon the green valley shining
in the sun. But the impressiveness of the situation quickly
wore OE, and the romping began again. The moment a candle
was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a
struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was
soon knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad
clamour of laughter and a new chase. But all things have an
end. By-and—by the procession went ﬁling down the steep

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SJWYER.

descent of the main ave-
nue, the ﬂickering rank
of lights dimly revealing
the lofty walls of rock
almost to their point of
junction sixty feet over-
head. This main avenue
was not more than
eight or ten feet wide.
Every few steps other
lofty and still narrower
crevices branched from
it on either hand, for
McDougal’s cave was
but a vast labyrinth of
crooked aisles that ran
into each other and out
again and led nowhere.
It was said that one
might wander days and

nights together through .

its intricate tangle of
rifts and chusms, and
never ﬁnd the end of the
cave; and that he might
go down and down, and
still down into the earth,
and it was just the same
——labyrinth underneath
labyrinth, and no end to
any of them. No man
‘knew’ the cave. Thalt
was an impossible thing.

EXPLORING‘ THE CAVE.

247

 

248 THE ADVENTURES] OF TOM SA WYER.

Most of the young men knew a portion of it, and it was not
customary to venture much beyond this known portion. Tom
Sawyer knew as much of the cave as anyone.

The procession moved along the main avenue some three-
quarters of a mile, and then groups and couples began‘ to slip
aside into branch avenues, ﬂy along the dismal corridors, and
take each other by surprise at points where the corridors joined
again. Parties were able to elude each other for the space
of half an hour without going beyond the ‘ known ’ ground.

By—and-by, one group aﬁer another came straggling back
to the mouth of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head
to foot with tallow drippings, daubed with clay, and entirely
delighted with the success of the day. Then they were aston-
ished to ﬁnd that they had been taking no :note of time, and
that night was about at hand. The clanging bell had been
calling for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day’s
adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the
ferry-boat with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody
cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft.

Huck was already upon his watch when the ferry-boat’s
lights went glinting past the wharf. He heard no noise on
board, for the young people were as subdued and still as people
usually are. who are nearly tired to death. He wondered what
boat it was, and why she did not stop at the wharf-—and then
he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his
business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten
o’clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights
began to wink out, all straggling foot—passengers disappeared,
the village betook itself to its slumbers and left the small
watcher alone with the silence and the ghosts. Eleven o’clock
came, and the tavern lights were put out; darkness everywhere,
now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long time, but
nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM 5A. WJ’ER. 249

use? Was there really any use? Why not give it up and
turn in ? '

A noise fell upon his ear. He was all attention in an instant.
The alley door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the
brick store. The next moment two men brushed by him, and
one seemed to have something under his am. It must be that

 

BUCK 0N DUTY-

box! So they were going to remove the treasure. Why call Tom
now ? It would be absurd—the men would get away with the
box and never be found again. No, he would stick to their wake
and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for security
from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped
out and glided along behind the men, cat-like, with bare feet,
allowing them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible.

 

260 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to
the left up a cross street. They went straight ahead, then,
until they came to the path that led up Cardiﬂ‘ Hill; this they
took. They passed by the old Welshman’s house, half way up
the hill, without hesitating, and still climbed upward. Good,
thought Huck, they will bury it in the old quarry. But they
never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the summit.
They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumach
bushes, and were at once hidden in the gloom. Huck closed
up and shortened his distance, now, for they would never be
able to see him. He trotted along a while ; then slackened
his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast; moved on a piece,
then stopped altogether; listened; no sound; none, save that
he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart. The booting
of an owl came from over the hill—ominous sound! But no
footsteps. Heavens, was everything lost? He was about to
spring with winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not
four feet from him ! Huck’s heart shot into his throat, but he
swallowed it again; and then he stood there shaking as if a.
dozen ngues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that
he thought he must surely fall to the ground. He knew where
he was. He knew he was within ﬁve steps of the stile leading
into Widow Douglas’s grounds. ‘ Very well,’ he thought, ‘let
them bury it there ; it won’t be hard to ﬁnd.’

Now there was a voice—a very low voice—Injun Joe’s:

‘ Damn her! maybe she’s got company—there’s lights, late
as it is.’ ‘

‘ I can‘t see any.’

This was that stranger’s voice—the stranger of the haunted
house. A deadly chill went to Huck’s heart—this, then, was
the ‘ revenge ’ job! His thought was to ﬂy. Then he remem—
bered that the Widow Douglas had been kind to him more then
once, and maybe these men were going to murder her. He

THE ADVENTURES OF IT OM SA WYER. 251

wished he dazed venture to warn her; but heiknew he didn’t
dare—they might come and catch him. He thought all this
and more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger’s
remark and Injun Joe’s next—which was :

‘ Because the bush is in your way. Now—«this way——now'
you see, don’t you? ’ V

‘ Yes. Well, there is company there, I reckon. Better
give it up.’ ' '

‘ Give it up, and I just leaving this country for ever! Give
it up, and maybe never have another chance. I tell you again,
as I’ve told you before, I don’t care for her swag—you may
have it. But her husband was rough on me— many times he
was rough on me—and mainly he was the justice of the peane
that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain’t all ! It ain’t 'a
millionth part of it! He had me haremth l—horse—
whipped in front of the jail, like a nigger !—with all the town
looking on! HORSEWHIPPEbl—do you understand? He took
advantage of me and died. But I’ll take it out of her!’

‘ Oh, don’t kill her! Don’t do that l ’

‘ Kill! Who said anything about killing? I would kill h’r'xm
if he was here; but not her. When you want to get revenge
on a woman you don’t kill her—boshl you go for her looks.
You slit her nostrils—you notch her ears like a sow ! ’

‘By God, that’ —-’

‘ Keep your opinion to yourself l It will be safest for you.
I’ll tie her to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my
fault? I’ll not cry if she does. My friend, you’ll help in this
thing—for my sake—that’s why you’re here—I mightn’t be able
alone. If you ﬂinch, I’ll kill you ! Do you understand that?
And if I have to kill you, I’ll kill her—and then I reckon
nobody’ll ever know much about who done this business.’ .

‘ Well, if it’s got to be done, let’s get at it. The quicker the
better—I’m all in a shiver.’

252 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘ Do it nowl—and company there? Look here—I’ll get
suspicious of you, ﬁrst thing, you know. No—we’ll wait till
the lights are out—there’s no hurry.’

Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue—a thing still
more awful than any amount of murderous talk; so he held
his breath and stepped gingerly back; planted his foot care-

 

A HOUSING ACT.

fully and ﬁrmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a. precarious
way and almost toppling over, ﬁrst on one side and then on the
other. He took another step back with the same elaboration
and the male risks; then another and another, and—a twig
snapped under his foot! His breath stopped and he listened.
There was no sound—the stillness was perfect. His gratitude

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 253

was measureless. Now he turned in his tracks between the
walls of sumach bushes—turned himself as carefully as if he
were a ship—and then stepped quickly but cautiously along.
I When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, so he picked up

his nimble heels and ﬂew. Down, down he sped till he reached
the Welshman’s. He banged at the door, and presently the

 

RESULT OF A SNEEZE.

heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons werethrust
from windows. .

‘What’s the row there? Who’s banging? What do you
want .9 ’

‘Let me iii—quick! I’ll tell everything.’

‘ Why, who are you ? ’

‘ Huckleberry Finn—quick, let me in ! ’

 

254 ' J'HE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

‘Huckleberry Finn, indeed! It ain‘t a name to open
many doors, I judge! But let him in, lads, and let’s see
what’s the trouble.’

‘ Please don’t ever tell I told you,’ were Huck’s ﬁrst words
when he got in. ‘Please don’t—I’d be killed sure—but the
Widow’s been good friends to me sometimes, and I want to tell
—I will tell if you’ll promise you won’t ever say it was me.’

‘By George, he has got something to tell, or he wouldn’t
act so!‘ exclaimed the old man. ‘ Out with it, and nobody
here’ll ever tell, lad.’

Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed,
were up the hill, and just entering the sumach path on tip-
toe, their weapons in their hands. Huck accompanied them
no further. He hid behind a great boulder and fell to
listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence, and then all
of a sudden there was an explosion of ﬁrearms and a cry.
Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped
down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. . 256

CHAPTER XXX.

As the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning,
Huck came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old
Welshman’s door. The inmates were asleep, but it was a
sleep that was set on a hair-trigger, on account of the exciting
episode of the night. A call came from a window:

‘ Who’s there?’

Huck’s scared voice answered in a low tone:

‘ Please let me in! It’s only Huck Finn!’

‘ It’s a name that can open this door night or day, lad !—
and welcome I ’

These were strange words to the vagabond boy’s ears, and
the pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not recollect that
the closing word had ever been applied in his case before.

The door was quickly unlocked, and he entered. Huck was
given a. seat, andthe old man and his brace of tall sons speedily
dressed themselves.

‘ Now, my boy, I hope you’re good and hungry, because
breakfast will be ready as soon as the sun’s up, and we’ll have
a. piping hot one, too—make yourself easy about that. I and
the boys hoped you’d turn up and stop here last night.’

‘I was awful scared,’ said »Huek, ‘and I run. I took out
when the pistols went oﬁ', and I didn’t stop for three mile.
I’ve come now bean I wanted to know about it, you know; and
I come before daylight beeuz I didn’t want to run acrost them
devils, even if they was dead ’

250 1 THE ADVENTURES 01' T01! SAWYER.

‘Well, poor chap, you do look as if you’d had a hard night
of it—but there’s a bed here for you when you’ve had your
hreakﬁist. No, they ain’t dead, lad—we are sorry enough for
that. You see, we knew right where to put our hands on
them, by your description; so we crept along on tip-toe till we
got within ﬁfteen feet of them—dark as a cellar that sumach
path was—and just then I found I was going to sneeze. It
was the meanest kind of luck ! I tried to keep it back, but no
use—’twas bound to come, and it did come! I was in the
lead, with my pistol raised, and when the sneeze started those
scoundrels a—rustling to get out of the path, I sang out “Fire,
boys!” and blazed away at the place where the rustling was.
So did the boys. But, they were 03' in a jiﬁ'y, those villains,
and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we never
touched them. They ﬁred a shot apiece as they started, but
their bullets whiued by and didn’t do us any harm. As soon
as we lost the sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went
down and stirred up the constables. They got a posse together,
and went 03‘ to guard the river bank, and as soon as it is light
the sheriff and a gang are going to beat up the woods. My
boys will be with them presently. I wish we had some sort
of a description of those rascals—’twould,help a good deal.
But you couldn’t see what they were like in. the dark, had, I
suppose?’ -

‘ Oh, yes, I saw them down town, and follered them.’

‘ Splendid! Describe them—«describe them, my boy ! ’

‘Oue’s the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that‘s ben
around here once or twice, and t’other’s a mean-looking,
ragged—J

‘That's enough, lad, we know the men! Happened on
them in the woods back of the widow’s one day, and they slunk
away. 03‘ with you, boys, and tell the sheriff—get your break—
fast to-morrow morning ! ’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 267

The Welshman’s sons departed at once. As they were
leaving the room Huck sprang up and exclaimed:

‘ Oh, please don’t tell anybody it was me that blowed on
them! Oh, please!’ »

‘All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the
credit of what you did.’

‘ Oh, no, no! Please don’t tell ! ’

When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said:

‘ They won’t tell—and I won’t. But- why don’t you want it
known ? '

Huck would not explain further than to say that he already
knew too much about one of those men, and would not have
the men know that he knew anything against him for the whole
world—he would be killed for knowing it, sure.

The old man promised secrecy once more, and said :

‘ How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were
they looking suspicious?’

Huck was silent, while he framed a duly cautions reply.
Then he said:

‘ Well, you see, I’m a kind of a hard log—least everybody
says so, and I don’t see nothing agin it———a.nd sometimes I can’t
sleep much, on accounts of thinking about it, and sort of trying
to strike out a new way of doing. That was the way of it last
night. I couldn’t sleep, and so I come along up street ’bout
midnight a turning it all over, and when I got to that old shackly
brick-store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed up agin the
wall'to have another think. Well, just then along comes these
two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under
their arm, and I reckoned they’d stole it. One was a smoking,
and t’other one wanted alight; so they stopped right before me,
and the cigars lit up their faces, and I see that the big one was
the deaf and dnmb Spaniard, by his white whiskers and the

s

258 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

patch on his eye, and t’other one was a rusty, ragged-looking
devil.’

‘ Could you see the rags by the light of the cigars?’

This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said:

‘ Well, I don't know—but somehow it seems as if I did.’

‘ Then they went on, and you—’

‘Followed ’em—yes. That was it. I wanted to see what
was up—they sneaked along so. I dogged ’em to the widdet’s
stile, and stood in the dark, and heard the ragged one beg for
the widder, and the Spaniard swear he’d spile her looks, just as
I told you and your tw0—’

‘What! The deafand dumb man said all that!”

Huck had made another terrible mistake! He was trying
his best to keep the old man from getting the faintest hint of
who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed deter—
mined to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do. He
made several eﬁ‘orts to creep out of his scrape, but the old man’s
eye was upon him, and he made blunder aﬁer blunder. Pre-
sently the Welshman said:

‘ My boy, don’t be afraid of me, I wouldn’t hurt a hair of
your head for all the world. No—l’d protect you—I’d protect
you. This Spaniard is not deaf and dumb; you’ve let that slip
without intending it; you can’t cover that up now. You know
something about that Spaniard that you want to keep dark. Now
trust rue—tell me what it is, and trust me—I won’t betray
you.’ '

Huck looked into the old man’s honest eyes smoment, then
bent over and whispered in his ear:

‘ ’Tain’t a Spaniard—it’s Injun Joe ! ’

The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment
he said:

‘ It’s all plain enough now. When you talked about notching
ears and slitting noses, I judged that that was yourownembel-

TEE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 259

lishment, because white men don’t take that sort of revenge.
But an Injun ! That’s a different matter altogether!

During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it
the old man said that the last thing which he and his sons had
done before going to bed was to get a lantern and examine the
stile and its vicinity for marks of blood. They found none, but
captured, a bulky bundle of—

 

COIIN EBED.

‘ Of wan? ’

If the words had been lightning, they could not have leaped
with a more stunning suddenness from Huck’s blanched lips.
His eyes were staring wide, now, and his breath suspended—
waiting for the answer. The Welshman started—st in

return—three seconds—ﬁve seconds—ten—then replied:
s 2

 

200 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

‘ Of burglars’ tools. Why, what’s the matter with you?’

Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably
grateful. The Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously—and
presently said: - '

‘ Yes, burglars’ tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal.
But what did give you that turn? What were you, expecting
we'd found?’ .

Huck was in a close place; the inquiring eye was upon him
—he would have given anything for material for a plausible
answer. Nothing suggested itself; the inquiring eye was
boring deeper and deeper—a senseless reply offered—there was
no time to weigh it, so at a venture he uttered it, feeny :

‘ Sunday-school books, maybe.’

Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man '

laughed loud and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy
from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh was
money in a man’s pocket, because it cut down the doctor’s bills
like everything. Then he added:

‘ Poor old chap, you’re white and jaded; you ain’t well a bit.
No wonder you’re a little ﬂighty and off your balance. But
you’ll come out of it. Rest and sleep will fetch you all right,
I hope.’

Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and
betrayed such a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the
idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure,
as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow’s stile. He had
only thought it was not the treasure, however; he had not
known that it wasn’t; and so the suggestion of a captured
bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole
he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew
beyond all question that that bundle was not the bundle, and
so his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact,
everything seemed to be drifting just in the right direction

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA W FER. 261

now ; the treasure must be still in Number Twa, the men would
be captured and that day, and he and Tom could seize the
gold that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption.

Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the
door. Huck jumped for a hiding-place, for he had no mind to
be connected even remotely with the late event. The Welsh-
man admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them' the
Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of citizens were climbing
up the hill to stare at the stile. So the news had spread.

The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the
visitors. The widow’s gratitude for her preservation was out-
spoken.

‘Don’t say a word about it, madam. There’s another that
you’re more beholden to than you are to me and my boys maybe,
but he don’t allow me to tell his name. We wouldn’t have
been there but for him.’

Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost
belittled the main matter; but the Welshman allowed it to eat
into the Vitals of his visitors, and through them he transmitted
to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret.
When all else had been learned the widow said:

‘ I went to sleep reading in bed, and slept straight through
all that noise. Why didn’t you come and wake me ? ’

‘We judged it warn’t worth while. Those fellows wam’t
likely to come again ; they hadn’t any tools left to work with,
and what was the use of waking you up and scaring you to
death? My three negro man stood guard at your house all
the rest of the night. They’ve just come back.’

More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold
for a couple of hours more.

There was no Sabbath-school during day-school vacation,
but everybody was early at church. The stirring event was
well canvassed. News came that not a sign of the two villains had

262 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

been yet discovered. When the sermon was ﬁnished Judge
Thatcher’s wife dropped alongside of Mrs. Harper as she moved
down the aisle with the crowd, and said:

‘ Is my Becky going to sleep all day ? I just expected she
would be tired to death.’

‘ Your Becky ? ’

‘ Yes,’ with a startled look. ‘Didn’t she stay with you last
[night ? ’

‘ Why, no.’

Mrs. Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew just as
Aunt Polly, talking briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt
Polly said :

‘ Good morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good morning, Mrs. Harper.
I’ve got a boy that’s turned up' missing. I reckon my Tom
stayed at your house last night—one of you. And now he‘s
afraid to come to church. I’ve got to settle with him.’

Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler
than ever.

‘He didn’t stay withvus,’ said Mrs. Harper, beginning to
look uneasy. A marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly’s face.

‘ Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning .9 ’

' ‘ No’m.’

‘ When did you see him last? ’

Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he oouldvsay. The
people had stopped moving out of church. Whispers passed
along, and a boding uneasiness took possession of every
countenance. Children were anxiously questioned, and young
teachers. They all said they had not noticed whether Tom
and Becky were on board the ferry~boat on the homeward trip;
it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if anyone was missing.
One young man ﬁnally blurted out his fear that they were still
in the cave ! Mrs. Thatcher swooned sway ; Aunt Polly fell to
crying and wringing her hands.

The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from

.THE ADVBN T [IRES 0F TOM SA WYER. 268

street to street; and within five minutes the bells were wildly
charging, and the whole town was up! The Cardiﬁ' Hill episode
sank into instant insigniﬁcance, the burglars were forgotten,
horses were saddled, skiﬂ's were manned, the ferry-boat ordered
out, and before the horror was half an hour old two hundred
men were pouring down high-road and river towards the cave.

All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead.
Many women visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher, and tried
to comfort them. They cried with them, too, and that was
still better than words.

All the tedious night the town waited for news; but when
the morning dawned at last, all the word that came was ‘ Send
more candles, and send food.’ Mrs. Thatcher was almost
crazed, and Aunt Polly also. Judge Thatcher sent messages of
hope and encouragement from the cave, but they conveyed no
real cheer.

The old Welshman came home towards daylight, sputtered
with candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out.
He found Huck still in the bed that had been provided for
him, and delirious with fever. The physicians were all at the
cave, so the Widow Douglas camp and took charge of the
patient. She said she would do her best by him, because,
whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord’s,
and nothing that was the Lord’s was a thing to be neglected.
The Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow
said :

‘You can depend on it. That’s the Lord’s mark. He don’t
leave it 05. He never does. Puts it somewhere on every
creature that comes from His hands.’

Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to struggle
into the village, but the strongest of the citizens continued
searching. All the news that could be gained was that remote-
nesses of the cavern were being ransacked that had never been

264 .THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

visited before; that every corner and crevice was going to be
thoroughly searched; that wherever one wandered through the
maze of passages, lights were to be seen ﬂitting hither and
thither in the distancetand shoutings and pistol-shots sent
their hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles.
In one place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists,

 

 

 

TOM'S MARK.

the names ‘BECKY & TOM’ had been found traced upon the
rocky wall with candle smoke, and near at hand a grease-soiled
bit of ribbon. Mrs. Thatcher recognised the ribbon and cried
over it. She said it was the last relic she should ever have of
her child; and that no other memorial of her could ever be so
precious, because this one parted latest from the living body
before the awful death came. Some said that now and then in
the cave a far-away speck of light would glimmer, and then a,

 

-THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 286

glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping -
down the echoing aisle—and then a. sickening disappointment
always followed; the children were not there; it was only a
searcher’s light.

Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours
along, and the village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one
had heart for anything. The accidental discovery, just made,
that the proprietor of the Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his
premises scarcely ﬂuttered the public pulse, tremendous as the
fact was. In alucid interval Huck feebly,led up to the subject
of taverns, and ﬁnally asked, dimly dreading the worst, if any—
thing had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since he
had been ill?

‘Yes,’ said the widow.

Huck started up in bed, wild-eyed:

‘What! What was it?’

‘ Liquor l—and the place has been shut up. Lie down, child
-—what a turn you did give me 1 ’

‘ Only tell me just one thing—only just one—please ! Was
it Tom Sawyer that found it? ’

The widow burst into tears.

‘ Hush, hush, child, hush ! I’ve told you before, you must
not talk. You are very, very sick! ’ '

Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have
been a great pow-wow if it had been the gold. So the treasure
was gone for ever—gone for ever! But what could she be cry—
ing about? Curious that she should cry.

These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck’s mind,
and under the weariness they gave him he fell asleep. The
widow said to herself:

‘ There—he’s asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer ﬁnd it!
Pity but somebody could ﬁnd Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain’t
many lelt now that’s got hope enough, or strength enough
either, to go on searching.’

206 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Now to return to Tom and Becky’s share in the picnic. They
tripped along the murky aisles with the rest of the company,
visiting the ﬁrmiliar wonders of the cave—wonders dubbed with
rather over—descriptive names, such as ‘ The Drawing Room,’
‘The Cathedral,‘ ‘Aladdin’s Palace,’ and so on. Presently the
hide-and-seek frolicking began, and (Tom and Becky engaged
in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a triﬂe weari-
some; then they wandered down a sinuous avenue, holding their
candles aloha and reading the tangled wabwork of names, dates,
post-oﬁice addresses, and mottoes with which the rocky walls
had been frescoed (in candle smoke). Still drifting along and
talking, they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of
the cave whose walls were not frescoed. They smoked their
own names under an overhanging shelf and moved on. Pre-
sently they came to a place where a little stream of water,
trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone sediment with
it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and mﬂed
Niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed
his small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky’s
gratiﬁcation. He found that it curtained a sort of steep natural
stair-way which was enclosed between narrow walls, and at once
the ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded to
his call, and they made a smoke mark for future guidance, and
started upon their quest. They wound this way and that, far
down into the secret depths of the cave, made another mark,

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 267

and branched off in search of novelties to tell the upper world
about. In one place they found a. spacious cavern, from whose
ceiling depended amultitude of shining stalactites of the length

 

woxnm OF THE CAVE

:nnd circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it,
wondering and admiring, and presently leﬁ; it by one of the
numerous passages that opened into it. This shortly brought
:them to a bewitehing spring, whose basin was encrusted with a

 

268 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

frostwork of glittering crystals; it was in the midst of acavem

whose walls were supported by many fantastic pillars .which
had been formed by the joining of great stalactites and stalag—

 

ATTACKED BY NATIVES.

mites together, the result of the ceaseless water-drip of cen-
turies. Under the roof vast knots of bats had packed them-
selves bogether, thousands in a bunch ; the lights disturbed the»
creatures, and they came ﬂocking down by hundreds, squeak~

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 269

ing and darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their
ways, and the danger of this sort of conduct. He seized Becky’s
hand and hurried her into the ﬁrst corridor that offered; and
none too soon, for a bat struck Becky’s light out with its wing
while she was passing out of the cavern. The bats chased the
children a good distance; but the fugitives plunged into every
new passage that oﬁ'ered, and at last got rid of the perilous
things. Torn found a subterranean lake, shortly, which stretched
its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows.
He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would
be best to sit down and rest a while ﬁrst. Now for the ﬁrst
time the deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon
the spirits of the children. Becky‘said:

‘Why, I didn’t notice, but it seems ever so long since I
heard any of the others.’

‘ Come to think, Becky, we are away down'below them, and
I don’t know how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever
it is. We couldn’t hear them here.’

Becky grew apprehensive.

‘ I wonder how long we’ve been down here, Tom. We better
start back.’

‘ ‘ Yes, [reckon we better. P’raps we better.’ >

‘ Can you ﬁnd the way, Tom ? It’s all a mixed-up crookedness
to me.’

‘ I reckon I could ﬁnd it, but then the bats. If they put both
our candles out it will be an awful ﬁx. Let’s try some other
way, so as not to go through there.’

‘ Well, but I hope we won’t get lost. It would be so awful l ’
and the girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful
possibilities. ‘

They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence
a. long way, glancing at each new opening, to see if there was
anything familiar about the look of it ; but they were all strange.

270 ‘ THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

Every time Torn made an examination, Becky would watch his
face for an encouraging sign, and he would say cheerily:

‘ Oh, it’s all right. This ain’t the one, but we’ll come to it
right away! ’

But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and
presently began to turn 03‘ into diverging avenues at sheer
random, in desperate hope of ﬁnding the one that was
wanted. He still said it was ‘All right,’ but there was such a
leaden dread at his heart, that the words had lost their ring,
and sounded just as if he had said, ‘ All is lost!’ Becky clung
to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep back the
tears, but they would come. At last she said:

‘Oh, Tom, never mind the bats; let’s go back that way!
We seem to get worse and worse off all the time.’

Tom stopped.

‘Listen! ’ said he.

Profound silence ; silence so deep that even their breathings
were conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went
echoing down the empty aisles, and died out in the distance in
a faint sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.

‘ Oh, don’t do it again, Tom, it is too horrid,’ said Becky.

‘ It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they miyht hear us, you
know,’ and he shouted again.

The ‘ might ’ was even a chillier horror than the ghostly
laughter, it so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood
still and listened ; but there was no result. Tom turned upon
the back track at once, and hurried his steps. It was but a
little while before a certain indecision in his manner revealed
another fearful fact to Becky; he could not ﬁnd his way back!

‘ 0h, Tom, you didn’t make any marks! ’

‘Becky, I was such a fool! such a fool! I never thought
we might want to come back! No, I can‘t ﬁnd the way. It’s
all mixed up.’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYEIL 271

‘Tom, Tom, we‘re lost! we’re lost! We never can
get out of this awful place! Oh, why did we ever leave the
others?’

She sunk to the ground, and burst into such a frenzy of
crying that Tom was appalled with the idea that she might die,
or lose her reason. 'He sat down by her and put his arms

 

 

 

 

DESPAIE.

around her; she buried her Ewe in his bosom, she clung to him,
she poured out her tenors, her unavailing regrets, and the far
echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom begged her
to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell to
blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
situation ; this had a better effect. She said she would try to
hope again, she would get up and follow wherever he might

’4‘: use»
.\, l eﬂa

272 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

lead, if only he would not talk like that any more. For he was
no more to blame than she, she said.

So they moved on again—aimlessly—simply at random—
all they could do was to move, keep moving. For a little while,
hope made a show of reviving—not with any reason to back it,
but only because it is its nature to revive when the spring has
not been taken out of it by age and familiarity with ﬁlilure.

By-aud-by Tom took Becky‘s mudle, and blew it out. This
economy meant so much. Words were not needed. Becky
understood, and her hope died again. She knew that Tom had
a whole candle and three or four pieces in his pocket,—-yet he
must economise.

By-and—by fatigue began to assert its claims ; the children
tried to pay no attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting
down when time was grown to be so precious ; moving, in
some direction, in any direction, was at least progress and might
bear fruit; but to sit down was to invite death and shorten its
pursuit.

At last Becky’s frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She
sat down. Tom rested yrith her, and they talked of home, and
the friends there, and the comfortable beds, andvabove all, the
light! Becky cried, and Tom tried to think of some way of
comforting her, but all his encouragements were grown thread—
bare with use, and sounded like samasms. Fatigue bore so
heavily upon Becky that she drowsed of to sleep. Tom was
grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow
smooth and natural under the inﬂuence of pleasant dreams;
and by-and-hy a smile dawned and rested there. The peace-
ful face reﬂected somewhat of peace and healing into his own
spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and
dreamy memories. While he was deep in his musings Becky
woke up with a breezy little laugh: but it was stricken dead
upon her lips, and a groan followed it.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 273

‘Oh, how could I sleep! I wish I never, never had
wsked! No, no, I;don’t, Tom! Don’t look so! I won’t say
it again.’ ‘

‘ I’m glad you’ve slept, Becky; you’ll feel rested, now, and
we’ll ﬁnd the way out.’

‘We can try, Tom; but I’ve seen such a beautiful country
in my dream. I reckon we are going there.’ 

- ‘ Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let’s go on
trying.’

They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hope-
less. They tried to estimate how long they had been in the
cave, but all they knew was that it seemed days and weeks,
and yet it was plain that this could not be, for their candles
were not gone yet.

A long time after this—they could not tell how long—Tom
said they must go softly and listen for dripping water—they
must ﬁnd a spring. They found one presently, and Tom said
it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go on a little further. She was
surprised to hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it.
They set down, and Tom fastened his candle to the wall in
front of them with some clay. Thought was soon busy; no-
thing was said for some time. Then Becky broke the silence:

‘Tom, I am so hungry!’

Tom took something om of his pocket.

‘ Do you remember this?’ said lie.

Becky almost smiled.

‘ It‘s our wedding cake, Tom.’

‘ Yes—I wish it was as big as a harrel,for it’s all we’ve got.’

‘ I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way
grown-up people do with wedding cake—but it’ll be our———-—’

She dropped the sentence where it was. Tom divided the

cake, and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at
T

274 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

his moiety. There was abundance of cold water to ﬁnish the
feast with. By-and-by Becky suggested that they (should
move on again. Tom was silent a moment. Then he said 2

‘ Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something? ’

Becky’s face paled, but she said she thought she could.

‘ Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's
water to drink. That little piece is our last candle l ’

 

THE WEDDING CAKE.

Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he
could to comfort her, but with little eﬂ'ect. At length Becky
said:

‘Tom l ’

‘ Well, Becky?’

‘ They’ll miss us and hunt for us l ’

zi'wzutn

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 275

‘ Yes, they will! Certainly they will ! ’

‘Muybe they’re hunting for us now, Tom.’

‘Why, I reckon maybe they are! I hope they are.’

‘ When would they miss us, Tom?’

‘ When they get back to the boat, I reckon.’

‘ Tom, it might be dark, then—would they notice we
hadn’t come ? ’

‘ I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you
as soon as they got home.’

A frightened look in Becky’s face brought Tom to his
senses, and he saw that he had made a blunder. Becky was
not to have gone home that night! The children became
silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of grief from ‘
Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers
also—that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before
Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper’s.

The children fastened their eyes upon their hit of candle
and watched it melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the
half inch of wick stand alone at last: saw the feeble ﬂame
rise and fall, climb the thin column of smoke, linger at
its top a moment, and then—the horror' of utter darkness
reigned!

How long afterwards it was that Becky came to a slow
consciousness that she was crying in Tom’s arms, neither could
tell. All that they knew was, that after what seemed a mighty
stretch of time, both awoke out of a. dead stupor of sleep, and
resumed their miseries once more. Tom said it might be Sun-
day now—maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk, but
her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom
said that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt
the search was going on. He would shout, and maybe someone
would come. He tried it; but in the darkness the distant
echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more.

'1‘ ‘l

276 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

.The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the
captives again. A portion of Tom’s half of the cake was left;
they divided and ate it. But they seemed hungrier than
before. The poor morsel of food only whetted desire.

By-and-by Tom said:

‘ Sh! Did you hear that?’

Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound
like the faintest, far-oﬁ‘ shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and
leading Becky by the hand, started groping down the corridor
in its direction. Presently he listened again; again the sound
was heard, and apparently a little nearer.

‘It’s them!’ said Tom; ‘they’re coming! Come along,
Becky—we’re all right now! ’ i .

The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their
speed was slow, however, because pitfalls were somewhat com-
mon, and had to he guarded against. They shortly came to
one, and had to stop. It might be three feet deep, it might be
a hundred—there was no passing it, at any rate. Tom got
down on his breast, and reached as far down as he could. No
bottom. They must stay there and wait until the searchers
came. They listened; evidently the distant shootings were
growing more distant ! A moment or two more, and they had
gone altogether. The heartosinking misery of it! Tom
whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. ‘He talked
hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and
no sounds came again.

The children groped their way back to the spring. The
weary time dragged on; they slept again, and awoke famished
and woe-stricken. Tom believed it must be Tuesday by this
time.

Now an idea struck him. There were some side-passages
near at hand. It would be better to explore some of these
than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness. He took

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEH. 277

a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and
Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the line as" he
groped along. At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended
in a ‘jumping—oﬂ" place.’ Tom got down on his knees and felt-
below, and then as far around the corner as he could reach with

 

A NEW TERROR.

his hands conveniently; he made an eﬁ'ort to stretch yet a
little further to the right, and at that moment, not twenty
yards away, a human hand, holding a candle, appeared. from
behind a rock! Tom lifted up a. glorious shout, and instantly
that hand was followed by the body it belonged to—Injun J oe’s !

278 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

Tom was paralysed ; he could not move. He was vastly grati-
ﬁed the next moment to see the ‘ Spaniard ’ take to his heels
and get himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not
recognised his voice and come over and killed him for testify-
ing in court. But the echoes must have disguised the voice.
Without doubt that was it, he reasoned. Tom’s fright-weak-
ened every muscle in his body. He said to himself that if he
had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay
there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting
Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what it
was he had seen. He told her he had only shouted ‘for luck.’

- But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the
long run. Another tedious wait at the spring, and another
long sleep brought changes. The children awoke, tortured with
a raging hunger. Torn believed that it must be Wednesday or
Thursday, or even Friday or Saturday, now, and that the search
had been given over. He proposed to explore another passage.
He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other tenors. But
Becky was very week. She had sunk into a dreary apathy, and
would not he roused. She said she would wait, now, where she
was, and die—it would not be long. She told Tom to go with
the kite—line and explore if he chose ; but she implored him to
come back every little while and speak to her; and she made
him promise that when the awful time came, he would stay by
her and hold her hand until all was over.

 Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and
made a show of being conﬁdent of ﬁnding the searchers or an
escape from the cave; then he took the kite-line in his hand
and went groping down one of the passages on his hands and
knees, distressed with hunger and sick with bodings of coming
doom.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM' SAWYER. 279

CHAPTER XXXII.

Tummy afternoon came, and wnned to the twilight. The vil-
lage of St. Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had
not been found. Public prayers had been offered up for them,
and many and many a private prayer that had the petitioner’s
whole heart in it; but still no good news came from the cave.
The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and gone
back to their daily evocations, saying that it was plain the chil-
dren could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a
great part of the time delirious. People said it was heart-
breaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and
listen 3 whole minute at a. time, then lay it wearily down again
with a moan. Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melan-
choly, and her grey hair had grown almost white. The village
went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

Away in the middle of the night a wild peel burst from the
village bells, and in a. moment the streets were swarming with
frantic half-clad people, who shouted, ‘ Turn out! turn out!
they’re found! they’re found ! ’ Tin pens and horns were added
to the din, the population massed itself and moved toward the
river, met the children coming in an open carriage drawn by
shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its homeward
much, and swept magniﬁcently up the main street roaring
huzzsh after huzzah!

The village was illuminated ; nobody went to bed again;
it was the greatest night the little town had ever seen. During

280 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

the ﬁrst half—hour a procession of villagers ﬁled through Judge
Thatcher’s house, seized the saved ones and kissed them,
squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to speak but couldn’t, and
drifted out mining tears all over the place.

Aunt Polly’s happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher’s
nearly so. It would be complete, however, as soon as the

 

 

THE ‘TURN OUT, TO RECEIVE TOM AND BECKY.

messenger despatched with the great news to the cave should
get the word to her husband.

Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him, and
told the history of the wonderful adventure, putting in many
striking additions to adorn it withal; and closed with a. descrip
tion of how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition ;

 

TILE ADVENTURES OF T011! SA WYER 281

how he followed two avenues as far as his kite—line would reach;
how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the kite-line,
and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-0H speck
that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward
it, pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw
the broad Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened

 

THE ESCAPE FROM THE CAVE.

to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight, and
would not have explored that passage any more! He told how
he went back for Becky and broke the good news, and she told
him not to fret her with such stuﬁ‘, for she was tired, and knew
she was going to die, and wanted to. He de'scribed how he
laboured with her and convinced her, and how she almost died
for joy when she had gtoped to where she actually saw the blue

,1 unﬁl‘i’

282 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

speck of daylight; how he pushed his way out at the hole and
then helped her out; how they sat there and cried for gladness;
how some men came along in a skiﬁ', and Tom hailed them and
told them their situation and their tarnished condition ; how the
men didn’t believe the wild tale at ﬁrst, ‘ because,’ said they,
‘.you are ﬁve miles down the river below the valley the cave is
in ; ' then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them sup-
per, made them rest till two or three hours otter dark, and then
brought them home.

Before day-dawn Judge Thatcher and the handful of
searchers with him were tracked out in the cave by the twine

 

 

 

 

 

t, , ,;  ~~~

    

A emu-Ina course.

clews they had strung behind them, and informed of the great
news. * ‘

Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were
not to be shaken OR at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered.
They were bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and
seemed to grow more and more tired and worn all the time.
Tom got about alittle on Thursday, was down town Friday, and
nearly as whole as ever Saturday; but Becky did not leave her
room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had passed
through a wasting illness.

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 283

Tom learned of Huck’s sickness, and went to see him on
Friday, but could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither
could he on Saturday or Sunday. He was admitted daily after
that, but was warned to keep still about his adventure and
introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas stayed by to
see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiﬁ' Hill
event ; also that the ‘ ragged man’s ’ body had eventually been
found in the river near the ferry landing ; he hadbeen drowned
while trying to escape perhaps.

About a fortnight after Tom’s rescue from the cave he
started off to visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough,
now, to hear exciting talk, and Tom had some that would
interest him, he thought. Judge Thatcher’s house was on
Tom’s way, and he stopped to see Becky. The Judge and
some friends set Tom to talking, and someone asked him iron-
ically if he wouldn’t like to go to the cave} again. Tom said
he thought he wouldn’t mind it. The Judge said:

‘ Well, there are others just like you,Tom,I’ve not the least
doubt. But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost
in that cave any more.’

‘ 9

‘ Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two
weeks ago, and triple locked; and I’ve got the keys.’

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

‘What’s the matter, boy? Here, run, somebody! Fetch a
glass of water!’

The water was brought and thrown into Tom’s face.

‘ Ah, now you’re all right. What was the matter with you,
Tom ? ‘ . ,

‘01:, Judge, Injun Jae’s in the cave!’ '

".284 THE ADVENTURES 01” T01}! SAWYBR.

CHAPTER XXXIII .

mem a few minutes the news had spread, and n dozen skiff-
loads of men were on their way to McDougal’s Cave, and the
ferry-boat, well ﬁlled with passengers, soon followed. Torn

 

IN BEECH 0F Ill-“IN Jul.

Sawyer was in the skit? that bore Judge Thatcher. When the
cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in
the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon

(Hawk

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER. 285

the ground, dead, with his face close to the crack of the door,
as if his longing eyes had been ﬁxed to the latest moment
upon the light and the cheer of the free world outside. Tom
was touched, for he knew by his own experience how this wretch
had suﬁ’ered. His pity was moved, but nevertheless be felt an
aboundng sense of relief and security, now, which revealed to

 

CAUGHT AT LAST.

him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before, how
vast a. weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day
he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outdst.

Injun J oe’s bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in
two. The great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped
and backed through with tedious labour; useless labour, too, it
was, for the native rock formed a sill outside it, and upon that

288 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

stubborn material the knife had wrought no effect; the only
damage done was to the knife itself. But if there had been no
stony obstruction there, the labour would have been useless still,
for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could not
have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he
had only hacked that place in order to be doing something—in
order to pass the weary time-in order to employ his tortured
faculties. Ordinarily one could ﬁnd half a dozen bits of candle
stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule, left there by
tourists; but there were none now. The prisoner had searched
them out and eaten them. He had also contrived to catch a.
few bats,and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their claws.
The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place
near at hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from
the ground for ages, builded by the water-drip from a stslactite
overhead. The captive had broken off the stalagmite, and upon
the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had scooped a. shallow
hollow to catch the precious drop that fell once in every three
minutes with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick—a dessert-
spoonful once in four—and-twenty hours. That drop was falling-
when the Pyramids were new ; when Troy fall; when the
foundations of Rome were laid; when Christ was cruciﬁed;
when the Conqueror created the British Empire ; when Colum-
bus sailed ; when the massacre at Lexington was ‘news.’ It is
falling now ; it will still be falling when all these things shall
have sunk down the afternoon of history and the twilight of
tradition, and been swallowed up in the thick night of oblivion.
Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did this drop fall
patiently during ﬁve thousand years to be ready for this ﬂitting
human insect’s need, and has it another important object to
accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It is
many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out
the stone to catch the priceless drops, but to this day the

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 287

\.

tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and thet slow—
dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of McDougal’s

Cave. Injun Joe’s Cup stands ﬁrst
in the list of the cavem’s marvels;
even ‘Aleddin’s Palace ’ cannot rival
it.

Injun Joe was buried near the
mouth of the cave ; and people
ﬂocked there in boats and waggons
from the towns and from all the
farms and hamlets for seven miles
around; they brought their chil-
dren, and all sorts of provisions, and
confessed that they had had almost
as satisfactory a time at the funeral
as they could have had at the
hanging.

This funeral stopped the further
growth of one thing— the petition to
the Governor for Injun Joe’s pardon.
Thepetition had been largely signed;
many tearful and eloquent meet-
ings had been held, and a committee
of sappy women been appointed
to go in deep mourning and wail
around the Governor, and implore
him to be a merciful ass, and trample
his duty under foot. Injun Joe was
believed to have killed ﬁve citizens
of the village, but what of that?
If he had been Satan himself there
would have been plenty of weak-

 

DBOP AFTER DEOP.

lings ready to scribble their names to a pardon-petition, and

 

288 THE ADVENTURES OF Toll! SAWYER.

drip a tear 'on it from their permanently impaired and leaky
waterworks. ' ..

The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private
place to have an important talk. Huck had learned all about
Tom’s adventure from the Welshman and the Widow Douglas
by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one thing
they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted to talk
about now. Huck’s face saddened. He said:

' ‘ I know what it is. You got into Number Two, and never
found anything but whisky. Nobody told me it was you. but
I just knowed it must ’a’ hen you, soon as I heard ’bout that
whisky business; and I knowed you hadn’t got the money
hecnz you’d ’a’ got at me some way or other, and told me, even
if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something’s always
told me we'd never get holt of that swag.’

‘ Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern—keeper. You
know his tavern was all right the Saturday I-went to the pic—
nic. Don’t you remember you was to watch there that night? ’

‘ Oh, yes! Why, it seems ’bout a year ago. It was that very
night that I follered Injun Joe to the widder's.’

‘ You. followed him?’

‘ Yes—but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe’s left friends
behind him, and I don’t want ’em souring on me, and doing me
mean tricks. If it hadn’t hen for me he’d be down in Texas
now, all right.’ -

Then Huck told his entire adventure in conﬁdence to Tom,
who had only heard of the Welshman’s part of it before.

‘ Well,’ said Huck, presently, coming back to the main
question, ‘ whoever nipped the whisky in Number Two nipped
the money, too, I reckon—anyways it’s a goner for us, Tom.’

‘ Huck, that money wasn’t ever in Number Two 1 ’

‘ What! ‘ Huck searched his comrade’s face keenly. ‘ Tom,
have you got on the track of that money again ? ’

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. . 289

‘ Huck, it’s in the cave! ’

Huek’s eyes blazed.

‘ Say it again, Tom!’

‘ The money’s in the cave ! ’

‘ Tom—honest injun, now—is it fun or earnest?’
‘Earnest, Huck—just. as earnest as ever I was in my life.
Will you go in there with me and help get it out?’

‘ I bet I will! I will if it’s where we can blaze our way to
it and not get lost.’

‘ Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble
in the world.’ '

‘ Good as wheat! What makes you think the-money’s——?

‘ Huck, you just wait till we get in there. . If we don’t ﬁnd
it, I’ll agree to give you my drum and everything I've got in
the world. I will, by jings.’

‘ All right—it's e whiz. When do you say?’

‘ Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?’

‘ Is it far in the cave? I ban on my pins 5 little three or
four days, now, but I can’t walk more’n a mile, Tom—least I
don‘t think I could.‘

‘It’s about ﬁve miles into there the way anybody but me
would go, Huck, but there’s a mighty short cut that they don’t
anybody but me know about. Huck, I’ll take you right to it
in a skiﬂ'. I‘ll ﬂoat the skit? down there, and I’ll pull it back
again, all by. myself. You needn’t ever turn your hand-
over.’

‘ Less start right 03‘, Tom.’

‘ All right». We want some breed and meat, and out pipes,
and a little bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some
of these new-tangled things they call heifer-matches. I tell
you many’s the time I wished I had some when I was in there
before.’

A triﬂe after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a
U

990

THE ADVENTURES OF

1,.
n‘
“if vr
“W
r

 

A BUSINESS TRIP.

TOM 3.4 W

citizen who was absent,
and got under way at
once. When they were
several miles below ‘ Cave
Hollow,’ Tom said:

‘Now you see this
bluﬁ' here looks All alike
nllthe way down from the
cave hollow—no houses,
no wood-yards, bushes all
alike. But do you see
that white place up you—
der where there’s been a
landaslide? Well, that’s
one of my marks. We’ll
get ashore now.’

They landed.

‘Now, Huck, where
we‘re a standing you
could touch that hole I
got out of with a ﬁshing-
pole. See if you can
ﬁnd it.’

Huck searched all the
place about, and found
nothing. Tom proudly
marched into a. thick
clump of sumach bushes
and said:

‘Here you are! Look
at it, Huck; it’s the
sunggest hole in thi;
country. You just keep

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. ‘ 29] ‘

mum about it. All along I’ve been wanting to be a robber,
but I knew I’d got to have a; thing like this, and where to run
across it was the bother. We’ve got it now, and we'll keep it
quiet, only we’ll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in—because of
course there’s got to be 3. Gang, or else there wouldn’t be any
style about it. Tom Sawyer’s Gang—it sounds splendid, don’t
it, Huck?’ '

‘Well, it just does, Tom. And who’ll we rob?’

‘Oh, ’most anybody. Waylay people—that’s mostly the
way.’

‘ And kill them.’

‘ No—not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a
ransom l’

‘ What’s a ransom? ’

‘Money. You make them raise all they can oﬂ‘n their
friends, and after you’ve kept them a year, if it ain’t raised
then you kill them. That's the general way. Only you don’t
kill the women. You shut up the women, but you don’t
kill them. They’re always beautiful and rich, and awfully
scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take
your hat off and talk polite. They ain’t anybody as polite as
robbers—you’ll see that in any book. Well, the women get to
loving you, and after they’ve been in the cave a week or two
weeks they stop crying, and after that you couldn’t get them to
leave. If you drove them out, they’d turn right around and
come back. It’s so in all the books.’

‘ Why, it’s real bully, Tom. I b’lieve it’s hetter’n to he a
pimte.’

‘Yes, it’s better in some ways, because it’s close to home,
and circuses, and all that.’

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered
the hole, Tom in the lead. They toiled their way to the far-

ther end of the tunnel, then made their spliced kite-strings

‘ 17 2

2% THE ADVENTURES‘OF TOM SAWYER.

fast and moved on. A few steps brought them to the spring,
and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through him. He showed
Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of clay
against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched
the ﬂame struggle and expire.

The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the
stillness and gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They
went on, and presently entered and followed Tom’s other corridor
until they reached the ‘ jumping-06 plnce.’ The candles
revealed the fact that it was not really a precipice, but only a
steep clay hill, twenty or thirty feet high. Tom whispered :

‘ Now I’ll show you something, Huck.’

He held his candle aloft and said:

‘Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see
that? There~ou the big rock over yonder—«done with candle
smoke ? ’

‘ Tom, it’s a cross ! ’

‘ Now where’s your Number Two ? “ Under the cross,” hey ?
Right yonder’s where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle,
Huck !’

' Huck stared at the mystic sign a while, and then said with
a shaky voice :

‘ Tom, less gi't out of here! ’

‘ What! and leave the treasure ?’

‘Yes—leave it. Injun Joe’s ghost is round about there,
certain.‘ '

‘No it ain’t, Huck, no it ain’t. It would ha’nt the place
where he died—away out at the mouth of the cave—ﬁve mile
from here.’

‘ No, Tom, it wouldn’t. It would hang round the money.
I know the ways of ghosts, and so do you.’

Tom' began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings
gathered in his mind. But presently an idea occurred to him.

THE ADVENTURES 9F TOM SA WYER. 293

‘Looky here, Huck, 'what fools we’re making of ourselves!
Injun Joe’s ghost ain’t a going to come around where there‘s a
cross ! ’ ‘ , I

The point was well taken. . It had its effect.

‘ Tom, I didn’t think of that. But that’s so. It’s luck for
us, that cross is. I reckon we’ll climb down there and have a
hunt for that box.‘

Tom went ﬁrst, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he
descended. Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the
small cavern which the great rock stood in. The boys examined
three of them with no result. They found a small recess in the
one nearest the base of the rock, with a pellet of blankets spread
down in it; 'also an old suspender, some bacon rhind, and the
well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there was no
money-box. The lads searched and rte-searched this place, but
in vain. Tom said:

‘ He said under the cross. Well, this comes nearest to
being under the cross. It can’t be under the rock itself, because
that sets solid on the ground.’

They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down
discouraged. Huck could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom
said:

‘Looky here, Huck; there’s foot-prints and some candle-
grease on the clay about one side of this rock, but not on the
other sides. Now what’s that for? I bet you the money is
under the rock. I’m ‘going to dig in the clay.’

‘That ain’t no bad notion,‘ Tom! ’ said Huck, wit-h anima-
tion. -

Tom’s ‘ real Barlow ’ was out at once, and he had not dug
four inches before he struck wood.

‘-Hey, Huck! you hear that 1’ ’

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon
uncovered and removed. They had concealed a natural chasm

294 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

which led under the mock. Tom got into this and held his candle
as far under the rock as he could, but said he could not see 1
to the end of the till. He proposed to explore. He stooped

and passed under; the narrow way descended gradually. He ‘
followed its winding course, ﬁrst to the right, then to the left, ‘

 

 

‘GOT 11' AT LAST!‘

Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve by-and-by, and
exclaimed:

‘My goodness, Huck, looky here ! ’

It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug
little cavern, along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns
in leather cases, two or three pairs of old mocassins, aleather
belt, and some other rubbish well soaked with the water drip.

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA W YER. ‘295

‘ Got it at last! ’ said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished
coins with his hand. ‘ My, but we’re rich, Tom!’

‘ Huck, I always reckoned we’d get it. It’s just too good
to believe, but we have got it, mire! Say, let’s not fool around
here, let's snake it out. Lemme see if I can lift the box.’

It weighed about ﬁfty pounds. Tom could lift it after an
awkward fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.

‘ I thought so,’ he said; ‘ they carried it like it was heavy
that day at the ha’nted house~I noticed that. I reckon I was
right to think of fetching the little bags along.’

The money was soon in the bags, and the boys took it up to
the cross rock. .

‘ Now less fetch the guns and things,’ said Huck.

‘ No, Huck, leave them there. They’re just the tricks to
have when we go to robbing. We’ll keep them there all the
time, and we hold our orgies there, too. It’s an awful snug
place for orgies.‘

' What’s orgies?’

‘ I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course
we’ve got to have them too. Come along, Huck, we've been in
here a long time. It’s getting late, I reckon. I‘m hungry,
too. We’ll eat and smoke when we get to the skiﬁ'.’ ‘

They presently emerged into the clump of sumsch bushes,
looked warily out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching
and smoking in the skiﬂ'. As the sun dipped towards the
horizon they pushed out and got under way. Tom skimmed
up the shore through the long twilight, chatting cheerin with
Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

‘Now, Huck,’ said Tom, ‘ we’ll hide the money in the loft
of the widow’s wood-shed, and I’ll come up in the morning and
we’ll count it and divide, and then we’ll hunt up a place out in
the woods for it where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here

296 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYEE.

and watch the stuff till I run and hook Benny Taylor's little
waggon. I won’t be gone a minute.’

He disappeared, and presently returned with the waggon,
put the two small sacks into it, threw some old tags on top of
them, and started off, dragging his cargo behind him. When
the boys reached the Welshman’s house they stopped to rest.
J ust as they were about to move on the Welshman stepped out
and said:

‘ Hallo, who‘s that? ’

‘ Huck and Tom Sawyer.’

‘Good ! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping every
body waiting. Here, hurry. up, trot ahead ; I’ll haul the
waggon for you. Why, it’s not as light as it might be. Got
bricks in it, or old metal?’

‘ Old metal,’ said Tom.

‘ I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble
and fool away more time, hunting up six bits’ worth of old
iron to sell to the foundry, than they would to make twice the
money at regular work. But that’s human nature. Hurry
along, hurry along ! ’

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

‘ Never mind ; you’ll see when we get to the Widow
Douglas’s.’

Huck said with someapprehension, for he was long used to
being falsely mused:

‘ Mr. Jones, we haven’t been doing nothing.’

The Welshman laughed. -

‘Well,I don’t know, Huck, my boy. I don’t know about
that. Ain’t you and the widow good friends?’

‘ Yes. Well, she’s hen good friends to me, anyways.’

‘All\right, then. What do you want to be afraid for ? ’

This question was not entirely answered in Huck’s slow
mind before he found himself pushed, along with Tom, into

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 297

Mrs. Douglas’s drawing-room. Mr. Jones left the waggon near
the door and followed.

The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of
any consequence in the village was there. The Thatchers were
there, the Harper's, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the
minister, the editor, and a great many more, and all dressed
in their best. The widow received the boys as heartily as any-
one could well receive two such~looking beings. They were
covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt Polly blushed
crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head at
Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, how—
ever. Mr. Jones said:

‘ Tom wasn’t at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled
on him and Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them
along in a hurry.’

‘And you did just right,’ said the widow. ‘ Come with me,
boys.’
She took them to a bedchamber and said:

‘Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits
of clothes—shirts, socks, everything complete. They’re Huck’s
‘ ——-no, no thanks, Huck—~Mr. Jones bought one and I the other.
But they’ll ﬁt both of you. Get into them. We’ll wait-—
come down when you are slicked up enough.’

Then she left.

298 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

HUCK said: ‘Tom, we can slope if we can ﬁnd ampe. The
window ain’t high from the ground.’ '

‘ Shueksl what do you want to slope for? ’

‘Well, I ain’t used to that kind of a crowd. I can’t stand
it. I ain’t going down there, Tom ’

‘ Oh, bother! It ain’t anything. I don‘t mind it a bit. I’ll
take care of you.’

Sid appeared.

‘Tom,’ said he, ‘auntie has been'waiting for you all the
afternoon. Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and every-
body’s been fretting about you. Say, ain’t this grease and clay
on your clothes?’

‘Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist ’tend to your own business.
What’s all this blow-out about, anyway?’ -

‘It’s one of the widow’s parties that she’s always having.
This time it’s for the Welshman and his sons, on account of
that scrape they helped her out of the other night. And any
——I can tell you something, if you want to know.’

‘Well, what?’

‘Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something
on the people here to-night, but I overheard him tell auntie
to-dsy about it, as a. secret, but I reckon it’s not much of a.
secret now. Everybody knows—the widow, too, for all she
tries to let on she don’t. Mr. Jones was bound Huck should

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 299

be here—couldn’t get along with his grand secret without
, Huck, you know I ’

‘ Secret about what, Sid?’

‘About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow’s. I
reckon Mr. Jones was going to make a grand time over his
surprise, but I bet you it will drop pretty ﬂat.’

Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisﬁed way.

‘ Sid, was it you that told? ’

‘Oh, never mind who it was. Somebody told, that’s
enough.’

‘ Sid, there’s only one person in this town mean enough to
do that, and that’s you. If you had been in Huck’s place
you’d ’a’ sneaked down the hill and never told anybody on the
robbers. You can’t do any but mean things, and you can’t
bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones. There—no
thanks, as the widow says.’ And Tom cuffed Sid’s ears and
helped him to the door with several kicks. ‘Now go and tell
auntie if you dare, and to-morrow you’ll catch it 2 '

Some minutes later the widow’s guests were at the supper
table, and a. dozen children were propped up at little side tables
in the same room, after the fashion of that country and that
day. At the proper time Mr. Jones made his little speech, in
which he thanked the widow for the honour she was doing
himself and his sons, but said that there was another person
whose modesty— ' " ' ' "

And so forth and so on. He sprang his secret about Huck’s
share in the adventure in the ﬁnest dramatic manner he was
master of, but the surprise it occasioned was largely counter-
feit,‘and notas clamorous and eﬂ'usive as it might have been
under happier circumstances. However, the widow made a
pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many com-
‘pliments and so much gratitude upon Huck, that he almost
forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in

300 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WYER.

the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target
for everybody’s gaze and everybody’s laudationa.

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her
roof and have him educated; and that when she could spare
the money she would start him in business in a modest way.
Tom’s chance was come. He said:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

TON BACKS H18 STATEIEHT.

‘ Huck don’t need it. Huck’s rich l ’

Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the
company kept back the due and. proper complimentary laugh
at- this pleasant joke. But. the silence was a little awkward.
Tom broke it:

' “ Huck’s got money. Maybe you don’t believe ig but he’s

 

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAW'YER. 301

got lots of it. Oh, you needn’t smile; I reckon I can show
you. You just wait a minute.’ 

Tom ran out. of doors. The company looked at each other
with a perplexed interest, and inquirineg at Huck, who was
tongue-tied. V

‘ Sid, what ails ‘ Tom?’ said Aunt Polly. ‘ lie—well,
there ain’t ever any making of that boy out. I never ’

Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and
Aunt Polly did not ﬁnish her sentence. Tom poured the mass
of yellow coin upon the table and said: '

‘There*what did I tell you? Half of it’s Huck’s, and
half of it’s mine!’

The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed,
nobody spoke for a moment. Then there was a unanimous call
for an explanation. Tom'said he could furnish it, and he did.
The tale was long, but brimful of interest. There was scarcely
an interruption from anyone to break the charm of its ﬂow.
When he had ﬁnished, Mr. Jones said:

‘ I thought I had ﬁxed up a little surprise for this occasion,
but it don’t amount to anything now. This one makes it» sing
mighty small, I’m willing to allow.’

The moneywas counted. The sum amounted to alittle over
twelve thousand dollars. It was more than anyone present
had ever seen at one time before, though several persons
were there who were worth considerably more than that in

property.

 

302 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER.

CHAPTER XXXV.

TEE reader may rest satisﬁed that Tom’s and Huck’s windfall
made a mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petershurg.
So vast a sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible.
It was talked about, gloated over, gloriﬁed, until the reason of
many of the citizens tattered under the strain of the unhealthy
excitement. Every ‘haunted’ house in St. Petersburg and
the neighbouring villages was dissected, plank by plank, and
its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden treasure—and
not by boys, but men—pretty grave, unromsntic men, too, some
of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted,
admired, tared at. The boys were not able to remember that
their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their
sayings were treasured and repeated; everything they did
seemed somehow to be regarded as remarkable; they had
evidently lost the power of doing and saying common-place
things; moreover, their past history was raked up and dis-
covered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village
paper published biographical sketches of the boys.

The Widow Douglas put Huck’s money out at six per cent.,
and Judge Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly’s
request. Each lad had an income now that was simply pro-
digious—a dollar for every week-day in the year and half of the
Sundays. It was just what the minister got—no, it was what
he was promised—he generally couldn’t collect it. A dollar
and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in

THE ADVENTURES OF T0111 8.4 W YER. 303

those old simple days—and clothe him and wash him, too, for
that matter.

Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He
said that no common-place boy would ever have got his daughter
out of the cave. When Becky told her father, in strict conﬁ~
denoe, how Tom had taken her whipping at school, the Judge
was visibly moved; and when she pleaded grace for the mighty
lie which Tom had told in order to shiﬁ: that whipping from her
shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a ﬁne outburst that it
was a noble, a generous, a maguanimous lie—a lie that was
worthy to hold up its head and march down through history
breast to breast with George Washington’s lauded Truth about
the hatchet! Becky thought her father had never looked so
tall and so superb as when he walked the ﬂoor and stamped his
foot and said that. She went straight OE and told Tom
about it.

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great
soldier some day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom
should be admitted to the National Military Academy, and
afterwards trained in the best law-school in the country, in
order that he might be ready for either career, or both.

Huck Finn’s wealth, and the fact that he was now under the
Widow Douglas’s protection, introduced him into society—no,
dragged him into it, hurled him into it—and his sufferings were
almost more than he could hear. The widow’s servants kept
him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they bedded him
nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot or
stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend.
He had to eat with knife and fork; he had to use napkin, cup
and plate; he had to learn his book; he had to go to church ;
he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in
his mouth ; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of
civilisation shut him in and bound him hand and foot.

304» TIIE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA WY ER.

He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day
turned up missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted
for him everywhere in great distress. The public were pro-
foundly concerned; they searched high and low, they dragged
the river for his body. Early the third morning Tom Sawyer

 

 

 

 

COMFORTABLE ONCE MORE.

wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down
behind the abandoned slaughter-home, and in one of them he
found the refugee. Huck had slept there ; he had just break-
fasted upon some stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying
off now, in comfort with his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed,
and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made him pic-

u

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 805

turesque in the days when he was free and happy. Tom routed
him out, told him the trouble he had been causing, and urged
him to go home. Huck’s face lost its trantu content, and
took a melancholy cast. He said:

‘ Don’t talk about it, Tom. I’ve tried it, and it don’t work ;
it don’t work, Tom. It ain’t for me ; I ain’t used to it. The
widder’s good to me, and friendly; but I can’t stand them ways.
She makes me git up just at the same time every morning; she
makes me wash, they comb me all to thunder; she won’t let
me sleep in the wood-shed; I got to wear them blamed clothes
that just smothers me, Tom; they don’t seem to any air git
through ’em, somehow; and they’re so rotten nice that I can’t
set down, nor lay down, nor roll around auywheres; I ain’t slid
on a cellar-door for—well, it ’pears to be years; I got to go to
church, and sweat and sweat—I hate them ornery sermons! I
can’t ketch a ﬂy in there, I can’t chaw, I got to wear shoes all
Sunday. The widder eats by a. bell; she goes to bed by a bell;
she gets up by a bell—everything’s so awful reg’lar a body can’t
stand it.’

‘ Well, everybody does that way, Huck.’

‘Tom, it don’t make no diﬂ'erence. I ain’t everybody, and -
I can’t stand it. It’s awful to be tied up so. And grub comes
too easy—I don’t take no interest in vittles that way. I got to
ask to go a ﬁshing; I got to ask to go in a swimming~dem’d
if I ain’t got to ask to do everything. Well, I’d got to'talk
so nice it wasn’t no comfort; I'd got to go up in the attic and
rip out a while every day to git a taste in my mouth, or Pd 9.
died, Tom. The widder wouldn’t let me smoke, she wouldn’t
let me yell, she wouldn’t let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch
before folks.’ [Then with a spasm of special irritation and in-
jury] : ‘ And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see
such a woman! I had to shove, Tom, I just had to. And
besides, that school’s going to open, and I’d a had to go to it;

x l

306 THE ADVENTvRES OF TOM SAWYBR.

well, I wouldn’t stand that, Tom. Looky here, Torn, being
rich ain’t what. it’s cracked up to be. It’s just worry and
worry, and sweat and sweat, and a wishing you was dead all
the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar’l suits me,
and I ain’t. ever going to shake ’em any more. Tom, I wouldn’t
ever got into all this trouble if it hadn‘t ’a’ hen for that money ;
now you just. take my sheer of it along with your’n, and gimme
a tenocenter sometimes—not many times, becuz I don’t give a
dern for a thing ’thout it’s tollable hard to git—~and you go
and beg 03' for me with the widder.’

‘Oh, Huck, you know I can’t do that. ’Tain’t fair; and
besides, if you’ll try this thing just a while longer you’ll come
to like it.’

‘Like it! Yes—the way I’d like a hot stove if I was to
set on it long enough. No, Tom, I won’t; be rich, and I won’t
live in them cussed smothery houses. I like the woods, and
the river, and hogsheads, and I’ll stick to ’91:; too. Blame it
all X just as we’d got guns, and a cave, and all just ﬁxed to rob,
here this dern foolishness has got to come up and spile it all! ’

Tom saw his opportunity: ‘

‘ Looky here, Huck, being rich ain’t going to keep me back
from turning robber.’

‘ No! 01), good licks, are you in real dead-wood earnest,
Tom ? ’

‘Just as dead earnest as I’m a sitting here. But, Huck,
we can’t let you into the Gang if you ain’t respectable, you
know.’

Buck’s joy was quenched.

‘ Can’t let me in, Tom ? Didn’t you let me go for a pirate ? ’

‘ Yes, but that’s ditferent. A robber is more high-toned
than what a pirate is—as a general thing. In most countries
they‘re awful high up in the nobility—dukes and such.’

‘ Now, Tom, ain’t you always hen friendly to me? You

THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 307

wouldn’t shet me out, would you, Tom ? You wouldn’t do that,
now, would you, Tom?’

‘ Huck, I wouldn’t want to, and I don’t want to, but what
would people say? Why they’d say, “ Mph! Tom Sawyer's
Gang! pretty low characters in it ! ” They’d mean you, Huck.
You wouldn’t like that, and I wouldn‘t.’

 

 

x

way

"f/ﬁ/A lawn

 

HIGH UP IN SOCIETY.

Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle.
Finally he said :

‘ Well, I’ll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it,
and see if I can come to stand it, if you’llJlet me b’long to the
Gang, Tom.’ '

 

308 THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SA W YER.

‘ All right, Huck,.it’s a. whiz ! Come along, old chap, and
I‘ll ask the widow to let up on you a little, Huck.’

‘ Will you, Tom, now will you? That’s good. If she’ll let
up on some of the roughest things, I’ll smoke private and cuss
private, and crowd through or bust. When you going to start
the Gang and turn robbers ? ’

. ‘ Oh, right 03'. We’ll get the boys together, and have the
initiation to-night, maybe.’

‘ Have the which?’

‘ Have the initiation.’

‘ What’s that?’

‘ It’s to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the
Gang's secrets, even if you’re chopped all to ﬂinders, and kill
anybody and all his family that hurts one of the Gang.’

‘That’s gay—that’s mighty gay, Tom, I tell you.’

‘ Well, I bet it is. And all that swearing‘s got to be done
at midnight, in the. lonesomest, awfullest place you can ﬁnd——
a ha’nted house is the best, but they’re all ripped up", now.’

‘ Well, midnight’s good, any way, Tom.’

‘ Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a cofﬁn, and sign
it with blood."

‘ Now that’s something like! Why, it’s a. million times
bullier than pirating. I’ll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom;
and if 1 git to be a reg-’lar ripper of a robber, and everybody
talking ’bont it, I reckon she’ll be proud she snaked me in out
of the wet.’

\f e. THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER. 309

CONCLUSION.

S0 ended: this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a boy,
it must stop here; the story could not go much further without
becoming the history of a man. When one writes a novel about
grown people, he knows exactly where to stop—that is, with
a marriage ; but when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where
he best can.

Most of the characters that perform in this book still live,
and are prosperous and happy. Some day it may seem worth
while to thke up the story of the younger ones again, and see
what sort of men and women they turned out to be 3 therefore
it will be wisest not 00 reveal any of that part of their lives at
present. '

zonal: rum-In 31
IPGI'TXIWOODI A!» no" Irv-nun nun
Alli Murmur rrnln

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

