CHAPTER 1.

DOWN TUE RABBIT-HOLE.

"ALICE was beginning to get Ver tired of I
sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having
nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into

“ the book her sister was reading, but. it had no

,‘pictures or conversations in it, “andehat is
B

 

2 DUVVN TH E

the use of a book,” thought Alice, “without
pictures or conversations?”

So she was considering in her own mind,
(as well as she could, for the hot day made
her feel very sleepy and stupid,) whether the
pleasure of making a daisy-chain would he
worth the trouble of getting up and picking the '
daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with pink
eyes ran close by her. i

There was nothing so very remarkable in
that; nor did Alice think it so very much out
of the way to hear the Rabbit: say to itself,
“Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be too late!”
(when she thought it over afterwards, it oc-
tuned to her that she ought to have wondered
at this, but at the time it all seemed quite
natural ;)' but when the Rabbit actually took ct-
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at
it, and then hurried on, Alice startch to her
feet, for it ﬂashed across her mind that sherhad
never before, seen a rabbit with L either a waist;

coat-pocket, or a watch to take out of it, and, y i

 

RABBIT-HOLE. 3

burning with curiosity, she ran across the ﬁeld
after it, and was just in time to see it pop
down a. large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after

it, never once considering how in the world
she was to get out again.

The rabbit—hole went straight on like a
tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly
down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment i
to think about stopping herself before she found
herself falling down what seemed to he a very
deep well.

L Either the well was very deep, or she fell
very-slowly, for she had plenty of time as she
went down to look about her, and to wonder
what was going to happen next. First, she tried
to look down and make out what she was
coming to, but it was too dark to see anything:
then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were ﬁlled with cupboards
and book—shelves: here and there she saw maps

and pietures hung upon pegs. She took down

‘4 ‘ DOWN THE

:1 jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it.

was labellec “ORANGE MARMALADE,” but

to her great disappointment it was empty: she

did not like to drop the jar for‘fear of killing 
somebody underneath, so managed to put it into '
one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

“\Velll” thought Alice to herself, “after
such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of’
tumbling down stairs! How brave they’ll all
think me at home! Why, I'wouldn’t say any-
thing about it, even if Ifell off the top of the
house I” (WVhich was very likely true)

Down, doivn, down. \Vould the fall never,
come to an end! “I wonder how many miles
I’ve fallen by this time?” she said aloud. i‘ “I I
must be‘ getting somewhere near thereentre of

'the earth. ‘Let me see: that would be four‘
thousand miles down, I thinhw” (for, you see,*
Alice had learnt several things of this sort in
her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this
was not a only good opportunity for showing Off  .

her knowledge, as there was no one to listen ‘

 

RABBIT-HOLE. 5

her, still it was good practice to say it over)
“—yes, that’s about the right distance—but then
I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I’ve got
tO?” (Alice had not the slightest idea what
Latitude was, or Longitude either, but she
thought they were nice grand words to say.)
Presently she began again. “I wonder if
I shall fall right through the earth! How funny
it'll seem to come out among the people that
walk with their heads downwards! The Anti‘
pathies, I think—" (she was rather glad there
’was no one listening, this time, as it didn’t
sound at all the right word) “~but I shall
have to ask them what the name of the country
is, you know. Please, Ma’am, is this New

Zealand or Australia T’ (and she tried to eurtsey

 

as she spoke fancy czw‘lseying as you’re falling
through the air! Do you think you could
manage it ?) “And what an ignorant little girl
she’ll think me for asking! N0, it’ll never do
to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up

- Somewhere."

H DOWN THE

 

Down, down, down. There was nothing else to , 5

do, so Alice soon began talking again. “Dinah’ll
miss me y’ very much to-night, I should think!”
(Dinah was the cat) “I hope they’ll remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah, my dear!
1 wish you were down here with me! 'There
are no mice in the air, I’m afraid, but you
might catch a hat, and that’s very like a mouse,
you know. Butdo eats eat hats, I wonder?”
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and
went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort
of way, “Do eats eat bats? Do cats eat bats '9”
and sometimes, “Do bats eat eats?” for, you
see, as she couldn't answer either question, it
didn’t much matter which way she put it. She
felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun
to dream that she was walking hand in hand
with Dinah, and was saying to her very;
earnestly, “New, Dinah, tell me the truth: did
you ever eat a bat?” when suddenly, thump!
thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks,
and dry leaves, and the fall was oyen

 

RABBIT-HOLE. 4

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up
on to her feet in a moment: she looked up,
but it was all dark overhead; before her was
another long passage, and the White Rabbit‘was
still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not
a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the
wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as
it turned a corner, “Oh my ears and whiskers,
how late it’s getting!” She was close behind it
when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was
no longer to be seen: she found herself in a

long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of
lamps hanging from the root

There were doors all round the hall, but they
were all looked; and when Alice had been all
the way down one side and up the other, trying
every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged
table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing

hon it but a tiny golden key7 and Alice’s ﬁrst

idea was that this might belong to one of the

   

~s,- *  ' IlU)\'z\":'I‘HH

 

doors ol‘ the hull; but, 1:11:19? Either tlie‘mlodm
Wolfe too largo, 01‘“ Lt-he key was m3 small; L
at any rate it would not open "any of them;
However, on Lthe second time round, she came“:
L I upon a“. low];
curtain sho had
not noticed bov

fore, and  be:

 

 

hind it, W’Vnﬂ T

 

 

 

a. little (loof ',
about . yﬁfteén

, inchos “I ’lxigllf '
slle tried thé  
little ' goldelq ii

 

 ‘ key in “the ‘
lock, and to hel‘ gl‘oatv(leligl1t:‘it ﬁttedl L  L L
Alice opened the door and, found thatrltjiledf
into n small passage;- nof much larger thzmi a]
rat—hole: she knelt down and looked along the*
passage into the lovélieSt gardel’xyoﬂ ever saw,‘
How 3110 lenged‘ to, got out of that dark 11311;]:

anrl'wanclerabout among thoso'lgéds'xof bright?

 

 

 

RABBIT-HOLE. 9

ﬂowers and those cool fountains, but she could
not even get her head through the doorway ;
“and even if my head would go through,”
thought poor Alice, “it would be of Very little
use ‘without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I
could shut up like at telescopel I think I could,
if I only knew how to begin.” For, you see, so
many out—of—the—way things had happened lately,
that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by
the little door, so she went back to the table,
half hoping she might ﬁnd another keyon it,
or at any rate at book 'of rules for shutting
people up like telescopes: this time she found
a little bottle on it, (“ which certainly was not
here before,” said Alice,) and tied round the
neck of the bottle was :1, paper label, with the
words “DRINK ME,” beautifully printed on it
in large letters.

I It was, all Very well to say “Drink me," but
the wise little Aline was not going to do that
c

 

 

   

  
    

10 . ' V ,,1)'0\\"Nfriua

n"

and,

 

yin’ a- huiTy. “Nu, 1’11 1091;,ﬁrst,j’rshc‘sﬁid, I
I , sec Whethei" , it’s , I I I V
mailich ‘1m’z'sou’ or r
not § ”- fof she had I
read swam} nice r
little stories about
children who had
gubburht and eaten
up by vwild,” beasts"
and otherfuupleusunt- -
thinng {til because
they Would ﬁctio-

' member the ' simple

  

rules their friends 2-

  
  
   
  
  

L .r had taught them :V such as, that a Vijcd-hutwpoké
Win burn you if you hold it too long; mu

1:;
,.

that you cut your ,‘ﬁngcr i054]; idéeplyy \v
u knife,‘r it usually bleeds; and slip, 11ml ileyéi
bafﬂe

",nmrk‘ed “poison,” it is almost: certain: tO'disagreé

   

forgotten that? if‘ you drink much fromi

with you, sooner ‘01‘ later.

i ' Tlou'evc'i', this bottle was-not mini-ken ‘7pm§on,

 

ItABBl’l'—HULE.  11

so Alice ventured to taste it, and ﬁndng it
very nice, (it; had, in fact, a sort of mixed.
ﬂavour of cherry-tart, custard, pineaapple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she veiy
soon ﬁnished it off

age as

 

“ that a curious feeling K” said Alive ; “I must
he shutting up like a. telescope.”

And so it was indeed: she was now only
ten inches high, and her face lirightened up
at the thought that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that
lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a
few minutes to see if she was going to shrink
any further: she felt a little nervous about
this; “ for it might end, you know,” said Alien
to herself, “ in my going out altogether, like a
candle. I wonder what I should he like then?”
'-And she tried to fancy what the ﬂame of a

candle looks like after the candle is hlown out,

1'1 ])U\VX ’1‘“ IC

for she could not remember ever having seen
such a thing.

‘After a while, ﬁnding that nothing more
happened, she decided on going into the garden
at once; but, alas for poor Alice! When she got
to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to
the table for it, she found she could not possibly
reach it: she could see it quite plainly through
the glass, and she tried her best to climb up,
one of the legs of the table, but it was too
slippery; and when she had tired herself out
with trying, the poor little thing sat down
and cried.

“Come, there’s no use in cryng like that!“
said Alice to herself, rather sharply ; “I advise
you to leave off this minute!” She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she
very seldom followed it,) and sometimes she
scolded herself so severely as to bring fears
into her eyes; and once she remembered trying

to hex her own ears for having cheated herself

RABBIT-HOLE. 13

in a game of croquet she was playing against
herself, for this curious child was very fond of
pretending to be two people. “But it’s no use
now,” thought poor Alice, “ to pretend to be two
people! \Vhy, there’s hardly enough of me left
to make one respectable person I ”

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that
was lying under the table: she opened it, and
found in it a very small cake, on which the
words “EAT ME" were beautifully marked in
curralits. “ Well, I’ll eat it,” said Alice, “and if
it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key;
and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door; so either way I’ll get into the
garden, and I don’t care which happens!”

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to
herself, “Which way? which way?” holding her
' hand on the top of her head to feel which way
it was growing, and she was quite surprised
to ﬁnd that she remained the same size: to be
sure, this is what generally happens when one

eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CHAPTER II.
THE POOL OF TEARS.

“CURIOUSER and
euriouser l” cried Alice
(she was so much sur-
prised, that for the
moment she quite for—
got how to speak good
English) ; “ now I’m
opening out like the
largest telescope that
ever was! Good-bye,
feet I ” (for when she
looked down at her
feét, they seemed to
he almost out of sight,
they were getting so
far off)‘ “0h,myp00r
little feet, I wonder;

 

16 THE POOL

who will put, on your shoes and stockings for
you new, doors? I’m sure ,I shrm’t be able! I
shall be a great deal too far elf to trouble my-
self'about you: you must manage the best way
you can ;—but I must be kind to them,” thought 
Aliee, “or perhaps they won’t walk 'the way I
want to go! Let me see: I’ll give them it new
pair of boots every Christmas,” \

And she went on planning to herself: how she
would manage it. “ They must go by the carrier,” - I
she thought; “and how funny it'll seem, sending"
presents to one’s own feet! And how odd the
directions will look!  I * I

Alice’s Right Foot, Esq.
Hearﬂmay,
near the Fender,
(with Alice’s low.)
Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking! ",

Just at this moment her head struck against the

roof of the hall: in fact she wins nowrather more
‘ than nine feet high, and she at once took up the 

little golden key and hurried off to-the garden door. "

 

 

  
    
  
 

0F TEARS. 17

'P001' Alice! lt was as much as, she could do,
ﬂing down on one side, to look through into
the garden with One eye ; but to get through
as, more hopeless than ever :r she sat clown and
began To try again. '

“L You ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said
:VAlic'e, “a, great girl like you,” (she might well
is'ay this) “to go on crying in this way! Shop
:tllls momentl tell you!” But she went on till

the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there

 

,nms a large pool all round her, about four inches
‘ deep and reaching half down ,the hall‘

I 'After time she heard a little pattering of

 

feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her

 

eyes to see what was coming. It was the \Vhite I

Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with an pair

 

of white kid gloves in one hand and a large

    
  
  
  

lair in the other: he came trotting along in LL
greet: hurry, muttering to himself as he came,
“Ohl the Duchess,the* Duchess! Oh! won’t she L
be sewage if I’ve kept her waiting!” Alice

 

felt-‘30 desperate that she was ready to ask help

 

     

13 . , r0011

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

of; any one; sd,’yvh0n the Rabbit {tame hear: her,
she begaﬁ, in a low, timiéi voice, ‘fIf :ybﬁ p1éas¢,g
sir, ” The Rabbit sﬁar‘ted violently; dropped
thqwhite kid‘glovés and the fin,- ahd skﬁfried-

away into, the darkneSS asheprd'ﬁs‘he Cbuld g

 

 

   
 
   

or TEARS. 19

   

r Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the
hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all
the time she went on talking: “Dear, dear!

 

How queer everything is to-dayl And yester—
(lay, things Went on just as usual. I wonderif
I’ve been changed in the night? Let me think:
[Was I the same when I got up this morning?
v I Lalmost think I can remember feeling a little
Tdiﬁ'erent. But if ‘I’m not, the some, the next
question is, Who in the world am 1? Ah, that’s
the. great puzzle 1” And she began thinking, over
I all the children she knew, that were of the
’1‘ same age as herself, to see if she could have
been changed for any of them.
“I’m sure I’m not Ada," she said, “for her
: hail" goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn’t
go in ringlets at all; and. I’m sure I can’t he
Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
’1‘ 0h! She knows such a very little! Besides, she’s

she, and I’m I, and—oh (leer, how puzzling it

 

, eull isl I’ll try ifl know all the things I used

1, to know. Let me see: four times ﬁve is twelve,

 

 

   
    
  
 

or TEARS.  21,

i“l’m~ sure those are not the right words,”
aid poor Alice, and her eyes ﬁlled \ﬁth tears
:again as she went on, “I must he Mabel after
all, and I shall have to go and live in that;
poliy little house, and have next to noitoys to

play with, and 011! over so many lessons to

 

learn! No, I’ve made up my mind about it;
if l’m Mabel, I’ll stay down here! It’ll be no
muse their putting their heads down and saying,

‘Come up again, dear!’ I shall only look up

 

and so , ‘tho am I then? Tell me that ﬁrst,
y ,

 
 
 
 

and then, if 'I like being that person, I’ll come
rip: if not, I ’ll stay down here till I’m, some-
: body, else’——but, oh dear!” cried Alice, with, :L,

‘snclden burst of tears, “I do wish they would

 

'Jut their heads down! I am so rem tired of
l , , J

 

i‘be‘ing all alone here is,”

  
 

‘ 'VLA's she said this she looked down at her
hands, and was surprised to see that she had
put on one of the Rabbit’s little white kid gloves
:n’hile she-was talking. “How can I have done

that 3" she thought. “I innst he growing small

 

 

 

22 ’ THE POOL ‘

again.” She got up and wth to the table to
-measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly‘
as she could guess,‘ she was new about, two feet
high, and was going en shrinking rapidly : she
soon: found out that the eause of this was the"
fan she was holding, and she drolipcd it hastily, 1‘
just in time to save herself from shrinking away L
altogether.’ I ,

“That was a.‘ narrow escapel", said Alice, La '
good deal frightened at the; sudden change, but

s:

, very glad to ﬁnd herself still in existence;  and‘
now for the gardenl’h and she ran with all '»
speed back to the little door: but, alasl the
ylittleidoor was shut again} and the little golden,
key was lying on the glass table'as before, “and
things are worse than ever,” thought the poor I
child, “for I nei‘cr was so small as this before, I
never! Andl declare it’s too had, that it isl’,’ I ‘

As she said these Words her foot slipped},
and in another moment, splash! she »‘ was up to
her chin in salt Water. Her ﬁrst; idea. was that];

she had somehow fallen into the sea; ‘gantl'in

 

 

 

 

OF TEARS. 23

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i that case I can go back bynrailway,” she said
to herself. (Alice had been to the seaside once
in her life, and had come to the general eon-
, ‘elusibn, that wherever you go to on the English
y'coast; you 'ﬁnd a number of bathing machines
nin the seagsorne children digging in the sand
’with wooden spades, then a row of lodging
houses, and behind them a railway station.)

HoWeVer, she soon made out that she was in
~the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.

“I wish I hadn’t cried so much I” said Alice,

as she swam about, trying to ﬁnd her way out;

 

 

 

‘ ‘ \y is queer td-détyf’,

 

 

 

   
   
  
  
  
   
  
    
    
   
   

24   V’ \y-frH'E POOL
n ; “I shall he pimis’hed fbr Vitrnowr', supposea "by
being drowpedinv myowﬁli teal?! Tha't vat/(371m

 

: a‘quéer‘ thing: to, béysurél Hoi’xﬁ'éryeyerythiy

Just- khan V5110 heafd [something Splashing
about in the 17061 51, little Way off, and She ,swmn’
' nearer to make out L\\"hut\ it; was} atﬁl‘sti'fs 

 

thought it mﬁ‘st'r'he, a walrus‘br llippopotamué
I but then. she: remembered 110W small She «\x'us
“110w, and she soon made out’ihat ,it‘wzis (in! "

 

immusé thathhad slipped in’ iikefhel'sevlf.’

“Would “it “be‘ of any, usé7 110m?" jt1;011g11t

 

 

L ‘ Alida, “Ito to :tlii‘i‘s ‘1i10use31!,Everyﬂ'ﬁngjs
V50 butaﬂtlw-ﬁgy down; here,’rtha;fl131161.11” thi
'"\jery likely {zany ’tzﬂk: at any:
 Dd harm in ytfying.” 3‘, So She ,beg:m: g“ M
I, do [YQLIL/kﬁOSY the y'ayvoutibf \thié'pool? j
very ,tired'pf ‘s‘wjmmiﬁgvahoup lyierey‘Q (Inge
(Alice {thought-this must be {the ﬁght" ‘
-‘ speziking' £0 a mouse: ' she: had/newer ﬁche";
'V‘aIVthihg beforé, but ,shej'ememlgereﬁ hayihg‘ﬁe‘e",
1 her brothérfs Latin Gréunmar; , 'r‘ I a

0F TEARS. ' 25

  

 

y’of a mouse—to a mouse a mousewO mouse I ")
,The'Mouse leoked at her rather inquisitively, and
seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.

“Perhaps it doesn’t understand English,”

 

thought Alice; “1 daresay it’s a French mouse,

f come over with William the Conqueror.” (For,
with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no
very clear notion how long ago anything had
happened.) So she began again: “Oh est ma
chatte?” which was the ﬁrst sentence in her
French lesson-book, The Mouse gave a sudden
leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver
all over with fright. “ Oh, I beg your pardon I”

I cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the

i, poor animal’s feelings. “I quite forgot you didn’t
like cats."

H "‘ Not like cats! ” cried the Mouse, in a shrill,
r-passionate Voice. “Would you like cats if you

’ ravere me ?”

i “\Vell, perhaps not,” said Alice in a sooth-

iing: tone: “don’t be angry about it. And yet

 

E

 

it, (103

, ESE”? ‘ “

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“ﬁanélV ah

I iéely» :th’e ‘ ﬁfe, lhekiﬁg’ 111.215
ml She~i§ sir. U

v . Again, forf'thx's .

11 Wear, ﬁnd: ‘ $1 

 

 

or TEARS. \ V , 27

yoﬁ‘ended. y"‘\Ve> won't talk about herany more
you’d rather not.” L y
L I “\Ve, indeed!” cried the Mouse, who; was
y'tremhling down to the end of his mil. “As if I
,' Would‘talk on such u‘subject! Our family always
ﬂuted eats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don’t
let me hear the name again l ”

“I won’t indeed!” said Alice, in a great

hurry to fchnnge the subject of conversation.

 

1‘‘Are you are you fond—of—of dogs?” The
5 Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly:
"i‘i'i‘here is such a' nice little dog near our house
I should like to show you! A little bright-i

5 eyed terrier, you know, with ohl such long

 

' curly brown hair! And it’ll fetch things when
‘ you throw them, and it’ll sit up and beg for

 

' its dinner, and all sorts of things—l can’t re-

member half of themeand it belongs to a

 

  
 
 

er‘er,‘ you know, and he'says it’s souseful,

It’s worth a hundred pounds! He says it kills

 

 

y”

all the rats and—oh dear; 'cried' Alice in a

 

rsorrmrful' tone. “I’m afraid I've offended it

 

28  THE POOLVOF TEARS.

agaiul” For the Mouse was swimming {may
from her as hard as it could go, and making
quite [a Commotion in the pool as it went.  

So she called softly "after it: “Mouse deaf!
Do come back againoaudiwe won’t talk about;
cats or dogs either, if you don't like themI-T
\Vh‘en the Mouse heard this, itlturned’round
and swam slowly back to 1101’: its face was
quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and
it; said in a low, trembling 'voice, “Let us, ge*t"
to the shore, and then I’ll tell, you my’histvoi-y,
and you’ll understand why it is I hate cats
and dogs.” I L   i '

It was high time to go, for the pool was
getting quite crowded, with the birds and' ani’ -
mals that had fallen into it: there \vei-ga
and a Deck), a Lory and ran Eaglet, and several,
other curious creatures. Alice led the Way, and,
the Whole party swam to the shore.

 

 

 

 

CHAPTER III.’ ,

A GAUGES-RACE AND A LONG TALE.

THEY were indeed a queer-looking party that

    
    
 
 

Us’seﬁlbled on the. bank—the birds With draggled
feathers, the animals With théir fur (ﬂinging close
ix) them, and all chipping wet, cross, and un-
omfortable.  i '

The ﬁrst questioh of course was, how to get;
dryagain: they had a callstlltdtiOII about this,

  

3O ‘ ' CAUCUSeHACE

and after a fewrwminutes it, seemed quite naturth 
to Aliceito ﬁnd [herself talking fatlhlliarl)* with
them, llS if she had known them all her life, H
Indeed, lshe l1a(l quite, a long ' argument with f
the Lory, who at'last turned sulky, and «9011ch7
011ly’say,'“I am- oldef than you, and must kriwa
betterg” and, this Alice" would not allow, with: :
out knox'ving how old it was, and as the Lory
positively refused to tell its age, there was no ,
more to be said.  ' l
 At lastothe Mouse, who seemedylto he a
- pe1'son of some authority among them, challocl V’
out, “Sit-r.l0“j11, all of you, and llsten to me!
I’ll soon make you dry enough!” Theylall sat'
down at once, in a large ‘ ring, with, the, Mohée I I
yin the ’1nicldlo. Alice kept llcl” eyes anxiously
ﬁxed on it, for she felt stire she would catch, a
bad cold if she did not get ’(lry very 50011;,
“Ahem‘! ” said the Mouse with an important
air, ‘L‘arc you all ready? Thisis the driest thing L
I know. Silence all roulul, ’if‘/1y011 [pylea‘scl I

“William' the Conqueror, 'whose, cause ix‘a$',

 

 

 

AND A LONG TALE. 31

favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to

by the English, who wanted leaders, and had

{bean of, late much accustomed to usurpation and

conquest. Edwin and Mercer, the earls of
7»

, Mercia and Northumhriziﬂ
“Ugh!” said the Lory, with a shiver.

 

“I beg your pardon I ” said the Mouse,
i frowning, but very politely: “Did-you speak ’4”
“ Not I!” said the Lory hastily.
“I thought you did,” said the Mouse—“I
proceed. ‘Edwin and Morear, the earls of

Mercia and Northulnbria, declared for him;

 

v’ and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of

 

  

J»

Canterbury, found it advisable—~
“Found what ?” said the Duck.
“Found 2'2,” the Mouse replied rather crossly:
“of course you know What ‘it’ means.”
“I know what ‘it’ means well enough, when

ﬁnd at thing,” said the Duck: “it’s generally

 

a frog or a worm. The question is, what did
the archbishop ﬁnd?”

 The Mouse did not notice this ‘question, but

  

 

 

 

 
  

32 j ‘jA‘cAtets-ﬁmnf

   

hurriedly went on,”” found it advisabICVtOvO

 

, with Edgar 'Athéﬁug / . 1119915‘LWi11’iaD1and affer’y‘ 

 

 

  
  
 

him the é1'0\\'n.,i*Wi]liam’s conductz at} ﬁrstkﬂ
moderate. But Ithe-iiisolyence of hiS’N()1‘!11{lDS—~,, '

 

How aré yqu‘getting/ on nommy dear ?” “it can
’ tinned, turning to Alice-as it’spyokepy‘; 3 H
“ Asv‘wetdas‘,e'ver," sait} Alice, in a. melanchol

 

 

 

tend: y“,it doesn't seam mydl'y’ me 'ati‘a'll.”, ‘

 

“In: that; liaise}? 7 said ,the "Dodo solemnly,

rising t6 ‘ its feét, ‘ “I” move that, the ‘nie'étin’g ,y

 

adjourn, for ,the immediate adoption ofy‘more ‘
energetic remedies?” '   ' I , I ‘ ¥ 1 J
: ‘y‘ Speak English I ”’said the Eaglet.’ ’ “In (101)

L‘ knox'v ythc‘ 1n¢anigg half

 
  
    
   
  
 

   

and, What’s 1110131 don’t believe youle either
 And ‘the Eaglet, byént dokvn its'hezid’ f0 hide

  

smiln} some- offvthe oﬂmrrbirdsy I  .
“WVWhat I Wis going to gay! sﬁid Dod‘
L [in an offended 'tone‘, g‘rix'ns;.rt]151t ﬂle trims: {thiﬁﬁ
, to get usdff Wduld a; Caumﬁ—ﬁadé” ‘
L“ What is gCYaucus-rz‘tééf” said ,Alicg; (no
V that fskhye \vzin’ted much; to" knowrybgtith’é;DadsI

 

 
    
  
  
   
  

LAND A. LONG TALE. 33

iad’ paused as if it thought that somebody ought
‘toispeak, and no one else seemed inclined to
anything.

‘é‘Vhyf’ysaid the Dodo, “the best way to
explainit is to do it.” (And as you might like
to try the thing yourself, some winter day, l
’ ill tell you how the Dodo managed it.)

First it marked out a race—course, in a sort
of Circle, (“the exact shape doesn’t matter,” it ‘
,vsaid,)yan(l then all the party were placed along
the course, here and there. There was 110 “One
,twoi,rythreey, and away,” but they began running
When they liked, and left off when they liked, so
that it was not easy to know when the race was
['over. However, when they had been running half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo
suddenly called out, “ The race is over i” and they

 

hall crowded round it, panting, and asking, '“ But

   
 
 

,who has won 2”
y This question the Dodo could not answer
Jwithout at great deal of thought, and it sat for

 

,3. long time with one ﬁnger pressed upon its

F

3i, ' A CAUCUS—RAUE

forehead, (the iPositioyn 'in which you usimlly I

 

see Shakespeare, in: the pictures of him) while
I the restwaitecl in silence. At lastthe Dodo said,

 

’“Every'bodgj has Won, [and all, must have prizes.” '

“But who is to give the prizes?” quite,
’chorus of voices asked. I I y I

“Why, 3716, of course,” said the Dodo,‘ point—Vi,‘j
ing to Alice iivit'h, one ﬁnger; and} the whole-
party at once crowded round her, calling youth in
a confused way, “ Prizes! Prizes l ”"

Alice had no idea what to (lo, and insdespair  ‘
she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out
a box of comﬁts; (luckily the salt Watef had not
got into it,) iandhanded themiromid as' prizesi
There was exactly one a—piece,‘all reund. ‘

“But she must have a prize herself, yon
know,” said the Mouse. , i I V

“Of course,” the Dodo; replied very gravely.
“What else have you got in your pocket?” he '
went on,’ turningyto Alice. ’

“Only a thimhle,” said Alice sadly- 

“Hand it over here,” saicl the DMO.

 

   

AN'JJHA um; TALE.

a?

 

 Theh they all crowded round her once more,
While the Dodo solemnly presented ’th- thimble,
Saying “ We beg your acceptance of this clegﬁnt
tliimbleﬂ’ and, when it had ﬁnislled‘this short

 

:Specch, they all cheered.

 

 

 

gr. I A owns—RACE 

Alice thought the whole’ thing very absurd;
but they all looked so, grave [that she did not"
dare to laugh; and as shé ,could notythink of»,’
anything to say, she‘ simply bowed, and took the ‘i
thimble, looking as solemn as she could. {

i The next thing was to eat the comﬁts: this '
caused some noise and confusion, as the :lai‘ge
birds complained that they could not taste theirs,
and the small ones choked and had to he patted ‘/
on the back. However, it was over at last, and
they sat down again in a ring, and begged the
Mouse to tell them something more. I

“You promised to‘tell may your history, you‘
know,” said Alice, “and why it is you hate—C ‘ 
and D,” she added in a. Whisper, half afraid that
it would be offended again. i

“Mine is a long and a szid tale!” said tho i'
Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.

“It is a long tail, certainly,” said Alice,
looking down‘ with wonder at the House’s tail; '
“ But why do‘you call it sad ?”, And she kept on :

puzzling about. it while the Mouse was ’spealiing,’

 

 

33 r A  (“tops-11391:. ‘

“,You are not attending!" said the Mouse 1

to 'Alice, severely. “What, are you thinking or? ” M’

 

“I beg your pardon,” said Alice very humbly'fz
“you had got to the ﬁfth bench I think ? ”  y

“l, harl amt!” criéd the Mouse, sharply and
very angrily. , i /

“A knot ! ” said Alice, always ready to make ,
herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
“ 0h, (loi'leti me help to undo itl‘y  i

“I shall do nothing of the sOrt,” said the,
Mouse, getting up, and walking away. “You:
insult me by talking such nonsense !” i V

“I didn’t mean iitl’i’ ipleaded Poor, Alicia.
“ But you’re so easily oﬁ'ended, you knowl" ‘

The Mouse only‘growlctl in reply. ’

“Please come back, undyiﬁnish your story!” i'
Aline called after it; and the others all joinie‘tl”:
in chorus, “Yes, please do!” hut the hloilse i
only shook its hearl’impatienﬂy. and walked av;
‘ little quicker. i i i . V
“What u‘ pity it} wouldn’t stuiyl'y’ sighed *

the Lory, as 'soon'as it was quite out of sight;

 

 

 

 

AND A LONG TALE. ' 39

,I:Lnd an old Crab took the opportunity of saying
irto' her daughter, “Ah, my dear! Let this be

L lesson to you never to lose your temper!”

 

 

, ‘Hold your tongue, Ma!” said the young Grab,
’a little snappisllly. “You’re enough to try the
«,«pa't-ienee of an oyster I ” i

i y “I Wish I had our Dinah here, I know I
do!” said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in
particular. “She’d soon fetch it back 1”

“And who is Dinah, if I might venture to
ask the question?” said the Lory. ‘
y,  Alice replied eagerly, for she was 511wayS
[ready to' talk about her pet: “Dinah’s your
seat. Andrshe’s such aieapital‘ one for catching
i mice, you can’t think! i And oh, I wish you
y-ieould see her after the birds! \Vhy, she ’11 eat
a little bird as soon as look at it i”

 

 

This speech caused a remarkable sensation
Yamon’g the party. Some of the birds hurried

‘oﬂ‘ at once: one old Magpie began wrapping

 

 

itself up very carefully, remarking, “I really,

 

:must be getting home; the night-air doesn’t

 

 

4n A cAUoUs-RACE AND A LOxG TALE.

Suit my throat!" and a Canary Lcalled out it ,
trembling voice’to its children, “ Come away, '
clears! It’s high time you were all‘iu bed l” on,
various pretexts they all moved off, andAlice'

was soon left alone. L y

y “I wish I hadn’t mentioned Dinah l ” she”
said to herself in a melancholy tone. V “Nobody ~k
seems to like her, down here, and 13:1 sure she’s;
the best cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah!

I wonder if I shall ever see you any more!”

And here 'poor Alice began to cry again, for she,
felt very, lonely and law‘spirite‘di In a‘ little

while, however, she again heard a little patter! '
ing of footsteps in the distance, and she looked
up eagerly, half hoping that ‘the Mouse had *
changed his mind, and was coming back to

ﬁnish his story.

 

 

 

 

CHAPTER IV.
THE RABBIT sENDs IN A LITTLE BILL.

IT was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly
back again, and looking anxiously about as it
went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself, “The Duchess! The
Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and
Whiskers! She’ll get me executed, as sure as
ferrets are ferrets! \Vhere can I have dropped
them, I wonder?” Alice guessed in a moment
that it was looking for the fan and the pair
of White kid gloves, and she very good—naturally
began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to beseenievcrything seemed to have

('1

42 THE RABBIT MINDS

changed since her swim in the pool, :1an the
great hull, with the glass table and the little
door, had vanished completely. '

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she
went huntingﬁbout, and called out to her in
an angry tone, “\Vhy, Mary Ann, what are you
doing out here’.l 'Run home this moment, and
fetch me a pair of gloves and a fanl, Quick,‘
now!” And Alice was so much flightened that
she ran off at once in the direction it pointed
to, Without trying to explain the mistake that
it had made.

“He too}: me for his liouselimiLl,'7 she said
to llCl‘Self as she ran. “How surprised he’ll be
when he ﬁnds out who I am! But I’d better
take him his fem and gloves—that is, if I can
find them.” As she said this, she came upon a, "
neat little house, on the door of which was it
bright brass plate with the name “XV. RABBIT ”
engraved upon it. She went in Without knock-
ing, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest,

she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be

 

 

 

 

IN A LITTLE BILL. ~13

turned out of the house before she had found
the fan and gloves.

“How queer it seems,” Alice said to herself,
“to be going messages for a rabbit! I suppose
Dinah’ll be sending me 011 messages next!”
And she began faneying the sort of thing that
would happen: “‘Miss Alice! Come here di—
reetly, and get ready for your walk!’ ‘Coming
in a minute, nurse! But I’ve got to watch
this mouse—hole till Dinah comes hack, and see
that the mouse doesn’t get out.’ Onlyl don’t
'think," Alice went on, “that they’d let Dinah
‘stop in the house if it began ordering people
about like that 3 ”

By this time she had found her way into
a tidy little room with a table in the window,
and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or
three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took
up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was
‘ just going to leave the room, when her eye fell
‘, upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-

glass. There was no label this time with the

 

44 THE RABBIT SENDS ' -‘

,' words “DRINK. ME,” but nevertheless she un-xh
corked it and put it to her lips. “I knoxﬁ -
something interesting is yfsure to happen,” she
said to herself, “whenever I eat or drink any-hi;
thing; so I’ll just see What this bottle does. iv,
I do hope it’ll minke me i grow large again, for
really I’m quite tired of being such: tl tiny
little thing I ”

It (lid so indeed, and much sooner than she
had expected: before she had drunk, half the
bottle, she found her head pressing against the“ "
ceiling, and hatl to stoop to save her neck fronr i
being broken. She hastily put clown the bottle, 
saying to herself, “That’s quite enough—I hope
I shan’t grow any more—As it is, I can’t get
out at the cloore-I do Wish I hadn’t drnnk '
quite so much!” '

Alas! it was too late to wish that! She
went on growing, and growing, and Very soon .
had to kneel deivn on the ﬂoor: in another
minute there was not, even'room «for this, rand; :
she tried the effect of lying down with one 1

   

 

 

IN A LITTLE BILL. 4:“:

 

 

elbow against the door, and the other arm
curled round her head. Still she went on grow—
ing, and, as a. last resource, she put one arm
out of the window, and one foot up the chimney,
and said to herself, “NOW I can do no more,
Whatever happensﬂ “That will become of me?”
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had
'- now had its full effect, and she grew no larger:
Still it \‘as very uncomfortable, and as there

Seemed to be no sort of 'chance of her ever

 

in I'm}: RABBIT sans

  

getting out of the room again, no wonder she

 

felt unhappy.  
“It waskmueh pleasanter at home,” thought

poor Alice, ‘‘When one wasn’t always growing

 

larger and smaller, and heing ordered about by
mice and rabbits. I almost wish I hadn’t gone y‘
down that rabbit-holekanrl yet—and yet—it’s,
rather curious, you know, this sort of life! I
do wonder whet can have happened to me!
\Vhen I uséd to read fairy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I,
am' in the middle of one! There ought to be
a book written about me, that there ought! "
And when I grow up, I’ll Write, one—hut I’m
grown up now,” she added in a, sorrowful tone, “ at
least there’s no room to grow up any more here.” ‘
“But then,” thought Alive, “shall I nereaf
get any older than I an) now? That’ll‘he at",
comfort, one way—never to be on olrl woman—
but them—always to have lessons to learn! Oh,
I shouldn’t like that I” 
“Oh, you foolish Alice!” she answered her-ﬂ

 

IN A LITTLE BILL. 4?

self. “How can you learn lessons in here I Why,
there’s hardly room for you, and no room at all
for any lesson—books I” '

And so she went on, taking ﬁrst one side and.
“then the other, and making quite a conversation
of it altogether; but after a few minutes she
heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

“Mary Ann! Mary Ann!" said the voice,
‘ "fetch me my gloves this moment} ” Then came
little pattering of feet on the stairs. Aliee
knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her,
and she trembled till she shook the house, quite
forgetting that she was now about a thousand
times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason
to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door,
and tried to open it; but as the door opened
:inwards, and Alice’s elbow was pressed hard
against it, that attempt proved a failure. Alice

f‘heard it say to itself, “Then I’ll go round and

 

get in at the window”

“ That you won’t i" thought Alice, and, after

 

   

48 THE RABBIT 513an

 

waiting till she fancied she heard .Lhc Rahbi
just linden the window, she suddenly spread],
' out‘hu'l' hand, and:
much: a snatch in the d
an. She did not get
hold of anything, but
she heard a little ,i
shriek and a fall,5f

and a crash ofhrol

 

 

ken glass, from which

 

she concluded that
it was just; [possible
it had fallen into a]
cucumber — frame, 301* ’

 

 

 

    
  

something of the sont ’

Next came’ an, angry x'oice%tlle- Rabbit’s;
”Patl Pat! WVherc are you?” And then a
voice, she had never heard before, “Sure then

 

 

  
   

I’m here! Digging for apples, yer honour} ”

“Digging for apples, indeed I” I said th
Rabbit angrily. “ Hens! Come and help ‘me:
out of this! ” (Sounds of more broken glass.)

IN A LITTLE BILL. 4w

 

“Now tell me, Pat, what’s that in the Win-
dew?”
“ Sure, it’s an arm, yer honour!” (He pro-

"nounced it “arrum.”)

 

“An arm, you goose! \Vho ever saw one
L that size? \Vhy, it ﬁlls the Whole Window!”

“Sure, it (lacs, yer honour: but it’s an arm
for.2lll that.”

“\Vell, it’s got no business there, at any rate:
‘ g0 and take it away! ”

There was a long silence after this, and Alice
I yeould only hear Whispers now and then; such
I as, “Sure, I don’t like it, yer honour, at all, at
all!” “Do as I tell you, you coward!” and at
last [she spread out her hand again, and made
another snatch in the air. This time there Were
two little shricks, and more sounds of broken
glass. “What a number of cucumber frames
I there must be 2 ” thought Alice. “I wonder what
Lythey’ll do next! As for pulling me out of the
window, I only wish they could ‘! I’m sure I
'don’t want to stay in here any longer K”
H

 

50  'l‘IIE RABBIT SENIJS

  

She waited for some time without hearing
[anything more: at last came a rumbling of

little cart-wheels, and the sound of a good many

voices all talking together: she made out the

words: “\Vhere’s the other ladder ?—\Vliy, l -
hadn’t to bring but one ; Bill’s got the other-—
Rilll fetch it here, ladlﬁHere, put"emup at I,
this corner—No, tie ’em together ﬁrst~they don’t
reach half high enough yet—0h! they’ll do well -‘
enough ; don’t be particular Here, Bill! catch .
hold of this rope—\Vill the roof hear ?—Mind -'
that loose slate——Oh, it’s coming down! Heads
below!” (a loud C1‘ﬂSl1)~-“NO\V, who (lid that?
wilt was Bill, I fancy—Who’s to go down the,
Chimney ?—Nay, I shan’t! Y on do it ?——-T/zat '
,I won’t, tlieii!~Bill’s got to go down—Here;

Billl the master says you’ve got to go down

 

the chimney I ” I

“ Oh! so Bill’s got to come down the ehim— 
ney, has he?” said Alice to herself. “ Why,
they seem to put everything upon Bill! I
wouldn’t he in Bill’s place for a good, deal:

 

 

 

IN A LITTLE BILL. 51

this ﬁreplace is narrow,
to be sure; but I think
I can kick :1 little 3”

She drew her foot as
far down the chimney as
she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal
- (she couldn’t guess of
what sort it was) scratch—
ing :and scrambling about
in the chimney close above
her: then, Saying to hur-
self, “This is Bill,” shu
gave one slmrp kick, and
waited to sm- wlmt \multl
happen nuxt.

The ﬁrst thing she
heard was a, general
chorus of “There goes
Bill I” then the Rabbit’s

voice alone—“ latch him,

 

you by the hedge l ” then

52 THE .uABBiT SENDS

silence, and then another confusion of voices—-
“Hold up his head—Brandy new—Don’t ‘choke
him—How was it, old fellow? \tht happened
to you? Tell us all about it!”

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, -
(“That’s Bill,” thought Aliee,) “\Vell, I hardly '1
> know—No more, thank ye; I’m better now—hut
I’m a deal too ﬂustcrcd to tell you—all I knew ' '
is, sumething comes at me like 21 .laek—in—thc—hox, ’
and up 1 goes like a sky—rocket!” I

x»

“So you (lid, old fellow said the others.
“'VVe must burn the house down!” said the
Rabbit’s voice; and Alice called out as loud as
she could, “ lf you do, I’ll Set Dinah at you!”
There was a. (lead. silence instantly, and Alice ‘
thought; to herself, “I wonder what they will do
next! If they had, any sense, they’d take the
roof off.” After a [minute or two, they begun "
moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit

‘suy, “A harrowful will do, to begin with.”

 

“A lmmwwful of what?” thought Alice; but 1

she hurl not long to doubt, for the next moment

 

 

 

 

 

IN A LITTLE BILL.

a shower of little Pebbles eame rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face.
“I’ll put a stop to this,” she said to herself, and
: shouted out, “You’d better not do that again!”
I which produced another dead silence.
 Alice noticed with some surprise that the
pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they
lay on the ﬂoor, and a, bright idea came into
her head “If I eat one of these cakes,” she
thought, “it’s sure to make some change in my
size; and as it can’t possibly make me larger, it
must make me smaller, I suppose,”
 I So she swallowed one of the cakes, and \'as
delighted to ﬁnd that she began shrinking
directly. As soon as she was small enough to
get through the door, she ran out of the house,
and found quite a crowd of little animals and
'birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard,
' Bill, was in the middle, being held up by two
guinea—pigs, who were giving it something out
of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the

moment she appeared: but she ran ofl' as hard

51 THE RABBIT SEX IJS

 

as she could, andsoon found herself safe in a
thick Wood.  

“The ﬁrst thing I’ve got to do,” said Alice
to herself, as she wandered about in the wood,
“ is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to ﬁnd my way into thth lovely
garden. I think that will be the best plan.”

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and
very neatly and simply arranged; the only dilhi
oulty was, that she had not the smallest idea.
how to set about it; and while she was peering
about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp
bark just over her head made her look up in

it gl‘C‘dt lllll‘l‘y.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her - ,

with large, round eyes, and feebly stretching out
one paw, trying to touch her. “ Poor little thing!”
said Alice, in a, coaxing tone, and she tried hard ‘y
to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened ,
all the time at the thought that it might be, d
hungry, in which case it would he'very likely to

eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.

 

 

IN A LITTLE BILL. 1'5

 

 

 

I Hardly knowing What she did, she picked up
,a little bit of stick, and held it out to the
puppy; whereupon the puppy jumpch into the

air' off all ifs font at once, with :L yelp of

 

'30 THE RABBIT SENHS

 

delight, and rushed at the stick, and made be-
lieve to worry it; then Alice dodged behind at
great thistle, to keep herself from being run 
over; and the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the
stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry
to get hold of it: then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a, game of play with n cart—y,
horse, and expecting every moment to be tram—
pled under its feet, mu round the thistle again ; I
then the puppy began a. series of short charges
at the stick, running a Very little way forwards
each time and a long way back, and barking
hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat (l0WIl,‘;:
a good way off, panting, with its tongue hang— 7
ing out of its mouth, and its great eyes :half i:
shut.  I;
This seemed to Alice :1 good opportunity for j»
making her escape, so she set off at once, and
mu till she was quite tired and out of breath, ’
and till the'puppy’s bark sounded quite faint in:
the distance. L i

 

IN A LITTLE BILL.  57

 

’“And yet what a dear little puppy it Was!”

  

said Alice, as she leantr against a buttercup to
rest'helself, and fanned herself with one of the

 

,lemfes: “I should have liked teaching it tricks
“Very much, if#if I’d only been the right size
lifter do it! Oh dear! I’d nearly forgotten that
1, I’ve got to grow up again! Let me see—how
is" it to be managed? l suppose I ought to eat
:g‘n: drink something or other; but the great

~'q11esti0n is, what?”

 

'Tlle (Treat tuestion eertainl’ was what?
0 3 :

 

: Alice looked ‘all round her at the ﬂowers and
the blades of grass, but she Could not see any-
ithing that looked like ’the right thing to eat
l or drink under the circumstances. There was a

large mushroom growing near her, about the

LSame'height as herself; and when she had looked

 

under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it,

 

 

it oceurred to her that she might as Well look

  

, and see what was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and

 

 

, peeped over ‘the edge of the mushroom, and her

I

  

 

 

CHAPTER V.

ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.

THE Caterpillar and Alice looked at  each'
lather fdr some time in silence: at last, the
Caterpillar took the lmokah out of its mouth,

- and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.

  

60 ADVICE FROM ' A

 

“ Vlio are you? ” said the Caterpillan
 This was not an encouraging opening for a A

conversation. .Alicc replied, rather shyly, “l—I ‘
hardly know, sir, just at present—at least, I"
know who I was when I got up this morning:
but I thinkl must have been changed several
times since then.” r ’

“\Vhat do you ‘mcan bythat?” said the
Caterpillar stcmly. “Explain yourself 1”

, “I can’t explain myself, I’m afraid, sir,” said '
Alice, “because I’m not myself, you see.”

“I don’t see,” said the Cateipillur.

“I’m afraid I can’t put it more clearly,” i
Alice replied very politely; “for I can’t under—
stand it myself to begin with; and being so“
many different sizes in a day is very confusing.”

“ It isn’t,” said the Caterpillar. I

' “Well, perhaps you haven’t found it so yet,”
said Alice; “but when you have to turn into a;
ch1ysalis——you will some day, you know—and
then after that into a, butterﬂy; I should think,

you’ll feel it a little queer, won’t you 2”

 

 

CATERPILLAR. 61

f‘ Not a bit,” said the Caterpillar.

  
   
  
   

' “ Well, perhaps your feelings may be different,”
said Alice; “all I know is, it would feel very
queer tome.” i
“ You I,” said the Caterpillar eontemptuously.
,“WVho are you?”
i, , Which brought them back again to the be-
'ginning of the conversation. Alice felt a little
irritated at the Caterpillars making such wry
shert remarks, and she drew hersclf up and said,
very gravely, “I think you ought to tell me who
you are, ﬁrst."
’ “\Vhy l” said the Caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question; and, as

 

   
  
  
 
  

Alice could not thin of any good reason, and

‘as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a very un-

pleasant state of mind, she turned away.

“Come back!“ the Caterpillar called after her.
“I’ve something important to say I ”

L ' This sounded premising, certainly : Alice turned

and came back again.

 L 3“ Keep your temper,” said the Caterpillar.

 

     
    
   
   
  
 

CATERPILLAR. \

V f’ You mm aid, Falle William,” the young 7221171 suid,‘
, ’-“A71(Z your hair 7er13 become very wizﬂc ;
Aml mt 7/01} incessantly stand on your heml—

Da 2/07! 7‘7/7'77lt, rd 7/0711” a‘r/r [it is ﬂail/Z”

Inf/rig) ynuih,” Faﬂmr Willimn, rrplz‘orl fn'lzie son,
“‘I‘fmwd it might injuw ﬂu: brainy,“
31129110101712“ I ’m pet/2:651:17 Sure I haw 41mm,

 ' W711], I’n’n again and again.”

 

Yet you turned a brash-somersaztlt m M (2007'; x 9

.“ In aaLg/L‘youﬂz,y’"sr[i(l thigs'ageh as’yhe” shook his], grcy‘locl L

' By Vilwrme this ointméht—mzc’ Ska)“

      
   
 
 
 

 

ADVICE FROM A \

 

“I You'iu'yc 01d," said 1/12: yauﬂL, “(is I ymmii'azzefl befm‘

And ﬂaws grown most unranmizdnlyrfnt;

  PruQ’mhnf’ie flzr'mmrm of ill/d?" ‘

r “I kept allmﬂy limbs very sypplc

 

1:7: [he bOz—‘—
Allow-mew Vsell you'rdr'ouplé? ’f   ‘ > L

 

 

  
    
   
    
 

1 7ATERPI LLAR.  :25

“L You are old," said the youth, “ and yOZU‘jI/ZL‘S arc too won/c
For anything toug/wrﬂz-(m 3216f;
fat you, ﬁnished the goose, with the bones and the Deal:—

‘Pray, how did you mama/e to do it?"

“In, my youthfysaid his fat/Lei", “I took totholcnw,
 And argued each case with my 1017c;

71d t]w.musculm" strength, which it gave to my jaw,
, ’ IIas ’Zastotlﬂm rust of my Mfg.” '

K

 

 

 

    
 

‘4 You my old," said [710 ‘Y/UI4t/L)' “ II‘W’ would hardly supper
That 3/0717- gj/c was ms" steixtly‘rw'bzwﬁ 
Yel you balanced- an pr! 07L the end of your nose——

WW mmlr y/m ,sn’ nzqulljz/ Hr7~r7~-?”,

'y “ I have answered, three questions, and that'is 27ml "
- Said hi5fatkc’r; “do”? {/in yozwselfaira! n
139 you think I am listen all day taswh ,-
Bekqﬁxor I ’ll kick you elm/17$ smirsil” ' I L

    

 
   
    
   

CATERPILLAR. [ii

I “That is not said right,” said the Caterpillar.
V y“Not quite right, I’m afraid,” said Alice,,
timidly; “some of the Words have got altered."

ff,“ It is wrong from beginning to end,” said the
Caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence, for
'V's‘onie minutes.

'The Caterpillar was the ﬁrst to speak.

I “‘ What size do you want to be?” it asked.
"Oh, I’m not particular as to size,” Alice
:liastily replied; “only one doesn’t like changing
o‘often, you know.”
I ‘3“1 don’t know,” said the Caterpillar.
Aliee said nothing: she had neVer been so

-mueh contradicted in all her life before, and she

 

felt that she was losing her temper.
“ Are you content now ? ” said the Caterpillar
“\Vell, I should like to he a little larger, sir,‘

if you wouldn’t mind,” said Alice: “three inches

   
   
 
 
 

is such a wretched height to he.”
 “It is a very good height indeedlf’ said the
Caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it

spoke was exactly three inches high).

 

 

   
  
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
 
 

68, ' ' ,- "ADVICE FROM A

I "‘But' I’m nét Vasecl lo lit ly’,’ pleaded’ ‘13)0 ’
' r Alibe in a‘pite‘oué Itone. , And éheitlwﬁght‘fo
, her‘se'lﬂ,’ ‘V‘I Wish the ,Creatures Wouldn’t I be ‘
easily ’Qﬁ‘endéd.” \ L I
I “ You’ll get-11593 to I it: ixiyfi111e,” said ’r‘th‘e
Caterpillar ; and it Put the, l166kah into: Vi
’ymouth mldibcgan Sindking again. I L 'V V L
 This! time Alice Waited patiently iuiﬁl it, chclse
’ to sp‘cak‘again.’ In a, minute 0ftwd thef Cater;
"pillar tbék the hoblmh out of itS‘VDLIOH-tl‘l and yamljned:
once ol- twice, and shook itself; rTheﬁlit gotvldown I
' off the mushrémm-‘and crmﬁle’d‘mi'ay into thegrass,
merely femal'king as'kit went, "? One side will make *
lyo’u grow tallely-and the other side ywill‘nlakej‘o'u
:grow skater.”  I, l l I, y; l I;
l “ One’ side 0f; ll‘llalf The other , ,siul‘e‘
what ?” ﬂmﬁght Alice to ,herselﬂ ; I L
“ the mushmoni,” said the caterpillar, just
' as, \if' she- llad asked it aloud: [and r ganothef r
momeymlit. waskou’ﬁ H’sighﬁ. 4 I I ‘
Alice Iemﬁinkad, looking tlioilghtﬁillylab {he
mushroom for 73L miuutp, trying ftg 5113:1116 '; V0; L

 

CATERPILLAR. ‘ so

  

thich were the two sides of it; and, as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difﬁcult

 

' Question. However, at last she stretched her
arms round it as far as they would go, and

broke off a bit. of the edge with each hand.

 

“ And now which is which?” she said to;
herself, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit
to try the eﬂect: the next moment she felt a
violent blew underneath her chin ; it had struck
her foot!

L She was a good deal, frightened by this very

 

 

sudden change, but she felt that there was no
time to, be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly;
so she set to work at once to eat some of the
I other bit: Her chin was pressed so closely
, against her foot, that there was hardly room to
open her mouth; but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a' morsel of the left—hand

L bit.

 

 

  

Tu ADVICE FROM A

“ Conic, my head’s free at last!” said Alice
‘in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm 
in another moment, when she found that hei‘ ,:
shoulders were newhere to be found: all she

could see- when she looked down, was an im-

 

niense length of neck, which seemed to rise

‘ like a stalk out ‘of a sea of green leaves that lay f

 

far below her. \
“ What can all that green stuﬁ' be ?” said’Alice.
“ And where have my shoulders got to 3 And oh,
my poor hands, how is it I can’t see you ? ” She
was moving them about as she spoke, but no result
seemed to follow, except a little shaking among 9
the distant green leaves. i U
As there seemed to he no chance of getting}
her hands up to her head, she tried to get her '
head do‘xn to them, and was delighted to ﬁnd
that her neck would'bend about easily in any
direction, like a serpent. She just succeeded
i in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and
was going to dive in among the leahes, which E

she found to be nothing but the teps of the trees ,

 

 

CATERPILLAR. :1

  
 

i’undei' which she had been \‘andei‘ing, when it
 sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a
large pigeon had ﬂown into her face, and was
beating her violently with its Wings.

“ Serpent! 7’ screamed the Pigeon.

“I’m not a serpent!” said Alice indignently.

 

“Let me alone!”
“ Serpent, I say again!” repeated the Pigeon,
but in a more subdued tone, and added with a

 

kind of sob, i“ I’ve tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them!”

“I haven’t the least idea What you’re talking
y‘  about,” said Alice.

“I’ve tiied the roots of trees, and I’ve tried
hanks, and I’ve tried hedges,” the Pigeon went on,
without attending to her; “but those serpents!
There’s no pleasing them I ”

Alice vats more and more puzzled, but she

thought there was no use in saying anything

 

rmore till the Pigeon had ﬁnished.
“As if it wasn’t trouble enough hatching

 

s,” said the Pigeon; f‘ but I must be on

 

 

 
  

‘ 72 ADVICE FROM, A

the look-out for serpents night and day! Why,-
I haven’t had ‘a wink of sleep these three
r weeks!”

“I’m very sorry you’ve been annoyed,” saidi
Alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.

‘fAnd just as I’d taken the highest tree in
the wood; continued the Pigeon, raising its-
voice to a shriek; “and just as I was thinking

I should be free of them at last, they must ,

 

needs come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh” I»

Serpent ! ”

 

“But I 'm not :1, serpent, I tell you I l’ said ‘Aliee.’ L

n

l’m a

 

 

“I'm :1
“Well I 117m: are you? ” said the Pigeon. “I
‘Can see ‘ou’re tr'inw to invent; somethinM" '

“IaI’m a little girl,” said Alice, rather»

 

doubtfully; as she remembered number of
changes she had gone through day. i w
“A likely story indeed!” said the Pigeon in, .y

 

a tone of the deepest contempt. “I’ve seenla; ,

I good many little girls in my time, but never one

7-,

with such a neck as that! No, no! 101131: a I

 

 

   
   
   
    
  
     
 
 
    
 

CATERPILLAR.  73

serpent;- and there’s no Use denying it. I sup—
pose you’ll be telling me next that you never
,tas-tecl an egg!"
 “l have tasted eggs, certainly,” said Aline,
‘ who was a very ti‘uthful child; “ but little girls
*ilt eggs, quite as much as serpents do, you
know.” I
“I don’t believe it,” said the Pigeon ; “but if
they do, why then they're a kind of serpent,
that’s all I can say.”

,This was such a new idea to Alice, that she
[-was quite silent for a minute 01' two, which gave

the Pigeon the opportunity of adding, “You're

 

looking for eggs, I know that well enough; and r

 

vhat does it matter to me whether you’re a.
'\ little girl or a serpent?”
" “It matters {L good deal to me,” said Alice
hastily; “but I’m, not looking for eggs, as it
,lluppens; and if I \vas,‘l shouldn’t want yours:
’1 don’t like them raw.”

“\Vell, he oil, then!” said the Pigeon in n
"sulky 10110, as it settled (lown again into its

    

74 ‘ ADVICE FROM A

nest. Alice crouched down among the trees a,

‘well as she could, for her neck kept getting

 

entangled among the branches,and every now-
and then she, had 'to stop and ’untwist it.
After a while she remembered that she still
held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and;
she set towork very carefully, nibbling ﬁrst at

one and then at the other, and growing s0me—"

 

times taller and sometimes shorter, until she
had succeeded in bringing herself down ,to her ‘

usual height.

 

It was so long since she had been anything 1:
near the right size, that it felt quite strange
at ﬁrst; but she got used to it in a few; ‘
minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.
“Come, there’s half my plan done now! Homo

 

puzzling, all these changes are! I’m never sure

 

What I’m going to be, from one minute to‘
another! However, I’ve got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into‘ that V

 

beautiful garden—how is that to he done, 1‘

 

wonder?” As she said this, she came suddenly 2

  

CATERPILLAR. 75

r upon an open place, with a little house in it about
four feet high. “Whoever lives there,” thought
Alice) “it’ll never do to come upon them this
size: \\'hy,l should frighten them out of their
wits!” So she began nibbling at the right—hand
hit again, and (lid not venture to go near the
house till she had brought herself down to nine

inches high.

C II A I’T E II VI.
rm AND PEPPER.

For: 21 minute or two she stood looking at
the house, and wondering what to , do next,
when suddenly a footman in livery mile run—
ning out of the woodw-(she considered him to
be a footman bemuso he was in livery: other-

wise, judging Ivy his face only, she would have

 

 

 

 

called him a ﬁsh)—und rapped loudly at the door 

with his knuckles. It was opened by another
foolumu in livery, with a round face, and large
eyes like a frog; and both footmen, Alice noticed,
had powdered hair that curled allover their
headsl She felt very curious to know what it
was all about, and crept 21‘ little way out of the

' wood to listen

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PT” A ND PEPPER.

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

The Fish—Fontman began by producing r0111
under his arm a great lvttcr, nearly as large
as himself, and this he handed over to the
\' other, saying, in :1 501011111 tone, “For the

L'Duchess. An invitation from 1110 Queen to plny

   
 

78 ' , PIG AND EEPPER.

croquet.” The FroggFootman repeated, in ’th

 

same ,Solen1n tone, only iehanging the order of
the words a little, “17mm the Queen.‘ AninVi-’
trition’for the Dnehess'ito play croquet.”

Then they both hewed low, anilhthen‘ curls
got entangled together.,  L  I

Alice laughed so much at this, that she hail
to i‘uinhack into the wood for fear -of their-
hearing her ; and when she next 'peeperl out the»

Fish—Footman was gone, and the other was sitting;-

 

on the ground near the door, staringstupidly up:
intd the sky. I '

Alice Wont timidly’ up ‘tn the door, and}
'knnrikm‘l. i I ’

,“Thei‘e's no sort wwf' use in knocking? mid»

 

 

the Footnmn, “ 21ml that furlwo reasons. First.‘ '
because I'm an the sunn; sidu of the door as
you are: sci-mull}; been-use they're inaliinggsuch

:L noise insicle. in) one vouh’l possibly‘henl‘ you."

 

And r'eittainly there mm a most extraomlinary’
noise going on within—n constant howling and

sneezing, and every now and then 3' great;

 

 

PIG AND PEPPER. 79

 

crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces, ,
“Please, then,” saidAlice, “ how am I to getin?”
“There might be some sense in your knock-
Wing,” the Footinan went on, without attending
to her, “if we had the door between us. For
instance, if you were inside, you might knock,
‘ and I could let you out, you know.” He was
looking up into the sky all the time he was
speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly un—
yeivil. “But perhaps he can’t help it,” she said
to herself; “ his eyes are so very nearly at the
top of his head But at any rate he might

answer questions—How am I to get in ?” she

 

repeated, aloud.

  

“I shall sit here,” the Footman remarked, “till
‘ to—morrow——,~—”
At this moment the door of the house
’-opened, and a large plate came skimming out,
straight at the ’Footman’s head: it just grazed
his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the

“trees behind him.

 

80 FIG AND PEPPER.

u

 

——or next day, maybe," the Footlnan (ton—

 

tinued in the same tone, exactly as if nothing

had happened.

 

“How am I to get in?” asked Alice again; i
in {1, louder tone.

“Are you to get in at all?” said the Foot—
man. “That’s the ﬁrst question, you know.”

It was, no doubt: only Alice (lid not like to
be, told so. “It’s really dreadful,” she muttered .

 

to herself, “the way all the creatures argue. It’s
enough to drive one crazy!”

The Footinan seemed to think this a good

 

opportunity for repeating his remark, with varia— L
tions. “l shall sit here,” he said, “on and oﬂ";
for days and days.”

i“ But what am I to do?” said Alice.

 

“Anything you like,” said the Footman, and i ‘1

began whlsthng.

 

“Oh, there’s no use in talking to him,” said,r‘
Alice desperately: “he’s perfectly idiotic E” And
she opened the door and went in.

The door led right into a large kitchen, ’

 

17m AND PEPPER. . '81

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

which was full of smdk from one, end to the"
other: the Duchess was sitting on a three—legged
stool in the middle, nursing in baby; the cook

 

 
   
  
 

LW-QS leaning over the ﬁre, stirring a large cauldron

[Which seemed to be full of Soup. I 1 ‘
“There’s eertainl‘y, too much pepper in that

soup 1” Alice said to V herself,  us well as she

lc‘ould for sheezing.’ L

M

82 BIG AND PEPPER.

  

There was certainly too much of it in the
air. Even the Duchess sneezed occasionally;
and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howl-
ing alternately without a moment’s pause. The i’
only two creatures in the kitchen that did not
sneeze, were the cook, and a large icat which
was sitting on the hearth and grinning from earl i
to ear.

“Please would you tell me,” said Alice, ‘ a
little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether
it was good manners for her to speak ﬁrst, “why
your cat grins like that?” i 

“ It’s a Cheshire cat,” said the Duchess, “ and
that’s why. Pig 1” ' >

She said the last word with such sudden
violence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw I,"
in another moment‘that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and,
Went on again 2-— i I I i

“I didn’t know that Cheshire cats always
grinned; in fact, I didn’t knowthat cats could,

grin.”

 

 

 

 

PIG AND PEPPER. ' S3

 

‘l They all can,” said the Duchess; “and
i must; of ’em do.” ‘

V, “I don’t know of any that do,” Alice said
very politely, feeling quite pleased toihave got

 

into a conversation.
 “You don’t know much," said the Duchess;
“and, that’s a fact.”

’Aliee did not at all like the tone of this
remark, and thought it would he as well to

 

 

introduce some other subject of conversation.
\Vhile she was trying to ﬁX on One, the cook
took the cauldron of soup off the ﬁre, and at
once set to work throwing everything within her'
the ﬁre-
irons came ﬁrst; then followed a shower of sauce-

 

reach at the Duchess and the baby

*pzms, plates, and dishes. The Duchess took no
notice of them even when they hit her; and the
baby was howling somuch already, that it Was

quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt

 

it or not

   
 

“Oh, please mind what you’re doing!” cried

Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of

Uthmkr‘xkﬂmt‘ ' ' ' would makg mtljfhe, :12:
L L gyohﬁfs‘eéﬂgthé éﬁrﬂl ‘téliés"-i§\lenty 9m:
‘0/ tum” oh“ its r
 *‘Talkihgégffagesﬁ "said ‘he
,t‘oﬁ‘y-hé’r‘ﬁeaﬂ’l77;{  " ‘
- ~ .s glanced aﬂi'ér y’ 311x101;st ti he;ka
gagyjffishe 1116aﬁt$0 ithei hint ,H I ’

do r “ ,

ever Could, db; gu‘réﬂ”, ‘ ‘ 1

. began-pursiDEh I hild‘y'aga

 

PIG AND PEPPER. 85

lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent

 

55hake at the end of every line :—

 

“Spmk roughly to your lillle boy,

And beat him when he snamcs:

 

[[0 only docs it to annoy,

Because he knows it leases.”

CHORUS.

(In which the cook and the baby joined) 2——

“ lVow/ wow! wow! ”

While the Duchess sang the second verse of
the song, she kept tossing the baby Violently up
and down, and the poor little thing howled so,

'that Alice could hardly hear the words:—

“I spank severely to my boy,
I beat him when he sn’eczcs;

For he com thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases! ”

CHORUS.

“ Wow! wow! wow!”

 
  
   
     
 
 

'ae , I PIG AND'PEPEER.

“ Here I you may nurse it a bit, if you like 1 ’9
the Dueheés said to Alice, ﬂinging the baby I,
her as ishe spoke.  “I must go and get ready ‘to
play croquet with the Queen/f and she hurried
oiit of the room. The cook threw a" frying—pan
after her as she went, but it just missed her. I

Alice caught the baby with some difﬁculty,
,as it was {t queer-shaped little creature, and held
out, its arms and legs in all directions; “just
like a star—ﬁsh,” thought Alice. The "pom little
thing was snorting like a steam-engine when
she ’caught it, and kept doubling itself up and,
straightening itself out again, so‘ that altogetheg
for the ﬁrst minute or two, it has as much; as
she could do to hold it. I ‘

As soon as she had made out the proper way
of; nursing it, (which was to, twist it up into}
a sort ’of knot, and then keep tight hold‘of its
right ear and, left feet, so as to prevent its
undoing‘itself,) i she carried it out into the open
air. I“ If I don’t take this child away with, me,”

thought Alice} “they’re sure to, kill it, in a day.

PIG AND PEPPER. 87

   
 

or two: wouldn’t it be murder to leave it be
hind?” She said the last words out loud, and
the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off
sneezing by this time). “Don’t grunt,” said
‘Aliee; “that’s not at all a proper way of ex—

pressing yourself.”

 

The baby grunth again, and Alice looked
- Very anxiously into its face to see what was the
matter with it.‘ There could be no doubt that

 

it had a very turn—up nose, much more like a
snout than a real nose; also its eyes were

 

‘ggetting extremely small for a baby: altogether
V Alice did not like the lookof the thing at all.
; “But perhaps it was only sobbing,” she thought,

 

and looked into its eyes again, to see if there
- were any tears.
No, there were no tears. “If you ’re going to

i turn into a pig, my dear," said Alice, seriously,

 

‘‘I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind

 

Vinowl”, The poor little thing subbed again (or
i grunted, it was impossible to say which), and
they went on for, some while in silence.

  

   
 
 

as , PIG AND PEPPER.’ '

Alice was justibeginning’to think to hexself:
“Now, what am I to do with this creature
when I get it home?” when it grunted again,
so violently) that she :
looked. down into its
face in some alarm.
This time there could i
be no mistake about
it: it was neither
more nor less than
a pig, and she felt,
that it would be

quite absurd for her

 

to carry it any fur? I
ther.

i” ,So she set the
little erenture'down, and felt quite relieved to '

   

   
 
  
 

'see it trot away quietly into the wood. ,“If '
it had grown up,” she to herself, “it. would
hive made a. dreadfully ugly child: but its-makes
rather a handsome pig, 1 think” And she be-
gan thinkng over other children she knew, who V

 

 

PIG AND PEPPER. 59

niight do very well as pigs, and was just say-
ing to herself, “if one only knew the right way
to change them—~J’ when she was a. little
startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a
though of a tree a few yards off.

The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice.
It‘looked good—natured, she thought: still it had
very long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

“Cheshire Puss,” she began, rather timidly, as
 she did not at all know whether it would like
the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.

u

“Conic, it’s pleased so far, thought Alice, and
she went on, “\Vould you tell me, please, which
way I ought to go from here?”

“Tth depends a good deal on where you want
i to get to,” said the Cut.
3 “I don’t much care where——” said Alice.
  I “Then it doesn’t matter which way you
go,” said the Cat. '
«

——so long as I get somewhere,” Alice added

us an explanation.

 

 

 
 
 

mu ‘ ’r PIG AND PEPPER. ‘ r

;‘Oh, you’re sure to do that,” said the Cat, ‘
‘‘if you only walk long enough.” I

Alice felt that this could not he denied, so she
tried another question. “'What sort of people
live about here ?"’

“In that direction," the Cat said, Waving its '

 

right. “pawiiround, “lives a. Hatter: and in that,

 

 

‘ direction,” waving the other paw, “livcsa March -'

  
  
 

Hare. Visit either you like: they’re both iiiacl’
“But I don’t want to go among, maul people?
Alice remarked. I I i i
“Oh, yen can’t help that," sakl the Cat ,
“we’re all mad here. I’m mad. . You’re mad.”
“ How do you know I’minad ?” said Alice.

 

i“ You must be,” said the Cay “01' you

 

: wouldn’t have come here.” ,
Alice didn’t think that proved it at [all

however, she went on: “And how do you know ,

  
 

 

that you’re inad T"  I 
“ To begin with,” said the Cat, “a dog’s not
inar,l. You grant that?” 7 '

7”} suppose so.” said Alice.

 

 

HG AND PEPPER. 91

         
 

 w r
“Kllell, then," the Cat
went on, “you see a dog
growls when it’s angry,
and wags its tail when it’s
pleased. Now I growl when
I’m pleased, and wag my
tail when I’m angry. There-
fore I’m mad.”
"‘ I call it purring, not

 

growling,’7 said Alice.
. V I “ Call it What you like,”
Q) ' i said the Cat. “Do you

 

 

play croquehwith the Q11een to—dny?”

 

v2 1’“): AND PEPPER,

“I should like it very much," said Alice, “but
I haven’t been invited yet.”

“You’ll see me there," said the Cat, and

vanished.

Alice was not much surprised at this, she was ~

 

getting so well used to queer things happening
\Vhile she was still looking at the place where it
had been, it suddenly appeared again. L

“By-the-hye, what became of the baby 2” said
the Cat. “‘I’d nearly forgotten to ask.”

“ It turned into upig,” Alice answered very

 

quietly, just as if the (‘at had come back in n

 

natural way. ,
“I thought it would,” said the Cat, and
vanished again.

Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it

 

again, but it did not appear, and after a minute
or ter she walked on in the direction in which
the March Hare was said to liver “I’ve seen
batters before,” she said to herself: “the March
Hare will be much the most interesting, and, L‘

perhaps as this is May it won’t be raving mad——

 

 

 

 

HG AND PEPPER. 9:5

 

 

 

   

 

at least not so mad as it was in March.” As she

said this, she looked up,, and there was the Cut

 

 

again, sitting on a branch of a tree.

 

"‘ Did you say pig, or ﬁg?” said the Cat.

“1 said pig," replied Alice; “and I Wish you
wouldn’t keep; appearing ﬁnd Vanishing so sud-
denly: you make one quite giddy,”

“ All right," said the Cat; and this time it

 

vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of
r the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained

 

some time after the rest of if had gone.

 

 

114 PIG AND PEPPER.

, 

“Well I, I’ve often seen a cat Without a grin,’ ;

 

 

thought Alice; “but a grin Without a cat 1h
It’s the most curious thing I ever saw in all
my life!U ’ 1

She had not gone much farther before she
came in sight of the house of the March Hare: f,
she thought it must be the right house, because;

the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof ‘

 

was thatched with fur. It was so largeka. house,-

 

that she did not like to go nearer till she had

 
 
 
 
  

nihbled some more of the left-hand bit of mush—
1‘00111, and raised herself to about two feet high:
even then she walked up towards it rather '
timidly, saying to herself, “Suppose it should‘
be raving mad after all! I almost Wish l’d’gene '

to see the Hatter instead I"

 

 

 

C H A P T E R VII.
A MAD TEA-PARTY.

THERE vas a table set out under a tree in
front of the house, and the March Hare and the
Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was
sitting between them, fast asleep; and the other
two were using it as a cushion, resting their
elbows on it, and talking over its head. “Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse,” thought Alice ;
“only, as it’s asleep, I suppose it doesn’t mind.”

The table was a large one, but the three were
all crowded together at one corner of it: “No
room! No room!” they cried out when they saw

Alice coming “There’s plenty of room!” said.

 

 

    
   
 
  
 
 
 

' A MAD TEA-PARTY.

 

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on
hearing this ; but all he said was, “\Vhy is- a
aven like a writing-desk ?” I

u

 

"‘ Come, we shall have some full nmv'l
thought; Alice. y“l’m“ glad they'i‘e begun ask—
ng riddlmifl believe I, call guess that,” she
'dde(l alouycl.‘ I i 

“Do you mean that‘you think you Gan ﬁnd,

 

llt the; {waver to it?" said the March Hare.
““i Exactly 59,” said Alien. ‘

0

 
  
  
  
  
    
 
 

‘ gs , - A MAD TEA-PARTY. .‘

, “Then your should my What you 111ea11,"i’iithe
MafchrHare went. on. ' I i e, V
“I (10," Alice hastily, replied; “ateleas‘t—ab
least I meanwhat sayAthzlt’s the same thing,
youiknow.”   I I
“Not the same thing a bit! " said the Hatter.
“ “Thy, you might Just, as ‘Well say that i‘ I i See
what I eat’ is the same thing as ‘I eat What
see’!'’ I I y H
“You might just as well say,” added :the
March Hare, “that ‘ I ’like what I get” is the: i
samelthing as ‘I get what I like ’ I ” i V
I “Yeu might just as well Vsay,” added the

 

Dormtmse, who“ seemed to be talking in' his "
sleep,“'that ‘I'hreathe when I eleep’ is the same,
thing as ‘I sleep when I breathe" 1 ” i ' V
“It is the same thing With you,” said the
Hattehend here the conversation droPPed, and:
the party ,sait silent for a 1ninute,wleilh'Ali :
thought over all she could iiememher, aljeﬁt
ravens and \V'ritilig-deSlzs, Whichy\vasn’t much.
The Hatter was the ﬁré’c to break the silenc

' A L MAD TEA-mum: 99‘

F‘LVVhat day of the month is it?” “he said, tum- r
in? to Alice-tho had taken his, Watch out of
“his, pocket, and was; looking at it uneasily, shah—y
' ing‘ it every now and then, and holding it to
~y‘llis’eér. , i y i .
Alice, considered a little) and said, “ The
fourth,” L '

‘¥T\\'0 clays wrong!” Sighed the Hatter. “l ,
told; you butter W0111(111’t ,suit‘ the works!” he
added, looking ailgl'ily, at the March Hare.

’ “It was the best huttor,” the Mai-oh Hare L
Ingekly, 11-plied. H n

:L,“Yes, but some, crumbs must have {got in,
well,”ithe Hatter grumbled :’ “you shouldn’t"
’haw’putit in with the brearl‘knife.”  I

The March Hare took the watch and lobked
at it gloomily: then he dipped it intoihis cup

 

‘ani tea, and looked at it again: but he could I

   
 
 
 

think of nothihg better to say than his ﬁrst ~
remark, “It Was the best buttmg~you know.” L

 Alice had been looking’over his shoulder- with
who c’ur’io’siity.’ ifXX’hat funny Watch!” ’shé

100 A‘ MAI) TEA-PARTY.

remarked. "‘ It tells the day of the month, and

  

doesn’t tell what o’clock it is I” ,

“Why should it ?” muttered the Hatter.
“ Does your watch tell you what year it is?”

“ Of course not,” Alice replied very readily]: ’
“but that’s because it stays the same year ford
sule 2L long time together."

“\Vhich is just the ease with. mine,” said
the Hatter.

Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter’si
remark seemed to her to have no sort ofmcaning r
in it, and yet it V’st eertainly English. “I don’t -
’quite understand you,” she said, as politely as she
could , I

“The Dormousc is asleep again,” said the Hat;
tar, and he pouredn little hot tea on its nose.

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently,
and said, without opening its eyes, “Of courgé,’
of; course; just what 1' was going to remark
myself.” i

‘ Hive you guessed the riddle yet?" the

Hath-1* said, turning to Alice again.

 

 

 

 

 

 

A MAD TEA-PARTY. 101

“No, I give it up,” Alice replied: “what’s
the answer?"
“I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the
Hatter.
“Nor I,” said the March Hare.
Aliee sighed \vearily. “1 think you might
do something better with the time,” she said,
i,‘.‘than wasting it in asking riddles that have
no answers.”
“If you knew Time as well as I do,” said
the Hatter, “you wouldn’t talk about wasting
,, it. It’s him.”
“I don’t know what you mean,” said Alice.
“Of course you don’t!" the Hatter said,
tossing his head contemptuously. “I dare say
’ you never even spoke to Time I" i
i “Perhaps not," Alice cautiously replied: “but
"I know I have to heat time when I learn
music.” .
"‘Ah! that accounts for it,” said the Hatter.

“ He won’t stand heating. ' Now, if you only

 

-, kept on good terms with him, hte do almost

 

 

14:2 ' A MAD TEA-PARTY.

anything you liked With the clock; F01" in,

 

 

stance, suppose it were nine o’clock in the morn 

 

’ ing, just time to begin lessons: you’d only have
to, whisper a, hint to Time, and round goestlie»;
clock in a twinkling! Half—past one, time for 3
dinner I " i I V i

(“I only wish it was,” the Llllai'oll Hare said i
to itself in a Whisper.) I
“That would be grand, certainly,” said Alice”
thoughtfully : “ but then —I shoulcln’t'be , hungry“
for it, you know.” L H

“Not at ﬁrst, perhaps,’l said the Hatter : “but

 

you could keep it. to half—past one as long ’as

 

you liked.” ,
, “ Is that the way you ‘ manage '4” ’Alic’ I
asked. I I I
The Hatter shook his head n10urilfiill)‘;~ “Not:

, I!" he replied, “\Ve quarrelled last March

  
   
 
 
 

 

 

just before lie went mud, you know ” (point—

ing with; his teaspoon at the Maréh Havre,‘

 

 

“ it was at the great concert given by th ‘
Queen of Hearts. and l had to sing

A MAD TEA-PARTY. L 103

 

   

 ‘ Twinkle, lwinkle, little, ball

How I wonder what you’re at.”

“You know the song, perhaps?”
"‘I’Ve heard something like it,” said Alice.

 

 

“ thgoes on, you; know,” the Hatter continued‘

  
 
 
 

“in this way :——

‘ Up- above the wm'ld you ﬂy,
Like a teatr’ay in the sky.

)n

Twinkle, twinkle————

I’L‘fHer’e the Dbrmpuse shook itself} and began

  
 
 
   
 

m , L ' A 31 AI) TEA-PART \'~.

singing in its élcep “Twinkle, twinkle, [zt'illklig
.t'wz'nkle»-—” and wentlon so long that they haul
to pinch it to make it stop. ‘ . a
“Well, I’d hardly ﬁnished the ﬁrst verse,
said the Hatter, “when the Queen bzuvled‘out;
‘ He’s murdering the time! 03‘ with his heth 3 ’" *
“How dreadfully savage!" ' exclaimed Alice. I,
“And ever since that,” the Hattel‘ went on '
in a monrnful tone, “he won’t do thith askl.
It’s always ’six o’clock now.”
»A bright idea came into Alice’s head. I “Is
that the reason so many tea—things are put out
here 1’” she asked. ‘

 

“ Yes, that ’s it,” said the Hatter with :2. High

“it’s always tea—time, and We’ve no time to; Q

 

wash the things between ‘\vhiles.”
“Then you keep moving round, I suppose?" 
said Alice. I ‘
“Exactly so,” said the Hattert ‘y‘ as the things ‘

get used, up."

 

“ But when d0:)0u  come to the beginning"

 

again?” Alice ventured to ask.

 

 

 

 

 

A MAI) TEA-PARTY. 10:”:

“Suppose we change the subject,” the March
Hare interrupted, yawning. “I’m getting tired
of this. I vote the young lady tells us a story”

“I’m afraid I don’t know one,” said Alice,
rather alarmed at the proposal.

“Then the Dormouse shall i” they both cried.
“Wake up, Dorinouse l ” And they pinched it on
both sides at once.

The Dorlnouse slowly opened his eyes. “I
wasn’t asleep,” he said in a hoarse, feeble voice:
"I heard every word you fellows were saying.”

“Tell us a story!” said the March Hare.

“Yes, please do!” pleaded Alice.

“’ And be quick about it)" added the Hatter,
“or you’ll be asleep again before it’s done.”

“Once upon a time there were three little
sisters,” the Dormouse began in a great hurry;
I “and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie;

:7

 

and they lived at the bottom of a well

“What did they live on?” said Alice, who
{Yalways took a great interest in questions of
eating and drinking. I

l,

 

luu' A MAI) ’l‘EA-I’ARTY.

 

“They lived on treuele,” said the Dornlouse,
after thinking a minute 01' two.

“They couldn’t have done that, you‘ know,”
Alice gently remarked: “they’d have been ill.”

“ So they were,” said the Dormouse ; “very ill.”

Alice tried a little to fancy to herself ’ what
such an extraordinary way of living would be
like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on: “But why did they live at the bottom of
a well?” I

“Take some more tea,” the March Hare said
to Alice, very earnestly.

“I’ve had nothing yet,” Alice replied in an

 

oﬂ'ended tone, “so I can’t take more.”

 

“ You mean you can’t take less,” said they
Hatter: “it’s very easy to take more than 1
nothing,”

“Nobody asked your opinion,” said Alice.

“Who’s making personal remarks new?” the

 

Hatter asked triumphantly,

 

Alice did not quite know what to say to

  

this: so she helped herself to some tea and

 

.\ MAI) TEA-PARTY. 11:7

bread-aud—butteig and then turned to the Dor—
mouse, and repeated her question. “\Vhy did
they, live at the bottom of a well?”

The Dormouse again took a minute or two
to think about it, and then said7 “ it was a
tl‘enele-well.”

“There’s no sueh thing!

" Alice was begin-
ning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March
Hare went “Sh! shl”an(l the Dermouse sulkily
remarked, “lf you can’t be civil, you’d better
ﬁnish the story for yourself.”

“N0y please go on E ” Alice said very humbly:
“I won’t interrupt you again. I dare say there
may be one.”

“One, indeed!” said the Dormouse indig—
nautly. However, he consented to go on. “And

so these three little sisters—they were learning

I)

 

to drew7 you know
“What did they draw?" said Alice, quite
forgetting her promise.
“ Treat-1e,” said the Dormouse, without consi—

dering at all this Time

lllzs A MAI) TE:\~P.—\RT\'.

“1 want a clean cup,” interrupted the Hatter:
“let’s all move one place on.”

He moved onas he spoke, and the Dormouse

 

followed him: the March Hare moved into the 
Dormouse’s place, and Alice rather unwillingly
took the place of the March Hare. The Hatten
was the only one who got any advantage from ‘
the change: and Alice was a good deal worse off L
than before, as the March Hare had just upset ‘ V
the milk—jug into his plate. '

Alice did not Wish to offend the Dormouse
again, so she began very cautiously: “But I i
don’t understand. Where (lid they draw the
treaele from 'Z”

“ You can draw water out of a water-well,”
said the Hatter; “so I should think you could-
draw treaele out of a treacle—well—eh, stupid?”

“But they were in the well," Alice said to
the Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last».
remark.

f‘Of course they were,” said the Der-mouse,—

“ well in. ”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A .\l:\l) TEA-PAHTL lot;

This answer so confused poor Alice, that she
"let the Dormouse go on for some tinie without
interrupting it.

“They were learning to draw,” the Dormouse
went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it
wits getting very sleepy; “and they drew all
manner of things—everything that begins with
an M-—" ‘

“Why with an M?” said Alice.

“\Vhy not?” said the March Hare.

Alice was silent.

,The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this
time, and was going oﬁ“ into a doze; but, on
being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again
with a little shriek, and went on: “—that
begins With an M, such as mouse—traps, and the
moon, and memory, and muchness—you know
you say things are ‘rnuch of a muchness’ﬁdid
you ever see sur'h u thing as a drawing of a
mnchness 7; "

“Really, now you ask me,” said Alice, very

u

‘ muoh confused, "l don’t think 7 ~

 
 
  
 
 

110 I A MAD V'I'EA-PARTY.’ ‘

"Then you shouhhlt talk," Said the Hatter.
This piece of rudenéss was more than yAlice
could hear: she got, up in great disgust, and
walked off; the Dormuuse fell asleep instantly;
and neither of the pthers took the least’uoticc’

    
  
 
  

of her going,’ though she looked back oncke 6r
twice, half hoping that they \vouldlcail, after her"
the last time she saw them, they were trying to
put the Dormoil'se into the teap0t. L L L

“ At any rate I’ll never go {MW again 3 ” said

A MAD TEA-PARTY. III

  

Alice as she picked her way through the wood.
“It’s the stupidest tea—party I ever was at in
r all my life ? ”

 

Just as she said this, she noticed that one
of the trees had a door leading right into it.

a

“ That’s very curious I ” she thought. )ut every-
thing’s curious to—dny. I think 1 may as well
go in at once.” And in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall,
and close to the little glass table. “New, I ’ll
manage better this time,” she said to herself.
’ and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till
she was about a foot high: then she walked
down the little passage: and them—she found
herself at last in the beautiful garden, among

the bright ﬂower-beds and the cool fountains.

 

 

 

THE QUEEN’S CROQUET-GROUND. 113

“ Y and better not talk I” said Five. “ I heard
the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to he
beheaded !”

L ' “What for?”
Said the one who
had spoken ﬁrst.

“That’s none

’ of your business,
Two I” said Seven.

“ Yes, it is his
business I” said
Five, “ and I 'll
tell him—it was
for bringing the

’ cook tulipmoots in--

 

stead of onions.”

Seven ﬂung
down his brush, and had just begun, “ \Vell, of
Vull the unjust things—” when his eye chanced
to fall upon Alice, as she stood Watching them,
and he checked himself suddenly: the others
looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

‘2

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 
 
     
   
   
   

1:14

 

,  “’Quld you ‘tkéllﬂinea 1117719856,” saidf
‘a’ ylitﬂét timidly, L L

 

w113'q'0113'are painting those

' i‘bges‘?

 

Fin: and Seyeﬁ‘ nothing; but lbdkke’d'yat
 “why; um
‘ fact, ~15; ~ you, see; Miss, ’this hem ought £61m

Two. de began,- 11198" 10W ‘xfoiae,

' beéﬁ ’ a red ,rdsg-tl‘eE, ﬁndwve} put axwhitg Qhe

‘ ii1 and if the‘Quee’n \xy'fkasiyfo‘ I H
“brut, ‘We ;$houl<1 ally‘havxe {mu fut, pﬁ; I you 
L knowfﬂo’ xscé, Miss,”\\je-’i-c, “(hail-g: our bqs
L‘ afqre {she crimes, 112—” ,At this mémeuéi F
Who-'5 had béeu- anxiously, lodging, aptoSs-Ljfhc

1 2;

garden; callquout; “The Queen? The Qﬁgéﬁ

    
 
  
  
   
 
  

 

~   and? the ,t1u"ee :gm‘dénem ‘ ihéfﬁnﬂyy'pthrew yth‘

 

‘ sélx'e$ ﬂjaf upqn'tkhyei’r‘ £36655 ‘ Therer‘éﬁaﬁ , 
of many foetstgps; fand' Alice looked 401111617. .

     

» to Seexthe Q‘néeﬁ;

 

 

‘ V 'gFifst L’casmé? tén gelding luhs ;’ these

35mm: and s ’aﬁédliké- the, ’threye/ gardeliensjbb
arid ﬂit, '7 fiﬂ’f-utheif-Haﬁds’ aha [atkth‘é chine):

‘ 3116511: the yf‘eﬁpouﬁiersigy these jfere @i‘namcﬁfé

’ an, ovér ' with. ,jdiamond's,’  13nd; jwllgéd My

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

CRDQUET-GROUND.  115

V‘tw‘o, asthe soldiers (lid. iAfter these came the
-r0yal‘ children; there ‘were ten of them, and
, the ' little tlears, came jumping merrily along
hand in hand, in couples: they were all orna—
'Inented with hearts. Next came the guests,
‘ mostly Kings and Queens, and among them
L’ : Aliee recognised the \Vhite Rabbit: it was talk-
ing in a hurried nervous manner, smiling ‘at
everything that was said, and went by Without,
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of

Hearts, carrying the King’s crown on a crimson
Vvolvreticushion; and, last of all this grand pro:
“ cession, 'came THE KING AND QUEEN OF
, HEARTS. 

Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought,
not to lie down on her face like the three
gardeners, but she could not remember ever
having heard of such a rule at processions ; “and
3 Besides, What would be the'use of a procession,”
thought she, “if people had all to lie down on
r‘their faces, so that they couldn't see it '2” So

she stood where she was, and‘ waited,

 

115 ’THE QUEEN’S

 

When the procession came opposite to Ali<ze,
they all stopped and looked at her, and the
Queen said severely, “Who is this '4” She said
it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and
smiled in reply.

“Idiot!” said‘the Queen, tossing her head
impatiently -; and, turning to Alice, she went 011,:
“What’s your name, child?”

“My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,”
said Alice very politely; hut she added, to her-'
self, “ Why, they’re only it pack of cards, after I,
all. I needn’t he afraid of them!”

“And who are these?” said‘the Queen, point- -
ing to the three gardeners who were lying 7
round the rose-tree; 'for you see, as they were '
lying on their faces, and the pattern on their ‘
hack was the same as the rest of the peek,
she could not tell whether they were gardeners,
01-, soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own 7
children. i ’

“How should I know ?” said Alice, surprised '

at her own courage. “It’s no business of 71177110.?

 

 

(‘HOQUE’IVGROUXD. 11:7

 

 

  

 

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and,

after glaring at her for a moment like a. wild
«beast. hogan screaming, “OH with 1101' head!

‘()ﬁ‘i”

 

    
   
 
  
 
   
  
   
     
 
  
  

113 , , U I THE QUEEN’S

Fxonse'nsev} ,‘Sarid Alice,“ {very loudly: gm
decidedly, and the Quben )vaé :silent, i, V I
The King laid his hand upon her,‘arn1,y‘§uirl
timidly said, ,“Consider, ‘deariﬂshe‘ is only
arc-hm Eur ,L d ,, I , h  L
 The Queen; turned angrin away from him
and said to the"Knave, “Tum them over!” 
‘ The Knave did so,irve'ry bai‘efliliy, With one, foot. *
“Gef up!” Lsaid the Queen in a shril}, IOud
'Vblice, and the three gardeners instantly: L
Lup, and began bowing to the-King, the Queen,
the royal Lchildr‘en, and e'veryfbody else. ,
“fLeiive qff that!” screamedthe Queen, ‘ “Yo
make me giddy.” And i‘ their/1?, t’ll‘yihgkyyto 'th
Jose—tree; she.yWentr on, “What have youik’rhée
doiﬁghei‘e Iii," I L ‘i L L

   

“May it pledsé your Majésty “said: Titohin-

 

 

a \‘ery’humblc tone, going domi, (in one hit
as he spoke; “werxifere tryin§-~” L
,‘V‘I see!” mid j’the Queen, whq had

\vhile‘ been examining the roses;

   
  

011,

their-- heads!” and the prm‘ebsmn' Lmovred

 

CBOQUET-GROUNI). ' 119

three of the soldier's remaining hehind to‘execute

 

the unfortunate gardeners, \\'l10,il'ﬂl’l to Alice for
, Protection. V
V“You shan‘t he beheaded!" said Alice, and
Idshe put. them into a large ﬂower-pot that stood
near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
U minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
’n1arched off after the others. i
“Are theirheads oﬁ’?” shouted the Queen.
“Their heads are gone, if it please your
‘ Majestyi” the soldiers shouted in reply. '
» “That’s right!” shouted the Queen. “Can
. you play croquet ?” i
V; The, soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice,
as the? question was evidently meant for her.
i‘ Yes I ” shouted Alice.

“ Come on, thenl” roared the Queen, and Alice

 

 

 

r jOined the procession, Wondering very much what
i would happen next.

’ said a timid

' “lt’s+it’s a very ﬁne dayl’
yoiee at her side. She was walking bythe White

Rabbit. whonvas peeping anxiously into her face.

 

120 I ‘V THE QUEEX‘S

   
 

:

“ Vel‘y,’
“Hush! hush!” sand the Rabbit inn‘ low;

hurried tone. He looked anxiously over

said Alice :—‘‘Where‘s the Duvhess?

shoulder as he spoke, and thenrraisecl himself
I upon: tiptoe,¥ put his mouth close to her ear,
and ivliispere(l,q“She’s under sentence of ex’equé ‘
my " i ‘ ii
*What'for?” said Alice. , 
“Did you say, "\Vhat a pity! ‘l” the [Rabbit]
asked. ‘ ' Li
H “ No, I (lichftj’ said Alice: “ l don’t think it e
at all a pity. I, said "What for?” ‘ - i
1“ She boxed the Queen’s ears—3th: Rabbit
began; Alice gave a little scream of laughter
“ Oh, hush l ” the Rabbit whispered in a frightened

 

  
   
    
    
  

tone. “The Queen will hear you! ~You see she
came rather late, and the Queen said—” \

“Get to yonr places!” shontetl the Queen in
e voice of thunder, and, people began running
about in all directions, tumbling- against each-
other :y'however,’ they got settled down in a minute

on two, andythe game began.

 

 

CROQUET—GROUNU.  121

" Alice thought she had never seen 511011 a
' cuﬁous eroquet—gmund in her I life: it was all
ridges and furrows; the eroguebbulls were live
hédgehogs, and the llmlle‘rs‘ live ﬂamingoes, nml
‘ the soldiers had to
:ydoulde themselves up
land stand on their
hands and ﬂea, to
1nake 'thc areheu.

The chief difﬁ-
culty Alice found at
ﬁrst, was in lllmmging
her ﬂamingo: she
3L1CCeeLlcd in getting

 its lmdytueked away,

 

comfortably enough,
ﬁnder her arm, with
its legs hanging down, but generally, jusL as she
had get its noel: nicely stmightcued out; and
' was going togive the hedgehog a blow with
v, its‘ head, it would twist itself round and look
up in her face, with such a‘ puzzled expres-

R

 

 

 

 

 

   
  
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
   

     

lHE WEE! '

Sign ’that she coyiltls'noﬁ help “hufﬁng: but? laugh
Ling: hnclhwhgnéherhad got its headdhwnj and
was goinng 1)p’gii1“agai11, itfw‘asvery provoking
,‘to ﬁnd that the hedgehogyﬂhad V‘uhrleledk‘itself L
‘ and was in the ' act of CmWth ‘h‘away’ : heéidcs
ﬁll this, there was generally a ridge 'furmw
in the dey \vhereverghshe wanted to séndgt‘he‘
hedgehog tafanyd; as the doubled—up Soldiers wen
nIWayéi‘gett‘ing up mindlwalkingﬁoﬁ" to Qtlmypm't.
of ‘ the IngOLInd, , A1199, '{soon came r to? the Conchisioﬁ
that it was a, very difﬁcth game ihd‘écd. 1 ' '

"The players Played at 'Once’x‘vithout wa
ing for“ turns; quarreﬂing all the while, and
ﬁghting ’fo’rrythe hédgehbgs and in a very 8110]?
time the Quéen #33; in ’3 furious‘passiomhand'
'wéknyt', stamping ahout, [and "shouting; “Off-Wit]
his, hem l” of “I03- with, héf ‘11éfadl’;5 ahO'utf one

». in 3- minute.

 

Alice begzm to‘ feel uneasy tp be suTe

she had ,uot"a.§ yet had» any dispute, with th’
’Qu‘cengbut she km;va that it"fmight hajjpen an}

:9

minute; “and thEHx-H thmxghtgshg “ What hid

 

   

 

 

 

CROQUET-GRO UND. 1:23

become of me? They‘re dreadfully fond of
beheading people here; the great wonder is,
that there’s any one left alive!”

She was looking“ about for some way of
escape, and \i'ondering whether she could get
away without being seen, when She noticed at
‘enrious appearance in the air: it puzzled her
very much at ﬁrst, but after watching it 21‘
minute or two she made it out to be a, grin,
and she said to herself, “It’s the Cheshire Cut:
now I shall have seniebody to talk to.”

L “How are you getting on?” said the Cut,
as seen its there was mouth enough for it to
speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then
nodded. “it’s no use speaking to it,” she
thought, “till its one have c01ne,L01‘ at least
onehof them.” In another minute the whole,
‘V I head appeared, and then Alice put down her
ﬂainingo,‘and began an account of the game,
feeling very glad she had some one to listen to
hen The Cat seemed to think that there was

 

  

m 7, THE QUEnx’s

enough of it now in sight, and no more of it
appeared
“ I don’t [think they play at all fairly," Alice i

lxevrzni inim’thcr'a com )lninin tone “and the'
a , 7

 

 all quarrel so dreadfully one can’t hear ends—sell

speak ,and, they don’t seem to have any rules

 

in particular; {Lt least, if there are, nobody],
attends to them—sand you’ve no idea. how, con;
fusing it is all the things being alive; for in-\
stancer there’s the arch I’ve- got to go through: ‘
next walking about ,at the other end ,ofrthe
gr01111(l~—an(l I should have croqueted the
Queen’s hedgehog just now; only it ran away"
when it saw mine coming I" i i
 “ How do you like the Queen?” said the Cat
in 1L low voice.

“Not at all," said Alice: “she’s so ex"
tremely—” Just then she noticed that the
Queen was close behind her, listeninaz so 511er

:;

went on, ——likely to Win, that it’s hardly worth”
-\Vliile ﬁnishing theigame.” i I I

','l,'he Queen smiled and passed on.

 

 

 

I‘IKOQUET-GROUND. 12;;

“Who are you talking to?” said the King,
seeming up to Alice, and looking at the Cat’s

head with great curiosityl

 

a Cheshire Cat,” said
 Alice: “allow me to introduce it.”
“1 don’t like the look of it at all,” said the

King: “however, it may kiss my hand if it

“It’s a friend of mine

likes."

“ I’d rather not,” the Cat remarked.

“Don’t be imperfincnt,” said the King, “and
don’t look at me like that!” He got behind
Alice as he spoke.

 “A cut may look at a king,” said Alice. “ I’ve
read that in some book, but I don’t remember
Where.”

“\Vell, it must be removed,” said the King
very decidedly, and he called to the Queen, who
was passing at the moment, “My dear! I wish
[you would have this cat removed I”

The Queen had only one way of settling all
i‘ diﬂieulties, great or small. “Off with his head 5”

' she said, without even looking round.

 
  

126 * THE QUEEN’S

“ I’ll fetch the executioner myself,” said the -»
King eagerly, and he hurried OH". x 

Alice thought she might as well go back and -‘
see how the game was going 011, as she heard i
the Queens ,Voiee, in the distance, sereaming
~with passion. She had already heard her sen-r
tence three -i of the players to he executed for,
having missed their turns, and she did not like i
the look of things at all, as the game was in:
such confusion that‘she never know whether” it
was her turner not. ‘So she went off in search
of her hedgehog. i I

The hedgehog was engaged in a ﬁght with
another hedgehog, which seemed, to; Alice an ex—
cellent opportunity for croquet.ng one of them

with the other: the only diﬂ‘ieulty was, that her

 

ﬂamingo was gone across to the other side of

the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a

   
 
 

helpless sort of way to ﬂy up into a, tree.

By the time she had caught the ﬂamingo
and brought it back, the ﬁght was over, and
both the hedgehogs were out of sight: ‘flJutij

 

 

FROQUET—GROUND. 1-27

doesn’t matter much,” thought Alice, “as all the
arches are gone from this side of the ground."
'30 she tucked it away under her arm, that it
might not escape again, and went hack to have
I a little more conversation with her friend.

d When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she
was surprised to ﬁnd quite a large crowd col—
lected round it: there was a dispute going on
between the executioner, the King, and the
Quee11,who were all talking at once, While all
the rest .Were quite silent, and looked very
uncomfortable.

The moment Alive appeared, she was appealed
to by all three to settle the question, and they
repeated their arguments to her, though, as they

fall spoke at once, she found it very hard to
make out exactly what they said

The executioner’s argument was, that you

'eouldn’t cut off a head unless there was a body
.to cut- it off from: that he had never had to do
sueh a thng liefore, and he wasn’t (roinO‘ to

23 a
begin at his time of life.

 

128 THE QUEEN’S

 

 

 

The King’s argument was, that anything that
had a head could be beheaded, and tlmﬁ you
weren’t to talk nonsense. 

The Queen's argument was, that if some;
thing wasn’t done about it in less than 110 timé ,

She’d have everybody exeéuted, all round. (It

 

CROQUET-GROUND. 129

was this last remark that had made the whole
party look So grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but
“It belongs to the Duchess: you'd better ask
7165‘ about it"

“She’s in prison,” the Queen said to the
executioner: “fetch her here.” And the execu-
tioner went oflf like an arrow.

The Cat’s head began fading away the moment
he was gone, and, by the time he had come back
with the Duchess, it had entirely disappeared 3 so
the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down looking for it, While the rest of the party

went back to the game.

 

CHAPTER lX.
THE 3100K TUM‘LE’S STORY.

“YOU can't think how glad I am to see you
again, you dear old thing!” said the Duchess, as
she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice’s, and
they Walked all” together.

Alice was very glad to ﬁnd her in such a
pleasant temper, and thought to herself that
perhaps it was only the pepper that had made
her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

\Vhen I ’m n Duchess," she said to herself, (not,
in a very hopeful tone though) “I won’t have
any pepper in my kitchen at all. Soup does

very well witlmut—whlaylw it’s always pepper

 

 

 

THE 3100K TURTLE‘S STORY. 131

that makes people hot-tempered,” she went on,
Very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, “and vinegar that makes them
sour—and camomile that makes them bitter—
and—and barley—sugar and [such ‘things that
make children sweet—tempered. Ll only Wish
people knew that: then they wouldn’t he
stingy about it, you'know—”

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this
time, and was a little startled when she heard
her voice close to her ear. “You’re thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk. I can’t tell you just now What
the moral of that is, but I shall remember it
in abit.”

“Perhaps it hasn’t 01101” Alice ventured to
remark

“Tut, tut, ehilr I” said the Duchess. “Every
thing’s got a. moral; if only you can ﬁnd it.”
And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's
side as she spoke.

Alice did not much like her keeping so close

gm

  

13‘2 , THE AIOL‘K '

to her: ﬁrst, because the 'Ducliess was very],
ugly, and secondly, because she was exactly did»
right, height to
rest 1101‘ L(‘lll]1 mil

A lice’s shoulder,

 

 

and it was an 1111-,
comfortably sharp
chin. Huwcver,
she did not like

to be rude, so ,she ,

 

bare it as Well as ’
she could.
“ The

gomg on mthep

game ’5

- better now,” slio

   

said, by way of

  
  
 
 

keeping up the convursation a little. I
“’Tis so,” said the Duchess: “and the moral“
of that 154011, ’t’is love, ’gis m, m makes:
the World go roundl’” I
“Somebody said,” Alice \Vliispereyd,1“that it’s .
done by every body minding theirown business I ”

 

'I‘URTLE’S STORY. 133

)

“Ah, u‘ellf. It means much the same thing,’
said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin
i intoy‘Aliee’s shoulder as she added, “and the

moral of that is—‘Tuke care (if the sense,nnd
‘the sounds will take bare of themselves.’ ”

“How fond she is of ﬁnding morals in
- things ‘2 ” Alien thought to herself.

HV“I dare say you’re wondering WhyI don"t ‘
put my arm roundyour waist,” the Duchess said
‘ after a pause: “the reason is, that I’m doubt—
ful about the temper of your ﬂamingo. Shall
I try the experiment?" ' y '

“He might bite,” Alice cautiously replied,
not feeling at all anxious to have the experi—
. ment tried.

’ "‘Very true," Said the Duchess; “ﬂamingoes
and mustard both bite. And the moral of that
is 4f Birds of a feather ﬂock together.”

“Only mustard isrft a liird,” Alice remarked.

“Right, as usual,” said the Duchess: “what
in clear way you have of putting ﬁlings!”

i “ It’s a mineral, I think,” said Alice.

 

 

 

 

 

  
   
 
   
    
     
 
   
  

12H  THE mm:

‘5“0f course it is,” said: the Duchess, 'W’ho'
seemed ready to agree to everything that Alio"
said; “there’s a‘ large I mustard—iiiihe hear here;
And the moral of that is~—‘Tho moré ‘there is
of mine, the less there is of youfs.”

“Oh, I know!” exclaimed Alice, who had
not attended to this last remai’k, “it’s a vege'
table. It doesn’t look like one, but it. i '

 

“I quite’ agree with you,” said theiDuohesn,
“and the morle of that is—‘Be what you would.
esekem to be’#0r, if you’d liko it put more
simplyi‘Ne’veii imagine yourself I not to ho
otherwise than what it might appear to others
"chat whﬁt you were or might have- 13é'en‘ has
'notpthel‘wise than What you' had beén ~W0ultl
have appeared toythem to booth-crwise.” V

“I think I should understand "that better,
,Alico said my politely, “if I 11an it written
 down} but I can’t quitei‘follonfwit as you shy
ﬂit.” ‘ V L '
L “ That’s nothing to ivhnt’ l Lcould lsay ifwil‘

chose}, the Diiohess repliéd; in, a pleased ‘toﬁeu I '

 

 

- TURTLE’S STORY. 135

“Pray don’t trouble yum-Self to say it any
longer than that,” said Alice; I

“Oh! don’t talk about trouble!" said the
Duchess. “I make you a present of every—
thing I’ve said as yet.”

“A cheap sort of present!” thought Alice.
‘fl’rn glad they don’t give birthday- presents
like that!” But she did not venture to say
out loud.

L “Thinking again?” the Duchess asked, with
another dig of her sharp little chin.

“I’ve a. right to think,” said Alice sharply,
for she was beginning'to feel a little worried.

“' Just about as much right,” said the Duchess,
“us pigs have to ﬂy: and the 111—"

But here, to Alice’s great surprise, the
Duchess’s voice died away, even in the middle
of, her favourite word 'IDOl‘ﬂl: and the urn]

Lthat was linked into hers began to tremble.
I 1\lice looked up, and there stood the Queen in
front of them, with her arms folded, frowning

like a thunderstorm

 

TURTLE’S STORY. 137

 

were taken into custody by the soldiers, who
of course had to leave off being arches to do this,
so that by the end of half an hour or so there
I were no arches left, and all the players, except
the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody
and under sentence of execution.
I Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and
said to Alice, “Have you seen the Mock Turtle
yet?”

i “No,” said Alice. “I don’t even know what
:1 Mock Turtle is.”

. “It’s the thing Nook Turtle Soup is made
” from,” said the Queen.
“I never saw one, or heard of one,” said Alice.
 “ Come On, then,” said the Queen, “ and he shall
- ,tell you his history.” '
As they walked 03' together, Alice heard the
‘ King say in a low voice, to the company gene—
rally, “You are all pardoned.” “Come, that’s a
good thingl” she said to herself, for she had felt
quite unhappy at the number of executions the

Queen had ordered.

 

[133 r , V , .Tm: 3100K'

 

 

They very S()(V)1L1L(”£11110 uponka: Gl‘yphon, lying
fast asleep in the 51111,, (If you don’t knmvkvhrit
a Gryphon, is, look at ’thekpicturc.) “Up; 152?
ﬂying!” ysaid the Queen, “and take this ymmgf
lady to see the Mock Turtle; and to him hi.

   

history. jI- must go back and see after some:

     
 
 

'exécutibns I hive ordered ;”’and«sh'o Walked 0H,,
leaving Alice alolie, with the Gryphonﬁ ‘Ali'ce
did not quite like 'the look of the creaturgbu 

6n the whole shekthought it Wmﬂd,be- Quite m

 

 

TURTLE ’s STORY. 139

safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen: so she waited.

The Gi‘yphou sat11p and rubbed its eyes: then
it watched the Queen till she was out of sight:
then it chuckled. -‘ “\Vhat fun!” said the
Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

' “\Vhat is the fun l” said Alice.

“Why, she,” said the Giyphon. “It’s all her
fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you
know. COme on!”
i “Everybody says y‘ come 0111’ here,” thought
Alice, as she went slowly after it: “I never was
i soordered about before, in all my life, never! ”

'They had not gone far before they saw the
Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and

V ’lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they
came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as
if his heait would break. She pitied him deeply.
“\Vhat is his sorrow?” she asked the Gryphon,
and the Gryphon answered, very, nearly in the
same words as before, “It’s all his fancy, that:

he hasn’t got no sorrow, you know. Come on!"

   
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
    
   
  

1m ’ THE 3100K '

So they went up to the Mock Turtlegiyhn-lbokcd j
at; them -\vit;h large eyes full of tears; buthsaid
nbth'mg.  , . V ,

i “This heré yoiing lady,” said the Gryphon,

“she wants; fbr ti) know your history, she do.”

“I’ll tell it her,” said they-Mock Turtle a

 deep; hollow- tone ‘: “sit (1an both of yé‘u,iancl”

don’t/speak u‘ivorcl till I’ve ﬁnished.”

i So they sat; down, and nobody spoke for sgme"

mummies. Alice thought toi herself, “I‘lclon’t- see“:

how he can ever ﬁnish? if he'doesn’t begin.” Bil
she waited patiéntly. i ’ , '

“Once,” said the Mock Turtle at last, ivith'a;

deep sighgf'li was a real Turtle.”  I “

These words, were i followed by 21' ’very, 10ng’

silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation“

of “Hjcki‘rhl”, from; the Gryplmn, and the (30114 

stunt heavy sobhing of' the Block Turtleiir Alice, ‘

i I was very nearly getting up and saying, “Thanh

' you; sir, for'your interesting stoiyf’ 1)th she boﬁld

not help thinking there-must he more to, ﬁon’ié,’s‘0

‘ she sat still and Said nothing. M i y y y

 

T URTVLE’S STORY. , w

 

 

 

 

 

~“\Vhenv We 'Were little,” the Mark Turtle
went on at last, more calmly, though stil] $01)-

binﬁ‘ a‘ little new and then, “ we went to school
0 

 

 
  
 

142 \ ‘ - THE MOCK

in the sea The master was zui olcl Turtle—we,
use(lrto call him Tortoiseﬁ” i I ‘
“Why did you call him Tortoise, if he Wasn’t
one 2” Alice asked.  I
“We called him Tortoisc,‘ because he taught

 

us,” said the Mock Turtle angrily; “really you ’5:
are very dull l” ' i

 “You ought to be, ashamed oi" yourself for‘: ‘-
asking such a simple question," a(l(le(l:the Gryi

phon; and then they both sat silent and looked

 

at poor Alice, who felt1'ea(ly ito sink into the I,
earth. At last the Gryphon said to the Moi:k
Tuiﬂe, “Dl'ive’on, old 'fello\vl. Don’t be all (lay:-
about it !” and he Went on in these words:

   
  
  
   
 
 

' “Yes, We went to school in the sea, though»
you mayn’t‘ believo it—”
“I never said I didn’t I” interrupted Alice.»
“You did,” said the Mock Turtle. i
“ Hold your tongue I" added the Gryphon, befor
Alice could speak again. The Mock Turtle went 01
“\V0 had the host of educationseinﬂfacy’t, JV
went to school every day;" I i

TURTLE’S STORY. 143

 

 

“I’ve been to :L (ln‘y—seliool too," said Alice;

 

““you needn't be so proud as all that.”
V‘V‘\Vithy extras?” asked the Mock Turtle a

' little anxiously.

 

“Yes,” said Alice, “we learned French and

 

music."
“ And washing ?” said the Mock Turtle.-

V“ Certainly not!” said Alice' indignantly.

 

 “Ah l Then yours wasn’t a, really good school,”
7 said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief.
“New at ours they had at the end of the bill,

‘ French, music, and washing—extra.”

 

“You couldn’t have wanted it Iniueh," said

Alice 3 “living at. the bottom of the sen.”

 

- “Ieouldn’t afford to learn it," said the Mock
Turtle with a sigh. “I only took the regular
L V course.”

V“What was that T’ inquired Alice.

   
 
 
 

“Reeling and \Vrithing, of course, to, begin,
with,” the Mock Turtle replied: “and then the
‘diﬁ'erent branches of ArithmetieﬁAml)itionx Dis~‘

traction, Ugliﬁcation, and Derision.”

 

144 ’1‘“ 1-} HOUR

“I never heard of ‘Ugliﬁuntiolnm Aline Sven-
tured to say. “What is it Vi

The Glyphon lifted up both its paws in sur—
‘prisc, “ Never heard of uglifying!” it cxclaimcd.’
“You know what to beautify is, I suppose 2"

“ Yes,” said Alice, doubtfully: “it nieans4t04

‘ make

 

an’ *thing—vprcttier.”

“\Vell then,” the Gryphon went on, “‘if you,
don’t know what to uglii'y is, you am it i
simpleton.”

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask {my I
more questions about it, so she turned tci the' :
Mock Turtle, and said; “\Vhat else had you to,
learn @” - L y 
“\Vell, there was Mystery,” the Mock Turtle '
mplied, countng off the subjects you his flappers,éy

 

  
 
   

“Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaogmphy i
then Dl‘éLwling—the Drmvliiig-mastﬂ was [L11 old
ponger—eel, that used to come once a 'week’ : 'lze'
taught us meling, Stretching, and Fainting in‘
Coils.”

“\Vhat was I/mz‘. like?” said Alice.

TURTLE’S STORY, ' ‘ 14:1

 

j" ,“Well, I can’t Show it you, myself,” the Mock
Turtle said: “I’m too stiff. And the Gryphon’

 

 

"never leerht it.” ,
i ““Hﬁdn’t time,” said the Gryphoni “I went
ijto the Classical master,theiigh. He was an old
crab, he was.” 

H “I never Went to him,” the Mock Turtle said
' With a' sigh: ' “he taught Laughing and Grief,
‘ they used to say.” i . '
‘TS‘O he did, so he did,” said the Gryphonk

 

’sighii‘ig in his min, and both creatures hid their"
“faces in theif paws,  y I

f‘And how many limirs a day did you' do
i‘ylcs‘sons?” said Alice, in a hurry to change the
: subject. i y I y y
, f‘Tcn houlis the ﬁrst day,” said the Mock

 

n“Ti1rtle’: “nine the next, and so on.”
“What a curious plan!” exclaimed Alice,
‘i‘That’s the reason they’re called lessons,” the

 

fGryphon remarked: “because they lessen {rem

 

 

1 day to day.”

  

i ' This Was quite a new, idea to Alice, and she
 ,   U

 

 

 

CHAPTER X.
THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE.

THE Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the
back of one ﬂapper across his eyes, He looked ‘
at Alice and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his Voice. “Same as if he had
a bone in his throat," said the Gryphon, and it
set to work shaking him and punching him in
the buck. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his
Voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks,
he went on again :—

‘V‘Yeu may not have lived much under the
sea—J’ (“I haven’t,” said Aliee)—“and perhaps
you were never even introduced to a. lobster—”

 

US THE LOBSTER

 

(Alice I begun to [say “I once. tilStG/(‘l’al’ but
checked herself hastily, and said, “No, never”)¥+,
“ so you can have no idea what a delightful thing

 

'vn

La Lobster—Quadrille 15-: , I
V0, indeed,” said Alice. “What am of a, '

dance is it?" I I ,
,“th,” said the Gryphon, “you ﬁrstforrﬁ

 

 

into a line along the seavshore—” I y
“ Two lines I ” cried the Mock Turtle. “ Sealsz
turtles, salmon, and so on: then, when you’Vc'
V Cleared all the jelly-ﬁsh Ont of the Ways—7’

“That generally ﬂakes some time," interruptecl

 

the Gryphon.
', “—¥)'0u advance twice—7’
“Each with a; lobster as a partnerl” cried the
 Gryphon 
“Of course,” the Mock Turtle said: “advance
twice, Sett0 phl‘t’uerse” l

“—changc lobsters, and retire in same order,"

 

contile the Gryphon.- I 
I “Then, yon knew,” theMock Turtle Went on,

“ you throw the—ell

 

 

 

QUADRILLE. 149

“The lobsters!” shouted the Gryphon, with a
" bonnd into the air.
"—as far out to sea as you can—'”

“Swim after them!” screamed the Gryphon.

“Turn a somersault in the seal” cried the
Mock Turtle, eapering Wildly about. 

 “Change lohsters’ again!" yelled the Gryphon
at the top of its voice.

“Back to land again, and—that’s'all the ﬁrst
.ﬁgure,” said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping
his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
down again very sadlyand quietly, and looked
at Alice. I
 “ It must be a very pretty dance,” said Alice
timidly. '

“\Vould you like to see a little of it?" said
i the Mock Turtle. '

‘,‘ Very much indeed,” said Alice. 

L“Come, let ’3 try the ﬁrst ﬁgure!” said the
iMoek Turtle to the Gryphon. “\Ve can do it
without lobsters, you know Which shall sing?” i

 
  
  
 
 
  
 

150 -  . ‘ THE LOBSTER

“Oh, you sing,” said the Gryphon. “I’ve
forgotten the words.”  L I ' \'
So they began 'solemnly dancing réuﬁd and:
round Alice, every now and than treading on lief
toes when they passed, “£00 (31050, and waving their
foré-paws to mark the time,‘ while the Mock Turtle ‘

’sanyg'this, Very slowly and sadly :~—

 

 

QUADRILLE. " 151

“ lVill you walk a little faster?” said at whiting to a snail,
“ There’s a poipoise close behind me, and he ’s treading on
I my tail.

See how eoy'M'ly the lobsters and the turtles till advance!

They are waiting on the shingleﬁwill you come and join
the (lance .2

Will you, won’t you, will, you, won’t you, will you join
the (lance?

lVill you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join

the dance .2

“ You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out
to seal! ”
But the snail replied, “ Tooﬂir, too fur! " otan gave u look
‘ ashame—
Said he thanked the whiting kindle, but he would not join
, - the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not
join the dance.

L " Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not

join the (lance.

 

 

 

 

   
   
    
 
  
    
 
  
   
  

'15’2   LOBSTER
, ‘k What mattersit howfcgr'uﬁ g0 .2 ” his scaly friend Mfliezl
,‘‘Thgra is another yshbrb,yau (snow, 7129071, like other sidé.
The further of from Engldnd t/‘Lé Mitre? isle-Emma
T/zén {um not 12mg, belowcl’snailj but Lcoma and join the I
’ (lame.   > > I
~ Will you, won? you, will you, won’t you, will you jdini
L I the dance? » L I i ‘ ' L L
Will you; won’t you, will you, won’t you,’1yx;oéi’tfyyou\joinj

thé ddnce 3'”

I ‘y‘yThankyou, it’s a very inteieslixlg daﬁcé to
:\\'&‘tCl1,” saidrAlice, feeling very glad that it Was- ,
' over at last: “and, I do so like that burious song
about the whiting” l I, I; 
“‘Qli, to the Whiting,” said: the ‘ Mock
Turtle,ll“theywybu’Ve seen tlmhL-of course?” V

“Yes,” said/Alice) “I’ve yéften seén them Lil; '
'dinn’—” she Checked herself hastily, I I

“I don’t know "where Dinﬁ may barf: LSﬂldn,
the Mock: Turtle, “but; if; )‘oufwie'. seen: than,
so often, bf course You gknow they’re
L'“l‘ believe so,” Alice rkelpliedl ﬁbuughfﬁillx

 

 

QUADRILLE. 153

“ They have their, tails in their mouths;—;m(l
I, they’re all over crumbs?
 “You're wrong about the crumbs,” said the
I Mock Turtle: “crumbs would all wash OH' in
the see. But they have their tails ih their
, mouths; and the reason isa” hero the Mock
LTurtle yawnecl and shut his eyes.-—“ Tell her
about, the reason and all that,” he said to the
L (:‘ri‘yphon, L L
“The reason is,” said the Gryphon, “that
L» they- would go with the lobsters to the dance.
So they got thrown out to sea. So they had
to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast
in their mouths. So they couldn’t get them out
again. That’s all.” ‘
, “ Thank you? said Alice, “ it’s very interesting.
‘ I never knew so much about a whiting before.”
“I lean tell you more than that, if you like,’
said the Gryphon. “Do you know why it’s
called a whiting?”

 

“I never thought about it,” said, Alice.
' “WVhy Cl”

 

 

      
  
  
   
   
 
 
  
   
   

 

15g ,  ‘ :THE-LOBSTEB

,“It does thaboots and ‘shucgf the Gryphm (
replied Vélyisolemlﬂy; ’ ¥ ,
,Alic‘er was thoroughly puzzled; “’Do’esythe hoof ‘
V and shoes 1” : she repeatedjn‘ya \\*oﬁ¢1&1‘ing- foﬁe; ‘-
“ Why, what “are ymm shoés *done‘ with? ”
Said Glyphon.’  “1,mea11,xvhat,1nakés {hem
so Shiny?" I I . L '  r I
Alice-looked down at” them, ‘and' cahﬁdered a
’ littlé bafore She gran her ansﬁrer; “,‘They’rékdokne,
“with, bucking, I believe)” , ”
“136th and shgiés7 under the sea,” the
pho‘n Went oh rin‘fa. deep vqiée, “wedding with,
‘whiti11g.r Now you know,” ‘  / I;
i - “And what y‘a’re thby made, ,cléf‘21’5‘ziA1-iCé asked;
rinia’ tone of great curiosity" V '   I
’ “Soles and eelswoyf cum-sag" the Gryphbpl
Vpliéd rather impatientlyf, ‘f shljinip"c0uld
hm .toldj’puythat.“   I L ‘ , /'
“ Pd beeh‘ the Whiting,” ‘said,Alicc,‘ ,xvhbsef"
‘ thoﬁghts were still running, ’c’m: sohg, ' “lid ,
‘ hm’gysaidkto the ’p‘o’rpgise, ‘Keep, back; please
‘ ﬁx've don’t wahtj you Withhsﬂ‘y “ '

 

   
   
 

- ‘ ‘ QbADRILLE. ‘ 15,5

, , f‘They’ ’wér’e obligéd, to him; him With them,"
the-“Megck Turtle said}- “mi wise ﬁsl1Wou1d g0 

I' : éhjzwhere withoﬁﬁyia porpoise.” '

r “ 3Voﬁld11’t ,itk réally 7.” said Alice in a tone
great éﬁlprise‘ I I

V :“Of’ coufse’ not,” ‘said the Mock Turtle;
y”“,‘\‘\?}1y,y if a ﬁsh came to mg, and told me he
, was‘going ‘a journey, I shotﬂd say, ‘Wiﬂ1 what

pm‘poise? ’ ”

 

“Don‘t you, mean ‘purpose ? ’ ” said Alice. -'

 

V . ‘f I mean What ’I sayﬂ’ the B’IockTurtle rcplied
* in an offended tonefAnd' the Gryphoﬁ gilded;

 

L “ Come, let’s hear some (f you?" adventures.” *

¥ “I could tell you my adventuresvbeginning
‘fmmxhis morning," said Alice a 11m away:
1 “but 'it’s no use going back to yesteﬂay, be:

 

'- cauéé I was a diﬂ'el‘ent person then.”
V Lf“EXplzLin all that)? said the Mock Turtle;
"‘,No, the adientures ﬁrst”, said-the ’

   
 

"Grﬂwhou in an impatient y'tone: “exp1anati0ns
‘ take such a‘ dreadful ﬁtnef’ -‘ L I '
: SQ Alicebegén telling them her adventures If

 

   
    
   
   
 
  
   
    
  
 
 

' 156 ‘ ' I I THE LOBSTER L

from the time when she ‘ﬁrs‘r' $sz um ’Whifé
‘ Rabbit: ‘she was‘ a little nervous about it just at: \
ﬁrst; the mm credfures got so close to her, one"
On each side, and opened their eyes andJmouths’»
so; very wide, but she gained courage as ,she j
ﬁventmon. Her listeners were perfectly-quiet till:
,she, got to the ‘part about hef repeating “ Your:
‘cu‘e oltl,‘Fathe74 Tl'yillz'am,“ to the Caterpillar, ﬁnd
I the words all, coming different, é;an 'thenithe’
Meek Turtle drew a, long breath, and saic, -“ That’s“
very Curious.” I '  I
‘ 1“ It’s all about as curious as it can- he,” said
the Gryphon.   - l , , I
'‘2It- all; came different!” the Mock Turtle
repeated thoughtfully. “I Should like xto hear,
her try and repeat something now. 'Tell her];
to begin.” ’He looked at the Gryphou as if he y'i '
thought it had some kind ,of authority '-oi'e1‘
’Alice.‘ " "
“Stand up and repeat "Tis the Lvoilce’ﬁof the I

dug/gar ~,’ ’f

said. thelyGryphou.‘

7” How the creatures order one-aheut,]and makeﬁ

QUADRILLE.

 

 

 

 

 

 

157

In

one repeablessonm
thought Alice ; “I
might just as well
be at school at
once.” Howevmg she
got 11p,- and began
to repeat it, but her
head was so full of -
the Lobster Quad-
1‘ille, that she hardly
knew what she was
the

very

saying, and

words came

queer i’ndeed :—

~, “1:119 the mice of the lobster; I lmml Mm declare,

‘You have bakch me too brown I must 3% M 9m hair.’
‘ .

a (Dark with its eyelids, so he

 

  

with his nose

Trims hisybélt and his Luttom, and turns out his toes."

“That’s different from what I used to say

when ‘I was a child,” said the Gryphbn.

   
   
   
 
 
   
    
    
 
 
 

ws’ ’ I .yr " THEEOBSTER

' “\Vell, I hover heard it beforefi’ﬂsaidjtlid Mmk
'Turtle ; “but it sounds uncommon no‘nsonseil’,
' Alice said nothing: éhe‘ had; Sat down’
with her fade iii her hands, wondering if any;
i , ,tliing would ever happen - in a “natural ivaly:
V again. ’ y'  ' i I
“ I should like for have it explainedj’ sﬁid the ‘
Mock Turtle. ’ J I
“She canlt V’exjﬂdin it,” lsaid {he :Gryplmn ‘

hastily. “‘Go on with the next Vel‘sei”

I ‘,‘ But lulwoutr his toes?” flier; Mock I'llurtlo
persisted.’ , “How could he turn' them ou’ﬁ with
his, nose, you know 3.” i‘  4

“ It’s the i ‘ position i111, dancing-’7 Alicia, '
said; ‘ but she was dreadfully pﬁzzlod by the) ‘

wholo thing, aiid, longed to chaﬁge the subject.
’ “Go on with tho-iiexi; Verse,” the Grypllon
L relieatedf impatiently: “it; lmgins ‘I ‘ paésed by"
Link garden”. ’ l, y y L y l [L r
i Alice ,rlid not dare, to; :(llSOlléy, though ﬁlie
' felt sure if would all come “Tongjzmd she W‘ent

on in trembling voicee r—

 

QUADKILLE. 159

 

5‘1 pussbd by his garden, and ’mm‘kai, with one eye,

'  3 How‘ t/w-owl and the oyster were sharing a pie.”

“ What is the useiof- repeating all that stuff,”

: the Mock Turtle interrupted, “if you don’t explain
it as you go on? It’s by far the most confusing L
thing I ever heard!" L

~“Yesr, I [think you’d better leave off,” said

* the Gryphon, and Alice was only too glad to

I, do so. I  L

I “Shall we try another ﬁgure of the Lobster

Qiuadl‘ille?" the Gryphon wth on. “ Or would

‘ you like the Mock Turtle to sing on a song?"

I “ 011, a song; please, if the Mock Turtle

Lwould' be so kind,” Alice replied, so eagerly» -

 

 

 

that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended

 

atone; “Hm! N0 accounting for tastes! Sing

 

er ‘Turtle Soup,’ will you, old fellow?” 
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began;

 

in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing
this:—

  

160  THE LOBSTER

“Beautiful Soup, so rich and given,

Waiting in (L [1,015 twaan

Who for such (Zaintz‘ws would mt stoop?

Sou]? of the evening, bum/7:de S0177 .’

Soup of HM arming, bmw‘éﬁtl Soup!
Beauvoatiful Soa~oop /
Brazo—oatzful Soo—mp!

Sou—00]) of the a—~(>4m‘ming,
Beauty‘ul, boazoté/zol S0207!

“ Bmutz'fzol Soup! Who cares for ﬁsh,

Game, or any other dish?

H’th 75011111 not yim all rise fm‘ two 1)

mmywoN/L only of bmutiful Soup?

Pmng/wm‘ﬂzr anly of bmutifal Soup?
Beau—00157]le Sea-470p !
Bemo—oatiful Sou—00p!

Sao—oop of the c—o—erminy,
Beautzful, beauti—FUL SOUP! ”

“Chorus again!” cried the Gryphon, and the

Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when

 

 

 

QUADRILLE. 161

a cry of “The triul’s beginning!” was heard in
the (listzumu.

“Come on!” cried the Gryphon, and, taking
Alice, by the hand, it hurried off, without wait—
ing for the end of the song.

“What trial is it?” Alice puntutl as Sllt‘ run;
but the Gryphon only answered “ Come on I” and
run the faster, while more and more faintly
camq carried on the breeze that followed them,

the melancholy words :A

“b’rlo—uop of (In; c—r—wm’niny,
Beautiful, Iii/wily”er Soy/p!"

 

 

 

WHO S'J'OLE THE TAH’I‘S 163

tarts, upon it: they looked so good, that it
made Alice quite hungry to look at them—“I
wish [they’d get the trial done,” she thought,
“and hand round the reftoslmicntsl” But there-
seemed to he no chance of this, so she began
looking at. everything about her, to pass away
the time. 

Alice had never been in a court of justice
before, but she had read about them in books,
and she was quite pleased to ﬁnd that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. “That’s
the judge,” she said to herself, “because of his
:gi'eat wig.”

The judge, by the way, was the King; and
as he were his crown over the wig, (look at
r the frontispiece if you want to see how he did
it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it
,'was certainly not becominu‘.
iii“And that’s the jury-box,” thought Alice,
“and those twelve creatures," (she was obliged
to say “creatures,” you see, because seine of;

them were animals, and some were birds,) “I

   
  
    
    
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
 
 

{o4 ‘ WHO $‘1'ULE .V

Suppose the)‘ ﬁre the jul’ors." She “Said this
"last r word ,two ,er three Ltimes over to herself, I
being rather proud of it; for she thought; and
rightly too, that very few little, girls Of her; age
. kneW'the meaning of it at. all. However, “jul'y‘
men” Would have done justiasyw’ell.’

The twelve jurors were, all writiﬁg very,
busily onxslates. “ What ate they doing ?” ’Aliee
Whispered to the Gryphon, “They can} halve
anything to put down yet,‘ before the“ trialfs -’
begun.” I f ‘

“They’re putting down their names,” the 
Gryphpn I Svhispel'ed I ln reply, “ for. fem" , they
'shoﬁld'forget then} before the end of the trial?"

“ Stﬁpld r things i ” Alice ' began I 41 land '
indignant yoice, but She stopped herself hhaﬁtil
fof the \Vhife Rabbit dried out, "‘ Silence fin-Ltlle V'

I court!” and ElleKihg put-0n his slxzc’eztcles and’
looked anxiﬂislf round, to make (nit ‘whoiwast
talking, ’ I ' '  ‘

AllCe icould see, its 'Well ‘as if she were look— I;

lug Overﬁheir shoulders; that all the jurorswmte f

 

,‘rui: 'I‘A m‘s é 1””

\1'1‘itiiig down “stuphlythingsf” on their slates, ‘

 

 

and, she could even make out that one of them

*yjirlidn’tknmi' how to spell “stupid,” alid that he

 

: had to ask his neighbour to tull him. “A nice,

.imuddle ,thcir- slaitcs’ll [he in before the trial ’5

 

Novel“! ” thought Alice. I
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeakcd.
i‘This, of mui‘se, Aline couhlnot stantl,’ and Shel
, [went round the court and got ltCllllld liiin.’an(l 'E
very soon friund an opportunity of taking it
 away. She did it so quickly that the poor
little juror (it Was Bill, the Lizard) could not
maker-rout {It all whatvhad become- of it; so,

lifter hunting all about for it,'he was obliged -

 

it’olvwrito with one ﬁnger for the rest of 1hr

(lay; and this Was of very little 115e,,us it left

 

no murkhn the slate.

  
  
   
 

I “HorahL read the necusation 2‘" said'ithe
King. , ‘ L

011 this the, llVllltO Rabbit blew thlw blasts
inn" tho, trumlmt, mid than um'relled thi- ’ ln‘ll‘ffl'l-

Imvnt'sr-i‘nll, and rend usfnllmvszw

 

 

 

THE TAK‘I‘S ’{ m7

“Not-yet, not yet!” the Rabbit hastily in-
’ ten‘upted. “'l'ln-re’s :L great deal to come before
that! ”

“Call the ﬁrst witness,” said the King ; and the
White Rabbit blew three blasts on the'trumpet,’
and culled out, “ First witness!”

The ﬁrst witness was the Hatter. He came in

‘with at treucup in one hand and a piece of bread-
nnd-butter in the other. “I beg pardon, your
Majesty,” he 'l)eg{1n, “for bringing these in: but
I hadn’t quite finished my tea when l was- sent

for.”

“You ought to have ﬁnished,” said the King.
“When (lid you begin?” 

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had
followed him into the court, arlnvin-m‘m with the
Dormeuse. “Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,” he said. '

“Fifteenth,” said the March Hare.

“Sixteenth,” added the Dormimwj

“\Vifite that down,” the King said to the jury,

and ,the jury eagerly wrote down all three

 

163 WHO STOLE

 

dates on their slates, zlnd‘then added them up.
and reduced the answerto shillings and pence,

“Take 03' your hut,h the King said to the

 

Hanoi-H

 

"It. isn’t mine.”,s:lid the Hitter.

 

“ Stolen! " the King,exclaimedLmrning to thé
jury, who instantly made A memorandum of thw,
fact,  '

“I keep them To sell,” the Hut/tor added as

 

an explanation: “I’ve none of my own. v I’m u
l] utter." L

Herc the Queen put on her spectacles, und-

 

 

hogan staring hard at the Hatrer. xi'ho tin-11ml pale
and ﬁdgotcd. i

“Give your f‘Vldl‘nt‘C,” said thv King: “and,
idth he nervous, or I’ll have ynu ioxccutud 011‘
dth Spot.” I

This did not seem IO encourage tho-\vitneSS at:
all: he keptishifting frunr one foot to the lothor,
looking uneasily at the Qumen, and in his (1011:
fusion he hit a large piece out of hi»? titan/11) in— , I

stead of the hrvad—aml—lbutter.

 

 

TH E mm‘s '? 169

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious
reensatiou, which puzzled her a good deal until
she made out what it was: she vas beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at ﬁrst she
would get up and leave the court; but on second
thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as there was room for her.

“I wish you Wouldn’t squeeze so,” said the
Dormousu who was sitting next to her. “I man
hardly breathe.” ’

"I can’t help it," said Alice very meekly: “ I’m
growing.”

“ You’ve no right to grow 11PM,” said the Der»
mouse.

“ Don’t talk, nonsense,” said Alir-e more boldly:
“you know you're growing too.”

“Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace," said
the Dorinouse: “not in that ridiculous fashion.”
And he got up Very sulkily and crossed over to
the other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off
staring at the Flatten and. just as the Dormouse

Z

  
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
   
  
  
    

170  iw HO- ’s'l‘uLE - ‘

crossed the court, she said to, one of the! ofﬁcers of 
theicourt, “ Bring me, the list of the singers in the r
last cOncertl " on which the wretchetl Hatter"
L trembled so, that he
shook both his Shoes r
DH: , - .

“Give your ,evi-‘
dence,” the King 1'e—‘
pented angrily, ' “ 0:"
I’ll have you executed,
whether you’re n'er—L -
Vous 01‘ not.”

i“ I’m ft poor main:
your B'Iajesty,” ,the ‘
Hatter began in, a.

 

 " trembling voice, “ anrlt-
I hadn’t begun my teat—not above a. Week 01‘ I

SO—='€1]1(l‘\\’l1at witli'ythe lu'Qad—Micl-bliﬁeijgetting

n

 

st» thiIr—aml the twinkling of the te2,
' ""l‘he twinkling bf what ?” said the King.

“It bcf/Hn \Vitlitlle ten," the ‘Hatti‘r replied. u
said‘

 

“ 0f cmu'sa twinkling begins with :1 T1.

 

ms TARTS Z 171

i the King sharply. “Do you take me for a dunce?
Go on I ” I

“I’m at poor man,” the Hatter went on, “and
most things twinkled after that—only the March
Hare snidHA—” i

“I didn’t!” the March Here interrupted in a
great hurry.

“You did I" said the Hatter.

“ l deny it!” said the March Hare.

‘ “ He denies it,” said the King: “leave out
that part”

“Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said—1’ the
Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if V
he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

“After that,” continued the Hatter, -“I cut
some more breatl—ancl—butter—-~” I  V

“But What did the Dormouse say?” one of
The jury asked. 

“ That I can’t remember,” said the Hatter.

“You must remember,” remarked the King,

Yer I’ll hive you exmutedi”

17:2 WHO STOLE

 

The miserable Hatter dropped his tcaoup and
hread-m’ul-butter, and went down on one knee. 
'"l’m a poor man, your Majesty,” he began.

“ You’re a very poor speaker,” said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was
immediately suppressed by the ofﬁcers of the
Court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
eXplain to you how it was done. They had a
large canvas bag, Which tied up at the mouth
with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-
pig, head ﬁrst, and then set upon it.)

 ‘V‘I’m glad I’ve seen that done,” thought Alice. ' ‘
,“I’ve so often read in the newspapers, at the end -
of trials, ‘There {was some attempt at applause,
which was immediately suppressed by the oﬂieers, i
of the court,’ and I never understood what it-
meant till now.” i

“If that’s all you know about it, you may r
stand down,” continuedthe King. I V

“ I can’t go no lower,” said the Hatter: “ I’m
on the ﬂoor, as it is.” I

“Then you may sit down,"the King replied.

 

 

THE TAIn‘s ? 17;;

Here the other guinewpig cheered, and \‘us
suppressed.

 

 

 

 

“ 701110, that ﬁnishes the guinea—pigs i” thought
Alice. “Now we shall get on better.”

“l’d ratheriﬁnish my tea,” said the Hatter,
with an anxious 100k at the Queen, who was
reading the list of singers.

“ You may go," said the King, and the Hatter
hurriedly left the court, Without even waiting to
put his shoes on.

I:

“hand just take his head OFF outside," the

 

 

’I‘HE TAI’UI'S 1

\I
u

imt.’ “ Beheml that Dormousel Turn that Deiu
mouse out of court! Suppress hini! Pinch him!
 Off with his whiskers l ”

For some minutes the whole court was in
confusion, getting the Dorniouse turned nut, and,
by the time the)" had settled down again, the
cook had disappeared. '

“Never mind !” said the King, with an air
of great relief, “(‘all the next witness.” And,
he added in an under—tone t0 the Queen,
‘“Really, my dear, you must cross—examine the

Alice watched the “Yhite Rabbit as he fumbled

«over the list, feeling Very curious to see what

next Witness. It quite makes my forehead ache ‘ ”

the next witness would be like, “var they

” she said to

haven’t got much evidence yet,
herself. Imagine her; surprise, when the White
Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little

voice, the name “ Alice! ”

CHAPTER Xll.
. ALIeE's EVIDENCE.

n:

“HERE cried Alice, quite forgetting in the
flurry of the moment how large She had grown
in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in
sueh a hurry that she tipped over the jury—box
with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jury-
men on to the heads of the crowd below, and
there they lay sprawling about, reminding her
very much of a globe of gold-ﬁsh she had
accidentally upset the Week before.

“‘01), I [my your pardon 3” she exclaimed in
a tone of great dismay, and began picking them

up again as quickly as she eoulrl, for the aeci—

 

 

ALICE'S EVVDE-NCE. , 1

 

 

 

    

r dent of the gold-ﬁsh kept funuing in her, head,
I and she had a vague, sort, of idea that they‘
,y must be collected at once and putback into the

 

U jgr’yl-box',’ 05‘ they’would dire.
“ ‘ L A A

 

 

       
   
 

yrlALIGEfS EVIDENCE. j r179

 

T‘ZWha‘ty‘do ymnknow about this businéss?”
ImKing said to Alice. L L '

L :‘é‘Nothingf’ said Aliceiy , ‘ I

‘ V‘Nothing wizdtwm'?“ persisted the, King. 1
“Nothing whatevar,” Alice. I  ’
“"“'l'hat’s Very yiin‘p'oftnnt,” the King Said, turn-4

Ling,th the jury V' ‘They‘ Were( just beginning toV

rhyh'write thisydown on their slates, when the White,

 

'Rabhitﬁnterruptgd: “‘Unimpor’tant, your llajeshy
xi: ' means, ‘of course," he said in it very regpectfnl

tbne; hut frowning and making faces m: him as ‘

 

: y‘ I he spoke.

 

\VV ’ u Uniniportant, of ycourse, VI Lmeant,”, the Kihg
hastily said) and went on to himself in-‘un undér—

' tone; "imperrant—innmportant—unimportant—im-

 

 

‘ 'portant “”" as if ' he were trying which word

" ; Sh‘unded , bcsf,

 

Some of the jury ertc it idon'n “important,”
41nd some “unimportant.” Alice could see this,

 

“but! it, Hoes“ . matter a bit.” she thought to
{ghersglfﬁ g ' -

 

   

’ she‘was near enoughto 100k over'their Slates} V: 1“

 

180 ' ALICE’s EX'IDExCE.

At this-moment; the King, who had been for;
some time busilywvriting in his h0te~bool<, called
out “Silence!” and read  out from his book,
“Rule Fofty—two. All persons More them a mile ‘
high to lccwe the court.” L I

Everybody loeked aﬁAlice. .

“I’m not a mile high,” said Alice.

“You are,”lsaid the King. ,\ ,

“Nearly two, miles high,” added the Queen.

“\Vell, I‘ishan’t go, at any rate,” said Alice;
“besides, that’s not a regular rule: you invented
it just now.”  I L I

It’s the oldest rule in the book? said the;
King.  i, ‘
“Then it’ough’t to be Number One,” said Alice;
The King, turned pale, and shim his note
r I, book hastily. , “Consider your verdict,” he said to
the jury, in a low trembling voice.  ' y I ’

“There’s more evidence to Come yet, please ,
your Majesty,” said the White Rabbit, jumping-T
up in' a. great hurry ; “this paper has just been
piekeclvup.“ i l L

 

 

ALICE’S EVIDENCE. 181

“What’s in it 2” said the Queen.

y“I haven’t opened it yet,” said the \Vhite
Rabbit, “but it seems to be a letter, written by
the prisoner to~—t0 somebody.”

“It must have been that,” said the King,
W“ unless it was written to nobody, which isn’t
usual, you know.” '

“Who is it directed to?” said one of the
jurymon.

“It isn’t directed at all,” said the White
‘Rabbit; “in fact, there’s nothing written on the
outside.” He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and
added. “It isn’t a letter after all: it’s a set of
"verses."

I “Are they in the prisoner’s handwriting?”
' asked another of the juryrnen.

“No, they’re not,” said the White Rabbit,
“and that’s the quoereét thing about it.” (The
jury all looked puzzled.) I
y ' “He must have, imitated somebody else’s
,' hand,” Said the King. '(The jury all brightened

3 up again.)

  
   
    
 
 
   
   
   
    
 

182 ALICE’S EVIDENCE.

“Please your Majesty,” said the Kimve, “l
,(lidn’t write it, and they can’t prove I did : there’s, -
no name signed at the end." L

“If you didn’t sign it,” said the King, “that i"
only makes the matter Worse, You must haye
meant seine mischief, or else you’d have signed
your name like ‘an honest man.” Vi 

There was a general clapping of hands at I.
it was the ﬁrst really clever thing the King had
said that clayi, ’ i

“That proves his guilt,” said the Queen.

“It proves nothing of the sort!” said -
Alice. I“ Why, you don’t even know what they ’re , L
about 1' ” ‘ I .i

“Read them,”ysaid the King,  

The White Rabbit ‘put on his spectacles;
“Where shall I begin, please your, Majesty'ZWi
he asked. i

“Begin at the beginning,” the King said,
. gravely, “and go on till; you come to the end:
then stop.” ' 

These Were the Verses the White Rilbbit read

 

184 ALICE’S EVIDENCE

'My nation was that you had been
(qum‘z she had this ﬁt)
Ah obs/Alcle that came between

Him, and ourselves, and it.

Don’t let him, 15an she liked lhem ﬁrst,
For this must em be I
A scoretxhept from all the rest,

Between yoursegf and me.”

i “That’s the mpst important piece of evidence

we’ve heard yet,” said the King, rubbing his

 

hands; “so now let the jury I

“If any one of them can explain it,” said
Alice, (she had grown so large in the last feiv"
minutes that she wasn’t a. bit afraid of interrupt-
ing him) “I’ll give him sixpence.‘v I don’t
believe there’s an atom of meaning in it”

The jury all wrote (10an on their slates,
“She doesn’t believe there’s an atom of meaning

ALIeE’s EVIDENCE. 185

'in it,” but none of them attempted to explain
the paper.

“If there’s no meaning in it,” said the
King, “that saves a world of trouble, you
know, as we needn’t try to ﬁnd any. And
yet I don’t know,” he went on, spreading out
the verses on his knee, and looking at them
with one eye; “I seem to see some meaning in
them, after all. ‘——said I could not swim—’
you can’t swim, can you?” he added, turning

to the Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. “Do I
look like it?” he said. (Which he certainly
did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)

“All right, so far," said the King, and he
went on muttering over the verses to himself:
“‘ W's know it to be ta'ue—’ that’s the jury, of
course——— ‘I gave her one, they gave him two—’
Why, that must be what he did with the tarts,
you know—”

“But it goes on ‘they all returned from
him to you,” said Alice.

B B

 

156 ALICE’S EVIDENCE.

“Why, there they

  
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

are I " said the King
triumphantly, pointing
to the tarts on the ,

table. “Nothing can be

 

 

 

 

clearer than that. Then

 

 

again—‘bvore she had
this ‘ﬁt—" you never
had ﬁts, my dear, I;
think?” he said to the
Queen.

“Never!” said the

Queen furiously, throw-

 

 

 

 

 

  

MM

 

ing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke.
(The unfortunate little Bill had left 01f writing

on his, slnte with one ﬁnger. as he found it made

 

ALICE’S EVIDENCE. 187

no mark; but he now hastily began again, using
the ink, that was trickling down his face, as
long as it lasted.)

“Then the words don't ﬁt you,” said the
King, looking round the court with a smile.
There was a dead silence.

“It's a pun!” the King added in an angry
tone, and everybody laughed. “Let the jury
consider their Verdict,” the King said, for about
the twentieth time that day.

“No, no!” said the Queen. “Sentence ﬁrst—
Verdiet afterwards.”

“ Stuff and nonsense I 7’ said Alice loudly. “ The
idea. of having the sentence ﬁrst!”

“Hold your tongue!" said the Queen, turn-
ing purple. I

“I won’t! ” said Alice,

“Off with her head!” the Queen shouted at
L, the top of her voice. Nobody moved.

“Who cares for you?” said Alice, (she had
grown to her full size by this time.) “You’re
nothing but a pack of cards!”

133 ALICE’s EVIDENCE.

 

    

At this the, whole pack rose up inﬁb the air, ,

and came ﬂying down upon her; she gave' a ‘

 

ALICE‘S EVIDENCE. 189

little scream, half of fright and han of anger,
and tried to beat them off, and found herself
lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of
her sister, who was gently brushing away some
dead leaves that had ﬂuttered down from the
trees upon her face.

“\Vake up, Alice dear!” said her sister;
“Why, what a long sleep you’ve had I”

“Oh, I’ve had such a curious dream!” said
Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she
could remember them, all these strange Adven—
tures of hers that you have just been reading
about; and when she had ﬁnished, her sister
kissed her, and said, “It was a culious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea;
it’s getting late.” So Alice got up and ran off,
thinking while she ran, as well she might, what
a, wonderful dream it had been.

 

I 194:

But her sistersat still just as 'she left her,’
leaning her head on her; hand, watching the
setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all I
her wonderful Adventures, 'till she too began:
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her -
dreamz— ’  ’

First,'she dreamed of little Alice heréelﬂ and 1 i
once again the tiny hands were clasped hp‘oﬁ ' ‘
"her-knee, and the bright eager eyes were look;

,ing upinto hersshe could hear the very tones

 

of her voice, and see that queer little toss of >
her head to keep hack the wandering hair that 7
would always get into her eyes—and still, as

she listened, or seemed to' listen, the Whole
place around her became alive with the strange

creatures of her little sister’s dream.

 

 

191

Theilong grass rustled at her feet as the
White Rabbit hurried by—the frightened Mouse
splashed his way through the neighbouring pool
 ——~she could hear the rattle of ' the teacups as

the March Hare and his friends shared their
never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the
"Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to
’ executionmonee more the pig-baby was sneezing
T on the Duchess’ knee, while plates and, dishes
crashed around it—onee more the shriek of the
Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard’s slate-
pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-
pigs, ﬁlled the air, mixed up with the distant
sob of the miserable Mock Turtle.

-'So she sat on, with Closed eyes, and half
believed herself in W’onderland, though she
knew she had but to open them again and all
would change to dull reality—the grass would '
be only rustling in the wind. and the pool rip-
pling to the waving of the reeds-the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells,

and the Queen’s shrill cries to the voice of the

 

192 '

shepherd boy—and the sneeze of the baby, the, V
shriek of the Gi‘yphon, and all the other queer
noises, would change (she knew), to theeony
fused clamour‘ of the busy farm-yard——while the
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take I
the place of 'the Mock Turtle’s heavy sohs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same
little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be
herself a grown woman; and how she‘ would,
keep, throughall her riper years, the simple and
lowing heart of her childhood: and how she'
would gather about her other little children, and :
maketheir eyes bright and eager with many a 
strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long-ago: and how' she, would 
feel with all their simple sorrows, and ﬁnd a
pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering
her own child-life, and the happy summer daysr'

‘ THE END.

R. our. son, Asp TAYLOR, mm‘rzns. ammo “new HILL.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

uuHMt—ll—lwumh

 

