 

Iiiiﬁiillll

0000723031.

 

 

 

 

 

 

FRANKENSTEIN:

on,

THE MODERN PRUME THEUS,

 

FRANKENSTEIN:

all.

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.

IY

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT SHELLEY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

 

A NEW EDITION.

ll

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR 0. AND W. B. WHITTAKER,
"manna-Mun.

1825.

 

2.9%. w. 53‘. (

 

PREFACE.

THE event on which this ﬁction is
founded- has been supposed, by Dr.
Darwin, and some of the physio-
logical writers of Germany, as not of
impossible occurrence. I shall not be '
supposed as according the remotest
degree of serious faith to such an ‘
imagination; yet,'in assuming it as
the basis of a work of fancy, I have
not considered 'myself as merely
‘ a 3

vi PREFACE.

weaving a series of supernatural ter- »
rots. The event on which the in-
terest of the story depends is exempt
from the disadvantages of a mere tale
of spectres or enchantment. It was
reeommended by the novelty of the
‘situations which it developes; and,
however impossible as a physical fact,
aﬁ'ords a point of view to the ima-
gination for the delineating of human
passions more comprehensive and
commanding than any which the
ordinary relations of existing events'
can yield.

I have thus endeavoured to pre—
serve the truth of the elementary

PREFACE. ' ‘ vii

principles of human nature, while I
have not scrupled to innovate upon
their combinations. The Iliad, the tra-
gic poetry of Greater—Shakespeare,
in the Tempest and Midsummer
Night’s Dreamr—and most especially
Milton, in Paradise Lost, conform to
this rule; and the most humble no-
velist, who seeks to confer or receive
amusement from his labours, may,
without presumption, apply to prose
ﬁction a licence, or rather a rule,
from the adoption of which so many
exquisite combinations of human
feeling have resulted in the highest
specimens of poetry.

"Hm-warm:

\IIIIiiiIIIn

500012303;

 

 

 

 

 

FRANKENSTEIN:

THE MODERN PRUMETHEUS.

2 rnxum‘mm; on,

burghtl feel a cold northern breeze
play upon my cheeks, which braees my
nerves, and ﬁlls me ,with delight. Do
you understand this feeling? This
bleae, whiuh has travelled {mmthe
regions towards which I am advancing,
giVes me a foretaste of those icy climes.
lnspirited 'by this wind of promise, my
day dreams become more fervent and
vivid. I try in" vain to be. persuaded
that the pole is the seat of frost and de-
solution; it ever presents itself to my
imagination: “the region of beauty and
delight. There, Margaret, the sun is
for ever- visible; its 'hvoad" disk just
skirting the mam. 9nd diﬁusins a
perpetual splendour. Therefgfor» with
your leave, my sister, l‘will puisome
trust in preceding navigators-Ahere
snow and frost are banished; end,| sail-
ing over a calm sea, we. may be wefled
to a land surpassing in wonders and

FRANKENSTEIN:

OR.

THE MODERN PROD! E THE US.

IY

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT SHELLEY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

 

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON :

PRINTED FOR 6. AND W. B. WHITTAKER,
"sauna-mun.

1—82—3.

.Jo’v. w, .537. (

4' - rnmuxsnm'; on,‘

embarksin ‘a little boat, with his holi-
day mates, on an expedition of discovery
up his native river. But, supposing all
these conjectures to be false, you cannot
contest the inestimable- beneﬁt which I
shall confer on all mankind to the last
generation, by discovering a passage
near the pole to those countries, to reach
which at present so many months are
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret
of the magnet, which, if at all possible,
can only be eﬂ'ected by an undertaking
 such as mine. . ' '
These reﬂections have dispelled the
agitation. with which‘I began my letter,
and I feel my heart glow with an en-
thusiasm which elevates me to heaven;-
for nothing contributes so much to tran-
quillize the mind as a steadypurposer-
a point on which the soul may ﬁx its in-
tellectual eye. This expedition has been

THI IODEIN mulmus. 5

the favourite dream of my early years.
I have read with ardour the accounts of
theivarious voyages which have been
made in the prospect of arriving at the
North Paciﬁc Ocean through the seas
which surround the pole. You may re-
member, that a history of all the voyages
made for-purposes of discovery composed
the whole of our good uncle Thomas’s
library. My education was neglected,
yet I was passionately fond of reading.
Theser' volumes were my study day and
night, and my familiarity with them in-
creased that regret.which I had felt, as a
child, on learning that my father’s dying
injunction had forbidden my uncle to
allow me to embark in a sea-Turing life.

These visions faded when I perused,
for the ﬁrst time, those poets whose
eﬁ‘usions entranced my soul, and lifted
it to heaven. I also became 'a poet,

1'

6 'nmx;nn,

and for one year lived in a Paradise :0!
nyown creation: {imagined that‘lmlsb
might obtain a‘niehe in thetemplewhu‘e
the names 'of Homer and -Shakspenm
moonseefnted; Younrewelluqu-iuoed
with my failure,- hnd how heavily I' burg.- 
’ the disappointment. But'ju‘st at; that
‘ time! killer-iced the fortune of my cousin;
and my thdnghts were turned into did
channel of their earlier-bent. ' ' 5
Six year: have passed-since I rambled
on my present undertaking; 'I 'can', evén‘
now, remember the hour frbm which]:
éedicated' mys’elfto‘ this great enterprise;
I commenced by inuring my body'eo
hardship. "-I accompanied 'the "whale-5
ﬁs‘hErs 'on several expeditions to' the‘
North Sea: I Voluntarily elidured cold,
famine, thirst, and want of'sleep;
oﬁen workedharder than the common‘
sailors during the day, and devotéd my

an Icon: non-rams. ‘7

nights to they audy of mathematics, the
theory of medicine, and those branches
ofphysical science from which a naval
adventurer might derive the. greatest
practical advantage. Twice [actually
hired- myself he an under-mate in a
Greenlandwhaler, and acquitted myself
to admiration. I» must own I felt a
little proud, when-my captain offered
me the second dignity in 'the vessel, and
entreated me to remain with the greatest
earnestness; ' Lao-valuable did he consider
lay-services.

And now, dear Margaret, do I not
deserVe to accomplish some great pur-
pose? My life-might have been passed
in ease and luxury; but I preferred
glory to every enticement-that wealth
placed in my path. Oh, that some en-
couraging voice would answer in the
afﬁrmative! My courage and my reso-
lution is ﬁrm; but my hopes ﬂuctuate,-

f

8 rnsnunsnm; as,

and my spirits are oﬂen depressed. I
am about to proceed on a long and dif-
ﬁcult voyage; the emergencies of which
will demand all'my fortitude: I am re-
quired not only to raise the spirits of
others, but sometimes to sustain my
own, when their’s are failing.

This is the most favourable period for
travelling in Russia. They ﬂy quickly
over the snow in their sledges; the mo-
tion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, for
more agreeable than that of an English
stage-coach. The cold is not excessive,
if you are wrapt in furs, a dress which
I have already adopted; for there i a
great difference between walking the
deck and remaining seated motionless
for hours, when no exercise prevents
the blood from actually freezing in your
Veins.‘ I have no ambition to lose my
life on the post-road between St. Peters~
burgh and Archangel.

TEE IQDIIN PIOII'I’HIVI. 9

I shall depart for the latter town in
a fortnight or three weeks; and my in-
tention is to hire a ship there, which can
easily be done by paying the insurance
for the owner, and to engage as many
sailors asl think necessary among those
who are accustomed to the whale-ﬁshing.
I do not intend to sail until the month of
Junepand when shall I return? Ah,
dear sister, how can I answer this ques-
tion? If I succeed, many, many months,
perhaps years, will pass before you and
I'maymeet. If I fail, you will ee me
again soon, or never; ‘ »- , :
= Farewell, my dear, excellent, Mar-
garet; Heaven shower down blessings
on you, and save me, that 1 may again
and again testify my gratitude for all
your love and kindness.
‘ Your affectionate brother,
R. WALToN.

35 a

10 manna-nus; on", v

LETTER [1.

e To Mrs. SAVILLE, England;

Archangel, 28th March, 17—.

How slowly the time passes here, en-
compassed as I am by frost and snow';
yet a second step is taken towards my
enterprise. I have hired a vessel, and
am occupied in collecting my sailors;
those whom I have already engaged ap-
ﬁear to be men on whom I can depend,
and are certainly possessed of dauntless'
courage.

But I have one want which I have
never yet been able to satisfy; and

ran loans mountains. I]

the absence of the object of which I
now feel as a most severe evil. I have
no friend, Margaret: when I am'glo'w-
ing with the enthusiasm of success,
there will be none to participate my
joy; if I am assailed by disappoint-
ment, no one yvill endeavour to sustain
me in dejection. I shall commit my
thoughts to paper, it is true; but that
is a poor medium for the communica-
tion of feeling. I desire the company
of a man who could sympathize with
me; whose eyes would reply to mine.
You may deem me romantic, my dear
sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a
friend. I have no one near me, gentle
yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated
as viell as of a capacious mind, whose
tastes are like my own, to approve or 
amend my plans. How would such'la
friend repair the faults of your poor
brother! I am too ardent in execution,

er

-12 . “mun-um; on,
.

and too impatient of difﬁculties. But it
is a still greater evil to me that Ian:
self-edﬁcated : for the ﬁrst fourteen years
of my life I ran wild on a common, and
read.nothing but our uncle Thomas’s
books of voyages. At that age I became
acquainted with the celebrated poets of
our own country; but it was only when
it had ceased to be in my power to de-
rive its most important beneﬁts from
such a conviction, that l perceived the
necessity of becoming acquainted with
more languages than that of my native
country. Now I am twenty-eight, and
am in reality more illiterate than many
School-boys of ﬁfteen. It is true that I
have thought more, and that my (lay
dreams are more'extended and magni-
ﬁcent; but they want (as the painters call
it) keeping ,- and I greatly need a friend
who would have sense enough not to
despise me as romantic, and all‘ection’

TH! IODEBN IIOIII’ERUS. 18

enough for me to endeavour to regulate
my mind. . 
Well, these are useless complaints;
I shall certainly ﬁnd no friend on the
wide ocean, nor eVen here in Archangel,
.among merchants and semen. Yet
some feelings, unallied to the dross of
human nature, beat even in these rugged
basoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is
a man of wonderful courage and enter-
prise; he is madly desirous of glory.
He is an Englishman, and in the midst
of national and professional prejudices,
unsoftened bycultivation, retains some
of the noblest endowments .of humanity.
I ﬁrst became acquainted with him on
board a whale vessel: ﬁnding that he
was unemployed in this city, 1 easily en-
gaged him to assist inmy enterprise.
. The master is a person of an excel..
lent disposition, and is remarkable in

I the ship for his gentleness and the mild~

. "(1

14 ramxzus'rnnl; on,

ness of his discipline. He is, indeed, of
so amiable a nature, that he 'will not
hunt (a favourite, and almost the only
amusement here), because he cannot
endure to spill blood. He is, moreover,
heroically generous. Some years ago
he loved a young Russian lady, of mo--
derate fortune; and having amassed a
considerable sum in prize-money, the-
futher of the girl consented to the
match. He saw his mistress once be-
fore the destined ceremony; but she
was bathed in tears, and, throwing her-
self at his feet, entreated him to spare
her, confessing at the same time that
she loved another, but that he was poor,
and that her father would never consent
to the union. My generous friend re-
a.Ssured the suppliant, and on being
informed of the name of her lover in-
stillltly abandoned his pursuit. He had
allready bought a farm with his money,

ma lbnlsx- muss-nus. 15

on which he had designed to pass the
remainder of his life; but he bestowed
the whole on his rival, together with the
remains of his prize-money to purchase
stock, and then himself solicited the
young-woman's father to consent to her
marriage with her lover. But the old
man decidedly refused, thinking him-
self bound in honour to my friend;
who, when he found the father ~in-
exorable, quitted his country, nor re-
turned until he heard that his former
mistresswas married according to her
inclinations. “ What a noble fellow!”
you will exclaim. He is so; but then he
has passed all his life on board a vessel,
and has scarcely an idea beyond the
rope and the shroud.

But do not suppose that, because I
complain a little, or because i can con-
ceive a consolation for my toils which I
may never know, that I am wavering

I"

16 FIANLIXITEIN; 03'

in my resolutions.- Those are as ﬁxed
as fate; and my voyage is only'now ‘
delayed until the weather shall permit
my embarkation. The winter has been
dreadfully severe; but the spring pro-
mises well, and it is considered as a
remarkably early season; so that per-
haps [may sail sooner than I» expected.
I shall do nothing rahly: you know
me suﬂiciently to conﬁde in my pru‘
deuce and considerateness whenever the
safety of others is committed to my care-
I cannot describe to you my sense-
tions on the near prospect of my underw
taking. It is impossible to communicate
to you a conception of the trembling
sensation, half pleasurable and half fear—
ful, with vvhich I am preparing to depart“
I am going to unexplored regions, to
“the land of mist and snow;" but I
shall kill no albatross, therefore do not
be alarmed for my safety. ‘

m HOD!“ PIOII’I'HIUS. ‘7

Shall I meet you again, after having
traversed immense seas, and returned
by the most southern cape of Africa or
America? I dare not expect such suc-
cess, yet ‘I cannot hear to look on the
reverse of the picture. Continue to
write to me by every opportunity: I
may receive your letters (though the
chance is very doubtful) on some occa-
sions when I need them most to support
my spirits. I love you very tenderly.
Remember me with affection, should
you never hear from me again.

Your affectionate brother,
Roman-r WALTOIK

18 EMT!!!” on,

LETTER Ill.

‘ ' 'To Mrs. Silvana-England;

July 7th, 17., .

In. nmm "sum,- .

1 warns a few lines in halterto-Bay
that I am. safe, and well advanced on
my voyage. This letter will reach
England -by-a merchantpman now on
its honieward voyage from Archangel;
more fortunate than I, who may not
see-.my native land, perhaps, for many
years. I am, however, in good spirits:
my men are bold, and apparently ﬁrm
of purpose; nor do the ﬂoating sheets
of ice that continually pass us, indi-

ms noon: mm. 19

eating the nhngers of the region towards
which we are advancing, appear to dis".
may them. We have already reached a
very high latitude; but it is the height
of summer, and although not so warm
as in England, the southern gales, which
blow us speedily towards those shores
which I so ardently desire to attain,
breathe a degree of renovating warmth
which I had not expected.

No incidents have hitherto befallen
us that would make a ﬁgure in a letter.
One or two stiﬂ‘ gales, and the break-
ing of a mast, are accidents which ex-
perienced navigators scarcely remember
to record; and I shall be well content
if nothing worse happen to us during
our voyage.

Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured,
that for my own sake, as well as yours,
I will not rashly encounter danger. I
will be cool, persevering, and prudent.

('

20 mm;on,

Remember me to all my Englinh
friends.
Most aﬂ'ectionately yours,
R. W.

was nouns non-rasus. 21

LETTER IV.
To Mrs. Sauna, England.

August 5th. l7—.

So strange an accident has happened
to us, that I cannot forbear recording it,
although it is very probable that you
will see me before these papers can
come into your possession.

Last Monday (July 8lst), we were
nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving
her the sea room in which she ﬂoated.

' Our situation was somewhat dangerous,
especially as we were compassed round
by a very thick fog. We accordingly
lay to, hoping that some change would

22 manuals-ram; on,

take place in the atmosphere and
weather.

About two o’clock the mist cleared
away, and we beheld, stretched out in
every direction, vast and irregular plains
of ice, which seemed to have no end.
Some of my comrades groaned, and my
own mind began to grow watchful with
anxious thoughts, when a. strange sight
suddenly attracted our attention, and
diverted our solicitude from our own
situation. We perceived a low carriage,
ﬁxed on a sledge and drawn by dogs,
pass on to wards the north, at the distance
of half a mile: a being which had the
shape of a man, but apparently of g-i.
gantic stature, sat in the sledge, and
guided the dogs. We watched the rapid
progress of the traveller with our te-
lescopes, until he was lost among the
distant inequalities of the ice.

rm: yonan annulus. 23

.- This appearance excited our unqua-
liﬁed wonder. We were, as we believed,
many hundred miles from any land;
but this apparition seemed to denote
that it was not, in reality. so distant as
we had supposed; Shut in, however,
by ice, it 'was impossible to follow his
track, which we had observed with the
greatest attention.

' Aboartwo hours 'after this occur-
rence, we heard the ground sea; and
before night the ice broke, and freed
our ship. We, however, lay to until the
morning,‘ fearing to encounter in the
derk those large loose masses which
ﬁmt about after the breaking up of the
ice. I proﬁted of this time to rest for a
.few hours. '

In the morn'ing.'however, as soon as
it was light, I went upo‘n decks-and
found all the sailors busy on one side of

r

24 manna-ram; on,

the vessel, apparently talking to some
one in‘the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge,
like that we had seen before, which had
drifted towards us in the night, on a
large‘fragment of ice. Only one dog
remained alive; but there was a human‘
being. within it, whom the sailors were
persuading to enter the vessel. He
- not, as the other traveller seemed to be,“
a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered
island, but an European. Whenl ap-'
peared on deck, the master said, “ Here
is our captain, and he will not allow
you to perish on the open sea.” '
On perceiving me, the stranger ad-
dressed me in English, although with
a foreign accent. “ Before I come .on'
board your vessel," said he, “ will you -
have the kindness to inform me whither
you are bound P” ’:
You may conceive my astonishment

Tn KODIBN noun-rams.

on hearing such a question addressed
to me from a man on the brink of de-
struction, and to whom I should have
supposed that my. vessel would have
been a resource which he would not
have exchanged for the most precious
wealth the earth can aﬂ'ord. I replied,
however, that we were on a voyage of
discovery towards the northern pole.
Upon hearing this he appeared satis-
ﬁed, and consented to come on board.
Good God! Margaret, if you had seen
the man who thus capitulated for his
safety, your surprise would have been
boundless." His limbs were nearly frozen,
and his body dreadfully emaciated by
fatigue and suﬁ‘ering. I never saw a
man in so wretched a condition. We
attempted to carry him into the cabin;
but as soon as he hadtquitted the fresh
air, he fainted; We accordingly brought
voL. I. c

l'

£6 FIANXENSTEIN; on,

him back to the deck, and restored-
him 'to animation by rubbing him with-
brandy; and forcing him to swallow -a-
small quantity. As soon as he showed-
signs of life we Wrapped him up in“
blankets, and placed him near the chins-f
ney of the kitchen-stove. By s'loW'de-v
grees he recovered, and ate a little soup,
which restored him wonderfully.

~‘Two days passed in this manner be-
fore he was able to speak;' and I ottenr;
feared that his ‘suﬂ'eri-ngs had deprived
him of understanding. When he had
in some measure recovered, I removed
him to my own cabin, and attended on
him‘ as much as my duty would permit.»
1 never saw a more interesting creature:
his eyes have generally an expression of
wildness, and even madness; but there-
are moments when. if any one performs
an act of kindness towards him, or does

TH! MODERN PEOIITHEUI. 2"

him "any the.most triﬂing service, his
whole countenance is lighted up, as it
were, with a beam of benevolence and
sweetness that I never saw equalled.
But he is generally melancholy and
despairing; and sometimes he gnashes
his;teeth,.as if impatient of the weight
of woes that oppresses himt

When my guest was a little recovered,
I had great trouble to keep oﬁ‘ the
men, who wished to ask him a thousand
questions ;v but! would not allow him
to be tormented by their idle curiosity,
in a. state of body and mind whose
‘ restoration evidently depended upon en-
tire3repose. Once, however, the lien-
tenant asked, Why he had come so
for upon the ice in so strange 3 ve-
hicle? ‘
. His countenance instantly assumed

an aspect of the deepest gloom; and he
c 2

I"

28. Vrusnxs'rux; on,

replied, “ To seek one who ﬂed from'
me.”

' “ And did the man whom you pur-
sued travel in the same fashion 2’" '

“ Yes.” ' .3

“ Then I fancy we have seen him?
for, the day before we. picked yonup,
we saw some dogs drawing a sledge,- 
with a man in it, across the ice.”.

This aroused the stranger’s attention-,.
and he asked a. multitude of questioan
concerning the route which the daemon;
ashe called him, had pursued. Soon aﬁer,
when he was alone with me, he said, “ I
have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, gs-
well as that of these good people; but you
are too considerate to make inquiriu.”

“ Certainly; it would indeed: be very
impertinent and inhuman in me to
trouble you with any inquisitiveness of

mine. -

run noun): nonunion. $9

“ And yet, you rescued; me from a
strange and pailous situation; you have
benevolently restored me to life."

Soon after this he inquired if I thought
that the breaking up of the ice had de-
stroyed the other sledge? I replied, that
loouldinot answer with any degree of
certainty; for the ice had not broken
until near midnight, and the traveller
might have arrived at a place of safety
before that time ;' but of this I could not
- judge. '

From this time the stranger seemed
very! eager to be upon deck, to watch for
the sledge [which had 'before appeared ;
but I have persuaded him to remain
in the cabin, for he is far too weak to
sustain the ruwness'of the atmosphere.
But I have promised that some one
should watch for him, and give him
instant notice if any new object should

appear in sight“

30 « ~ “rnniiimsrzm; an, ’

‘ Suéh is' my journal of whit relates
~to this strange occurrence up' to-the
presen’t'daLy. w The stronger has grade-4
‘ally improved in health,'but is very
silent, and appears uneasy when any
one ekcept myself enters his cabin. Yet
his manners are so conciliating‘ and
“gentle, that the sailors‘ are all interested
'in' him, although they have-had'yery
‘little 'comm’unica‘tiou With him.f For
my own part, .I begin to love him ‘a's
a brother; and his contant and deep
'grief’ ﬁlls me with sympathyland rom-
p‘assion. He' must have been a noble
creature in his better doys, being even
now in 'wreek 'so nttractive and ami-
abl‘e. ‘ -. . .

{I said in one of my letters, my ﬂeei-
Margaret, that l should‘ﬁnd no friend
"on the wide ocean} yet I haVe found ‘a
“ﬁnd who, before his spirit had been
broken by misery, I should have been

TEE IODBN PIOIIETEEUS- 81

happy to have possessed as the brother
of iny heart. .

I shall continue my journal concern-
ing the strange: at intervals, should I
have any fresh incidents to record.

August 13th, 17—.

My aﬁ'ection for my guest increases
every day. 'He excites at once my ad-
miration and my‘pity to an astonishing

degree. How can I see so noble a crea-
‘ ture destroyed by misery without feeling
the most poignant grief? .He is so
gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so culti-
vated; and when he speaks, although
his words are culled with the choicest
art, yet they ﬂow with rapidity and un-
paralleled eloquence.
. He is now much recovered from his
illness, and is continually on the deck,
apparently watching for the sledge that
preceded his own. Yet, although un-

f

33 i runaways; on,

happy; he' is not so utterly occupied by
his own misery,- but that he interests
himself deeply 'in the employme‘nts of
others; He has asked me many ques-
tionsjconcerning my design ;> and- I‘
have related my little history frankly .
to him. He appeared pleased with
the conﬁdence, and suggested several
alterations in myrplan, which I shall
ﬁnd exceedingly useful. There is no
p'edantry in his manner; but. all he
does appears to spring solely from the
interest. he instinctively takes in the
welfare of those who surround him. He
is often overcome by gloom, and then
he sits by himself, and tries to overcome
all that is sullen or 'unsocial in his
humour. These paroxysms pass from
him like-a cloud from before the sun,
though his dejection never leaves him.-
I have endeavoured to win his 6002'
ﬁdeuce; and I trust that I have suc-

run manna}: PROII'HIIUI. 38

heeded. One day I mentioned to him
the desire I had always felt of ﬁnding
a friend who might sympathise with
me, and direct me by his counsel.' I
said, [did not belong to that class of
men who are oﬁ'ended by advice. -“ I
am self-educated, and perhaps I hardly
rely sumciently upon my own powers.
I wish, therefore, that my companion
should be wiser and more experienced
than myself, to conﬁrm and support me;
nor have I believed it impossible to ﬁnd
a true friend."

‘5‘ I agree with you," replied [the
stranger, “in believing that friendship
is 'not only a desirable, but a possible

'acquisition. I once had a friend, the
most noble of human creatures, and
sin entitled, therefore, to judge respect-
ing friendship. You have hope, and
the world before you, and have no
cause for despair. But I I have

I“

 

c6

84 mansxnmx; on,

lost every thing, and cannot begin' liﬂ!
an-e'w.’, v' . . I - , .

"As the 'said this, his countenance'be—
came expressive of a calm settled grief,
‘that touched me-to the heart;' BntAhe
was silent, and presently retired tohis
cabin. , ' '

Even broken in spirit'as‘he-ishno
one can feel more‘deeply than he does
the beauties of nature. The starry sky,-
the sea, and every sight aﬂ‘orded. by
these wonderful regions; seems still- to
have the power of elevating 'his soul
from earth. Such a man has a double
existence: he‘may’suﬂ‘er misery, and be
overwhelmed by disappointments; yet,
when he'has retired into himself, he will
be like a celestial spirit, that has. a halo
around him, within whose circle no grief
or folly ventures. ‘ ' - v -

Will ,you laugh at the enthusiasm
I express concerning this clivine wane

m - KODIIN non-maul. 35

derer P. .If you do, you must have cer-
tainly .lost that simplicity which was
once your‘ characteristic ycharm. Yet,
if you will, smile at the warmth of .my
expressions, while I ﬁnd every day new
causes for repeating them. '

August 19th, 17—. -

Yesterday the stranger said to me,
“ You may easily perceive, Captain
Walton, that I-have suffered great and
unparalleled misfortunes. I had deter-
mined, onee, that the memory of these
evils should die with me; but you have
won me to alter my determination. You
seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I
once‘llid; and Iardently hope that the
gratiﬁcation of your wishes may not be
a serpent to sting you, as mine has been.
I do not know that the relation of my
misfortunes will be useful to you ; yet, it"

P

86 minimum; on,-

you are-inclined, listen to my tale..’ I be}
lieve that the strange incidents connected
with it will afford a view of nature, which
may. enlarge your, facultiew and under-
standing. Youwill hear of powers and
occurrences. such as yo“ have been ac-
customed to believe impossible: but I
do not doubt thet my tale conveys in its
series internal evidence of the truthlot'
the events of which it is compose ." '
You may easily conceive that I was
much gratiﬁed-by the oﬁ'e‘red Communi-
cation; yet I could not endure that he’
should renew his grief by a recital of his
misfortunes. I felt the greatest eager-
ness to hear the promised narrative;
partly from cnriosity, and partly from a-
strong desire to ameliorate his fate, if it
were in my power. I expressed these

feelings in my answer. l
“ I thank you,” he replied, “ for

rs: HOD“! manna. 51.

your sympathy,‘ but it is useless; my
fate is nearly fulﬁlled. I wait but for
onetcvent, and then I shall repose in
peace. [understand your feeling,” couq
tinned he, perceiving that I wished to
interrupt him; “ but you are mistaken,
my friend, if thus you will allow me
to name you; nothing can alter my

destiny: listen to my history, and you
' will perceive how irrevocably it is de—
termined.”

He then told me, that he would com-
mence his narrative the next day when
1 should be at leisure. This promise
drew from me the warmest thanks. I
have resolved every night, when I am
not engaged, 'to record, as nearly as
possible in his own words, what he has
related during the day. If I should
be engaged, I will at least make notes.
This manuscript will doubtless afford
you the greatest pleasure: but to me,

98 - ' ~nwnxmzm; on,

vého know himyand who hear it from
his own-lips, with .what interest and
sympathy shall I read it in some future
day!

I'll 'IODIRN "misusing. so

FRANKENSTEIN ;

THE maxim PROMETHEUS.

CHAPTER 1.

I AM by birth a Genevese; and my
family is- one of the most distinguished
of that republic. My,ancestors had
been for many years counsellors and
syndics; and my father had ﬁlled se-
veral .puhlic situations with honour and
reputation. He was respected by all
.who knew him for his integrity and in-
defatigable attention to public business.
He passed his younger days perpetually
occupied by‘ the affairs of his country:

’5

40 “museum; on,

and it was not until the decline of life
that he thought of marrying, and he- .
slowing on the state sons who might
carry his virtues and his name down tn
posterity.

As the circumstances of his merriage
illustrate his character, I cannot refrain
from relating them. One of his most
intimate friends was a merchant, who,
from a ﬂourishing state, fell, through nu-
merous mischances, into poverty. This
man, whose name was Beaufort, was-of
a proud and unbending disposition,‘ and
could not bear to live in poverty and
oblivion in the same country where'he
had formerly been distinguished for-his
rank and magniﬁcence. Having paid
his debts, therefore, in the. most ho.
nourable manner, he retreated with his
daughter to the town of anerne, where
he lived unknown and in wretchedness.
My father loved Beaufort with the truest

was loom. rmnmus. £1

friendship, and .was deeply grieved by
his,retreat in theseunfortuunte circum-
stances. He grieved also for the loss of
his society, and resolved to: seek him
out, and endeavour to persuade him to
begin the world again through his credit
and assistance.

Beaufort had taken effectual measures
to conceal himself; and it was ten months
. before my father discovered hisabode.

Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened
to the house, which was situated in a
mean street, neat-the Reuse. But when
.he entered, misery and despair alone
welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but
a very small sum of money from the
wreck of his fortunes; but it was suf-
ﬁcient .ta provide him with sustenance
for some months, and in the mean time
he hoped to procure some respectable
employment in a merchant’shouae. The

I“

4! manna-am; on,

interval was consequently spent in in-
action; his grief only became more deep
and rankling, when he had leisure for
reﬂection; and at length it took so fast
hold of his mind, that at the end of three
months he lay on a bed of sickness, in;~
capable of any exertion. . ' ' .
His daughter attended him with the
greatest tenderness; but she saw with
despair that their little ‘fund was rapidly
decreasing, and that there was no other
prospect of support. But Caroline Beau;
fort possessed a mind of an uncommon
mould,;' and her courage rose to sup;
port her in her adversity. 'She pro;
cured plain work; she plaited straw;
and by various means contrived to earn
a pittance scarcely sufﬁcient to support
life. ‘.
Several months passed in this man-
ner. . Her father grew worse; her time

m: uonznn rnonnrneus. 58

Was more entirely occupied in attend-
ing him“; -her means of subsistence 'de-
formed; and in the tenth month her
father died in her arms, leaving her an
orphan and a beggar. This last blow
overcame her; and she knelt by Beau-
fort’s c'oﬁin, weeping bitterly, when my
father. entered the chamber. He came
like a protecting spirit to the poor girl,
with» committed herself to his care, and
eﬂer the interment of his friend, he
conducted her to Geneva, and placed
her under the protection of a relation.
:Two years aﬁer this event Caroline
became his wife.

“When my father became a husband
:and a parent, he found his time so occu-
.pied by the ‘duties of his new situation,
that he relinquished many of his public
employments,‘ and devoted himself to
idle educationof his children. (If these
[Was the eldest, and the destined Inc-

A

ﬂ . FRANKINSTIIN ; on, -

ceasor to all his labours and utility.
No creature could have more tender
parents than mine. My improvement
and health were their constant cam,‘
especially aal remained for several years
their only child. But before I cohﬁnue
my narrative, I must record an incident
which took place when I was four year!
ofage. , - I.
My father had a sister, whom he
tenderly loved, and who had married
early in life an Italian gentleman. Soon
after her marriage, she had accom-
panied her husband into his native
country, and for some years my. father
had very little communication with- her.
About the time I mentioned she died;
and a few months afterwards he re-
ceived a letter from her husband, ao-
quainting him with his intention of
marrying an Italian lady, and request.
ing my father to take charge of the im

me not.“ noun-nus. 45

font. Elizabeth, the only child of his
deceased sister. “ It is my wish,” he
said, “that you should consider her as
your own daughter, and educate her
thus. Her mother’s fortune 'is secured
to her, the documents of which I will
commit to your keeping. Reﬂect upon
thiL proposition; and decide whether
you would prefer educating your niece
yourself to her being brought up by a
stepmother."

My father. did not hesitate, and im-
mediately went to Italy, that he might
accompany the little Elizabeth to her fu.
ture home. 'I have often heard my mo-
ther say, that she was at that time the most
beautiful child she had ever seen, and
showed sign! even then of a gentle and
aﬂ'ectiouate disposition. ' These indica-
tions,:and ‘a desire to bind as closely as
possible the ties of domestic love, deter-
minedmy mum- to consider Elizabeth.

r

46 rnmxnus'rem ; - on,

as my future wife; a design which she‘
nevertound reason to repent. '
- From this time Elizabeth Lavenza-
became my playfellow, and, aswe grer
older, my friend. She .was docile and‘
good tempered, yet gay and playful as—
a summer insect. Although she was
lively and animated, her feelings were“
strong and deep, and her disposition un-,
| commonly affectionate. No one could

better enjoy liberty, yet no one could
submit with more grace than she did
’to constraint and caprice. Her imagir
nation was luxuriant, yet her capability-
of application was great. Her person
was the image of her mind; her hazel‘
eyes, although as lively as a bird’s, pos:
sessed an attractive softness. Her ﬁgure
was light and airy; and, though cape-
ble of enduring great fatigue, she ap-~
peared the most fragile creature in the
world. While I admired her under-

ma uonnax PEOIETHIUS. 47

standing and fancy, I loved to tend on
her,'as I should on a favourite animal ;
and I never saw so much grace both of
person and mind united to so little pre-
tens‘iou. '

. Every one adored Elizabeth. If the
servants had any request to make, it was
' always through her intercession. We

were strangers to any species of dis.

union and dispute; for although there
was a great dissimilitude in ourvchao
metals, therewas an harmony in that
ﬁery'dissimilitude. I was more calm
audiphilosopbical than .my companion;
.yet: toy-temper was not so yielding.
My application was of longer endu-
rance; 'but it was not so’severe whilst it
endured. I delighted in investigating
the facts relative to the actual world;
she busied herself in following the aérial'
creations of the poets. .The Worldwas-
to me a secret, which I desired to dis-

(‘5

48 A amass-run; on,

cover; to her it was a vacancy, which
she sought to people with imaginations
of her own.
Y My brothers were considerably young.
er than myself; hutI had a friend in
one of my schoolfellows, who compen-
sated for this deﬁciency. Henry Cler-
val was the son of a merchant of Ge.
neva, an intimate friend of my father.
He was a boy of singular talent and
fancy. I remember, when he was nine
years old, he wrote a fairy tale, which
was the delight and amazement of all
his companions. His favourite study
consisted in books of chivalry and ro-
mance; and when very young, [can
remember, that we used to act plays
composed by him out of these favourite
books, the principal characters of which
were Orlando, Robin Hood,‘AmadiI,
and St. George.

No youth could have passed more

run noun! PMMETBEUS. 49

‘ happily than mine. My parents were
indulgent, and my companions amiable.
Our studies were never forced; and by
some means we always had an end
placed in View, which excited as to ar-
dent in the prosecution of them. It.
was by this method, and not by emula-
tion, that we were urged to application.
Elizabeth was not incited to apply her-
self to drawing; that her companions
might not outstrip her; but through the
desire of pleasing her aunt, by the
representation of some favourite scene
done by her own hand. We learned
Latin and English, that we might read
the writings in those languages; and
lo ﬁn- from study being made odious to
us through punishment, we loved appli-
cation, and our amusements would have
been the labour: of other children. Per-
haps we did not read so many books,
or learn languages so quickly, as those
VOL. I. n

’5

50 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,
C

who are disciplined according to the.
ordinary methods; but what we learned
was impressed the more deeply on our '
memories.

In this description of our domestiC'
circle 1 include Henry Clervsl; for he
was constantly with us. He went to-
school with me, and generally
the afternoon at our house ; for being an'
only child, and destitute of companions
at home, his father was well pleased
that he should ﬁnd associates at our
house; and we were never completely
happy when Clerval was absent.

I feel pleasure in dwelling on the re-
collections of childhood, before misfor-
tune had tainted my mind, and changed
its bright visions of extensive usefqu
ness into gloomy and narrow reﬂections
upon self. But, in drawing the picture
of my early days, I must not omit to
record those events which led, by in-

TEE HUBER" PROMETHEUB. . I

sensible steps, to my after tale of misery:
for when l would'account to myself for
the birth of that passion, which after-
wards ruled my destiny, I ﬁnd it arise,
like a mountain river, from ignoble and
almost forgotten sources; but, swelling
as it proceeded, it became the torrent
which, in its course, has swept away all
my hopes and joys.

" Natural philosophy is the genius that
has regulated my fate ; I desire therefore,
in 'this narration, to state those facts
which led to my predilection for that
science. When I was thirteen years of
age, we all 'went on a party of pleasure
to the baths near Thonon: the incle-
mency’of the weather obliged us to re-
main a day conﬁned to the inn. In
this house] chanced to ﬁnd a volume
of the works of - Cornelius Agrippa. I
opened it with apathy; the theory which
he attempts'to demonstrate, and the

f"

52 , runnxsum; on;

wonderful facts which he relates, soon
changed this feeling into enthusiasm.
A new light seemed to dawn upon my
mind; and, bounding with joy, 1 com- '
municated my discoVery to my ﬁther.

, I cannot help remarking here the miry
opportunities instructor-9‘ possess of di-

' Tecting the attention of their pupils to
usefur knowledge, which they utterly
neglect. My father looked'cnrelessly
at the title-page of my book, and said,
“All! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear
Victor, do not waste your time upon
this; it is sad trash.”

1 If, instead of this remark, my father
had taken the pains to explain to me,
that the principles of Agrippa had been
entirely exploded, and that a modern
system of science had been introduced,
which possessed much greater powers
than the ancient, became the power: of
the latter were chimerical, while those

ca‘

was noun)! marinas; 58

of the former were real and practical;
under such circumstances, I should cer-
tainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and,
with my imagination warmed as it was,
shoul bly have applied myself to
the Wional theory of chemistry
which resulted from modern dis-
coveries. It is even possible, that the
train of my ideas would never have re-
ceived the max impulse that led to my
ruin. But the cursory glance my father
had taken of my volume by no means
assured me that he was acquainted with
its contents; and I continued to read
with the greadest avidity.

When I returned home, my ﬁrst care
was to procure the whole works of this
author, and afterwards- of Paracelsus
and Albertus Magnus. I read and stu-
died the wild‘ fancies of these writers
with delight; they appeared to me trea-

54- nsmmum; on,

sures known to few beside myself; and
although I often wished to communicate
these. secret stores. of knowledge to my
father, yet his indeﬁnite censure of. y
favourite Agrippa always, ' me. >
I disclosed my discoveries- both;
therefore, under a promise o rid.-
crecy; but she did not'interest herself
in'the subject, and I was left by her to
- pursue my studies alone“: “‘5! :- .-
It may appear very strange, that a
disciple of Albertus Magnus should arise
in the eighteenth century; but 'oﬁrl‘hi
mily was not scientiﬁcal, and I had not ‘
attended any of the lectures given at"
the schools of Geneva. My dreams‘wq‘g
therefore undisturbed by reality; 'and I
entered with the greatest diligence into
the search of the philosopher’ stone and
the elixir of life. But theTIatterob-
tained my most undivided attention:

‘

was nouns: non-runs. '65

wealth was an inferior object; but what
glory would attend the discovery, if I
could banish disease from the human
I frame, and render man invulnerahle to
“any but’a Jiolent death I

Nor viiéﬁ'these my only visions. -The
rain'ng omosts or devils was a promise
liberally accorded by my favourite au-
thors, the fulﬁlment of which I most
eagerly sought; and if my incantations
were always unsuccessful, I attributed
the failure rather to my own inexperience
and mistake, than to a want of skill or
ﬁdelity in my instructors.
 The natural phenomena that take
place every day before our eyes did not
escape my examinations. Distillation,
and the wonderful effects of steam, pro-
cesses of which my favourite authors
were utterly ignorant, excited my asto.
nishment; but my utmost wonder was

i 66 mum-m; on,

I engugedbyson'e experiments on an nir-

' pump, which} sun employed by a gen-
tleman whom we were in the habit of
visiting. '

The ignorance of the early philoso-
phers on these and several other points
served to decrease their credit with me: ,
but I could not entirely throw them
aside, before some other systemvshwld
occupy their place in my mind.

When I was about ﬁﬁeen years old,

«we had 'retired to our house near Bel-g
rive, when we witnessed a most violent
and terrible thunder-storm: It advanced'
from behind the mountains of Jura ;> and
the thunder burst at once with frightful
loudness from various quarters of the
heavens. I remained, while the storm
lasted, watching its progress with cu-
riosity and delight; As I stood at the
door, on a sudden I beheld a stream of

Tn; noun "(nullan :67

the issue from an old and beautiful oak,
which stood about twenty yards from
our house; and so soon as the dazzling
light vanished, the oak had disappeared,
and nothing remained but a blasted
stump. When we visited it the next
morning, we found the tree shattered in
a singular manner. It was not splintered I
by the shock, but entirely reduced to
thin ribands of wood. I never beheld
any thing so utterly destroyed.

The catastrophe of this tree excited
my extreme astonishment; and I eagerly
inquired of- my father the nature and
origin of thunder and lightning. He re-
plied, “ Electricityz" desaribing at the
lame time the various eﬂ‘epts of that
purer. He constructed a small electrical
machine, and exhibited a few experi-
ments; he made also a kite, with a wire
and string, which drew down that ﬂuid

- from the clouds.
n 5

r

58 aluminum; on,

This last stroke completed the were ‘
throw (of Cornelius Agripps, Alberta:
'Magnus, and Paracelsus, who had so long
reigned the lordslofmy imagination. But
by some fatality I did not feel inclined
to commence the. study of any modern
system; and this disinclination was in-
ﬂuenced by the following circumstanCc.

My father expressed a wish that I
should attend a course of lectures upon
natural philosophy, to which 1 cheer.
fully consented. Some accident pre-
vented -my attending these lectures
until the course was nearly ﬁnished.
The lecture being, therefore, one of the
last, was entirely incomprehensible to
me. The professor discoursed with
the greatest ﬂuency .of potassium. and
boron, of sulphates and oxyds, terms
to which 1 could afﬁx no idea; and I
became disgusted with the science of
natural philosophy, although I still read

n1 nouns .muarnnus. 59

Pliny and Buﬁ‘on with delight, authors,
in my estimation, of nearly equal inte-
rest and utility. '

. My occupations at this age were prin-
cipally the mathematics, and most of
the branches of study appertaining to
that science. I was busily employed in
learning languages; Latin was already
familiar to me, and I began to read some
of the easiest Greek authors without the
help o'fa lexicon. I also perfectly under-
stood English and German. This is the
list of my accomplishments at the age of
seventeen; and you may conceive that
my hours were fully employed in ac-
quiring and maintaining a knowledge of
this various literature.

Another task also devolved upon me,
when I became the instructor of my bro-
thers. Ernest was six years younger
than myself, and was my principal pu-
pil. He had been aﬂlicted with ill health

if“

so mustang; on,

from his infancy, through which Eliza-
beth and I had been his constant nurses ;
.his» disposition was gentle, but he was
incapable of any severe application.
William, the youngest of our family, wan
yet an infant, and the most beautiful
little fellow in the world; his lively blue
eyes, dimpled cheeks, and endearing
manners, inspired the tenderest affec-
tion. 7

Such was our domestic circle, froui
which care and pain seemed forever
banished. My father directed our stu-
‘ dies, and my mother partook of our en-
joyments. Neither of us possessed the
slightest pie-eminence over the other;
the voice of command was never heard
amongst us; but mutual aﬁ‘ection en-
gaged us all to comply with and obéy
the slightest desire of each other.

rnz nouns “murmurs. 61

CHAPTER II.

Wnau I had attained the age of seven-
teen, my parents resolved that I should
become a student at the university of
Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended
the schools of Geneva; but my father
thought it necessary, for the comple-
tion of my education, that I should be
made acquainted with other customs
than those of my native country. My
departure was therefore ﬁxed at an
early date; but, before the day resolved
upon could arrive, the ﬁrst misfortune
of my me occunedL-an omen, as it
were, of my future misery.

r

02 ~ msumrsnv; on,

Elizabeth had caught the scarlet
fever; but her illness was not severe,
and she quickly recovered. During
her conﬁnement, many arguments had
been urged to persuade my mother to
refrain from attending upon her. She
had, at ﬁrst, yielded to our entreaties;
but when she heard that her favourite
was recovering, she could no'longer de~~
bar herself from her society, and entered ,
her chamber long before the danger of
infection was past. The consequences
of this imprudence were fatal. 0n the
third day my mother sickened; her
fever was very malignant, and the looks
of her attendants prognosticated the
worst event. On her death-bed the
fortitude and benignity of this admira- .
ble woman did not desert her. She
joined the hands of Elizabeth and
myself: “ My children,” she said, “ my

> ﬁrmest hopes of future happiness were

n: noon)! mun-runs. 69

placed on the prospect of your union.
This expectation Will now be the con-
solstion of your father. ‘ Elizabeth, my
love,’ you must supply my place to
your younger cousins. Alas! I regret
that I am taken from‘ you; and, happy
and beloved as I'have been, is it not
hard to quit you all? But these are not
thoughts beﬁtting me; I wil lendeavour
to resign myself cheerfully to death, and
will indulge ,a hope of meeting you in
another world."

She- died calmly; and her counte-
nance expressed affection even in ‘desth.
I need not describe the feelings of those
whose dearest-ties are rent by that most
irreparable evil, the void that presents
itself to the soul, and the despair that is
exhibited on the countenance.‘ It is so
long before the mind can persuade it-
self that she, whom‘ we saw every day“
and whose very‘ existence appeared .s

f

84 mmnm;os,-.

part of our own, can have departed thr
ever—that the brightness of a beldved
eye can have been extinguished, 'and
the sound of a voice so familiar, and.
dear to the car, can be hushedynever
more to be heard." These are the re?
ﬂections of the ﬁrst days; but when.the
lapse of time proves the reality of the
evil, then the actual bitterness of grief
commences. Yet from whom has not
that rude hand rent away some dear
connexion; and why should I describe
a. sorrow which all have felt, and must
feel? The time at length arrives, when
grief is rather an indulgence than a ne
cessity; and the smile that plays upon
the lips, although it may be deemed a
sacrilege, is not banished. My mother
was dead, but we had still duties which
we ought to perform; we. must conti-
nue our course with the rest, and learn
to think ourselves fortunate, whilst

run lonnw‘ animus. 05

one remains whom the spoiler has not
seized.

- My journey to Ingolstadt, which had
been. deferred by these events, wu now
egain determined upon. I obtained V
from my father a respite of some weeks.
This period was spent sadly; my mo-
ther-'s death, and my speedy departure,
depresed our spirits; but Elizabeth en-
deavoured to renew the spirit of cheer-
fnlness in our little society. Since the
death of her aunt, her mindhad ac-
quired new ﬁrmness and vigour. She
determined to fulﬁl her duties with .the
gmtest exactness: and she felt that that
most imperious duty, of rendering her
uncle and cousins happy, had devolved
upon her. She consoled me, amused
her uncle, instructed my brothers; and
I never beheld her so enchanting as at
this time, when she was continually en-
desvouring to contribute to the happi-

h

66 mmmm; 03,.

ness of others, entirely forgetful of. her-
self. .'

The day of my departure at- length
arrived. I had taken leave. of all my.
friends, excepting Clerval, who spent
the-last evening with us. He bitterly
lamented that he was unable to accom-
pany me: but his father could notibe
persuaded to part with him, intending
that he should become a partner with
him in business, in compliancewithhia
favourite theory, that learningwas su-
perﬂuous inthe commerce of ordinary
life. Henry had a reﬁned mind;---he
had no desire to be idle, and was well
pleased to become his father’s partner,
but he believed that a man might be a
very good trader, and yet possess a, cul-
tivated understanding. .

We sat late, listening to his com-
plaints, and making.many little arm
rangements for the future. The next

TEE MODE}! PROHITBIUB. 67

morning early’ I departed. ' Tears
gushed from the eyes of Elizabeth;
they proceeded partly from sorrow at
my departure, and partly because she
reﬂected that the same journey was‘ to
have taken place three months before,
when a mother’ blessing would have
accompanied me.

I 'threw-inyself into the chaise that
was to convey me away, and'indulged
in the most melancholy reﬂections. I,
who had ever been surrounded by ami-
able companions, continually engaged
in endeavouring to bestow mutual plea-
‘sure, I wasnow alone. In th e niver-
sity, whither I was going, I must form
my own friends, and be my own pro-
tector. My life had hitherto been re-
markably secluded and domestic: and -
this had given me invincible repug-
nance to new countenances. I loved
my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; .

68 ensure-mm ; on,

these were “ old familiar faces ;” but I
believed myself totally unﬁtted for the --
‘company of strangers. Such were my
reﬂections as I commenced my journey;
but as, I proceeded, my spirits and hopes
rose. I ardently desired the acquisi-u
tionof knowledge. I had often, when .
at home, thought it hard to remain due
ring my youth cooped up in one place,
and had.longed to enter the world, and
take my station among other human
beings. Now my desires were complied
with, and it would, indeed, have been
folly to repent. '
I had sufﬁcient leisure for 'these -and
many other reﬂections during my joui"
my to Ingolstadt, which was long and
fatiguing. At length the high white
steeple of the town met my eyes. I
ulighted, and was conducted to my so-
litary apartment, to spend the evening
as I pleased.

TH. KODEBK PIOIIETBEUS. 69

The next morning I delivered my
letters of introduction, and paid a visit
to some of the principal professors, and
among others to M. Krempe, professor
of natural philosophy. He received
"me with politeness, and asked me se-
veral questions concerning my progress
in the diﬁ‘erent branches of science
appertaining to natural philosophy. I
mentioned, it is true, with fear and
trembling, the only authors I'had ever
read upon those subjects. The pro-
fessor stared: "‘ Have you,” he said,
“really spent your time in studying
such nonsense ?” '

I replied in the afﬁrmative. “ Every
minute,” continued M. Krempe with
warmth,“ every instant that you hire
wasted 'on those books is utterly and
entirely'lost. 'You have burdened your
memory with exploded systems, and
useless names. Good God! in what

70 , rnmxzxaum; on,

desert land have you lived, where no
one was kind enough to inform you
that these fancies, which you have. so
greedin imbibed, are a thousand yearl'
old, and as musty as they are ancient?

1 little expected in this enlightened and

scientiﬁc age to ﬁnd a disciplevofAln-
bertus Magnus and Paracelsus. ' My
dear Sir, you must begin your studies.
entirely anew.” ‘ - '

So saying, he stept aside, and wrote

down a list of several books treating of:
natural philosophy, which he desired

me to procure, and dismissed me, after
mentioning that in the beginning‘ot'
the following week he intended to com-

mence a course of lectures upon natural

philosophy in its general relation, and

that M. Waldman, a fellow-professor,

would lecture upon chemistry the alter-

nate days that he missed.

I returned home, not disappointed,

'rns uonsm rnousrsem. 71

for I had long considered those authors
useless whom the professor had so
strongly reprobated; but I did not feel
much inclined to study the books which
I procured at his recommendation. M.
Krempe was ‘a little squat man, with a
gruﬁ' voice and repulsive countenance;
the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess
mel in favour of his doctrine. Besides.
[had a contempt for the uses of modern
natural philosophy. It was very diﬂ‘e-
rent, .when the masters of the science
sought immortality and power; such
views, although futile, were grand: but
now the scene was changed. The am-
bition of the inquirer seemed to limit
itself to the annihilation of those visions
on which my interest in science was
chieﬂy founded. I was required to ex-
change chimeras of boundless grandeur
for realities of little worth.

Such were my reﬂections during the

.l‘

72 BAN KEI’STEIN 3 on,

ﬁrst th0 or three days spent almost in
solitude. But as the ensuing week con-
menced, I thought of the information
which M. Krempe had given me cono
cerning' the lectures. And although I
could not consent to go, and hear that
little conceited fellow deliver sentences ~
out of a pulpit, I recollected what he
had said of M. Waldman, whom I had
never seen, as he had hitherto been out
of town. -
Partly from curiosity, and partl

from idleness, I went into the lecturing
room, ‘which M. Waldman entered
shortly after. This'professor was very
unlike his colleague. He appeared
about ﬁfty years of age, but with an
aspect expressive of the greatest hene.
volence; a few gray hairs covered his
temples, but those at the back of his
head were nearly black. His person
was short, but remarkably erect; and his

THE IODEBN PBOIBTHBUS.

voice the sweetest I had ever heard.
He began his lecture by a recapitu-
lation of the history of chemistry and
the various improvements made by dif-
ferent men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names 'of the most
distinguished discoverers. He then took
a. cursory view of the present state of
the science, and explained many of its
elementary terms. After having made
stew preparatory experiments, be con-
cluded with a panegyric upon modern
chemistry, the terms of which I shall
never forget :—

“ The ancient teachers of thi sci-
ence,” said he, .“ promied impossibili-
ties, and performed nothing. The mo~
dern masters promise very little; they
know that metals cannot be transmuted,
and that the elixir of life is a chi-
mera. But these philosophers, whose
bands seem. only made to dabble in

van. r.- n

74 raunxs‘rzm; on,

dirt, and.their eyes to pore over the
microscope or crucible, have indeed per-
formed miracles. They penetrate into
‘ the recesses of nature, and show hot
she yvorks in her hiding places. They
ascend into the heavens: they have dis.
covered how the blood circulates, and
the nature of the air we breathe. They
have acquired new and almost unlimited
powers; they can command the. thun-
ders of heaven, mimic the earthquake,
and even mock the invisible world with
its own shadows.”
la departed highly pleased with the
professor and his lecture, and paid him
a visit the same evening. His manners
in private were even more mild and at-
tractive than in public; for there was a.
certain dignity in his mien during his
lecture, which in his own house was
replaced by the greatest'atfability and
kindness. He heard with attention my

ms nouns runm‘nnvs. 78

little narration concerning my studies,
and smiled at the names of Cornelius
Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without
the contempt that M. Krempe had ex-
hibited. He said, that “these were
men to whose indefatigable zeal mo-
dern philosophers were indehted for
most of the foundation of their know-
ledge. They had left to us, as an easier
talk, to give new names, and arrange
in connected classiﬁcations, the facts
which they in a great degree had been
the instruments of bringing to light.
The labours of men of genius, however
erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail
in ultimately turning to the solid od-
vantage of mankind." I listened to his
statement, which was delivered without
any presumption or aﬁ‘ectation; and
then added, that his lecture had re-
moved my prejudices against modern
chemists; and I, at the same timeJre-
a 2

76 raANKmsum ; on,

quested his advice concerning the book!
I ought to procure. .

“I am happy,” said M. Waldmau,
“ to have gained a disciple; and if your
application equals your ability, I have
no doubt of your success. Chemistry is
that branch of natural philosophy in
which the greatest improvements have
been and may be made: it is on that
account that l have made it my peculiar
study; but at the same time I have not
neglected the other branches of science.
A man would make but a very sorry
chemist if he attended to that depart-
ment of human knowledge alone. If
your wish is to become really a man of
science, and not merely a petty experi-
mentalist, [should advise you to apply
to every branch of natural philosbphy,
including mathematics.”

He then took me into his laboratory,
and explained to me the uses of his "

“I IODEIN PROKITEEVU. 77

various machines; instructing me as to
What I ought to procure, and promising
me the use of his own when I should
have advanced far enough in the science
not to derange their mechanism. He
also gave me the list of books which I
had requested: and I took my leave.

' Thus ended a daylmemorable to me:
it decided my future destiny.

'78 ranuxensnm; on,

CHAPTER III.

Fnou this day natural philosophy; and
particularly chemistry, in the most com;
prehensive sense of the term, became
nearly my sole occupation. I read with
ardour those works, so full of genius and
discrimination, which modern inquirers
have written on these subjects. I at-
tended the lectures, and cultivated the
acquaintance, of the men of science of
the university; and I found even in M.
Krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is
true, with a repulsive physiognomy and
manners, but not on that account the
less valuable. In M. Waldman 'I found

TRI HODIBN PROHITHEUI. 79

a true friend. His gentleness was ne-
ver tinged by dogmatism; and his in-
structions were given with an air of
frankness and good nature, that ha-
nished every idea of pedantry. It was,
perhaps, the amiable character of this
man that inclined me more to that
branch of natural philosophy which he
professed, than an intrinsic love for the
science itself. But this state of mind
had place only in the ﬁrst steps towards
knowledge: the more fully I entered
into the science, the more exclusively
I pursued it for its own sake. That
application, which at ﬁrst had been a
matter of duty and resolution, now be-
came so ardent and eager, that the stars
oﬁen disappeared in .the light of morn-
ing whilst I was yet engaged in my
laboratory.

As I applied so closely, it may be
easily conceived that I improved ru-

80 .  FRANKENSTEIN; on,

pidly. My ardour was indeed the asto/
.nishment of the students; and my pro/
ﬁciency, that of the masters. Professol’
Krempe often asked me, with a sly
smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on?
whilst M. Waidman expressed the most
heartfelt exultation ' in my progress.
Two years passed in this manner, dur-
ing which I paid no visit to Geneva,
but was engaged, heart and soul, in the
pursuit of some discoveries, which I
hoped to make. None but those who
have experienced them can conceive of
the enticements of science. in other
studies you go as far as others have
gone before you, and there is nothing
more to know; but in a scientiﬁc pur-
suit there is continual food for discovery
and Wonder. A mindof moderate ca-
pacity, which cloely pursues one study,
must infalliny arrive at great proﬁ-
ciency in that study; and I, who con~

m roman nous-rams. 81

tinually sought the attainment of one
object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt
up in this, improved so rapidly, that, at
the 'end of two years, I made some dis-
coveries in the improvement of some
chemical. instruments, which procured
me. great esteem and admiration, at the
university. When] had arrived at this
.point, 'and had become as well ac-
quainted with the theory and practice
of natural philosophy as depended'ori
the lessons of any of the professors at
Ingolstadt, my residence there being no
longer conducive to my improvements,
i thought of returning to my friends
and my native- town, when an incident
happened that protracted my stay.

One of the phenomena which had
peculiarly attracted my attention was
the structure of the human frame, and,
indeed, any animal endued with life.

Whence,l often asked myself, did the
a 5

82 amass-rust; or,

principle oflii‘e proceed P ’1qu the“
question, and one which has ever been
considered as a mystery; yet with .how
many things are we upon the brink- of
becoming acquainted, if cowardice or
carelmsness did not restrain our in.
quiries. I revolved these circumstances
in my mind, and determined theirch
to apply myself more particularly to'
those branches, of natural philosophy
.which relate to physiology. Unless I
had been animated by an almost super-
natural enthusiasm, my application to
this study would have been irksome.
and almost'intolerable. To examine the
causes of life, we must ﬁrst have recourse '
to death. I became acquainted with the
science of anatomy : but this was not suf-
ﬁcient; I must also observe the natural
decay and corruption of the human body.
In my education my father had taken
the greatest precautions that my mind

m- Ions“ mun-nus. 8'5

dhould be impressed with no superna-
tural horrors. I do not ever remember
to have trembled at a tale of super-
stition, or to have feared the apparition
of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon
my fancy; 'and a churchyard was to me
merely the receptacle of bodies deprived
of life, which, from being the seat of
beauty and strength, had become food
for the worm. Now I was led to examine.
the cause and progress of this decay,
and forced to spend days and nights in
vaults and charnel-houses. My attention
was ﬁxed upon every object the most
ins'upportable to the delicacy-of the hu-
man feelings. I saw how the ﬁne form
of man was degraded and wasted; I be-
held the corruption of death succeed to
the blooming check of life; I saw how
the worm inherited the wonders of the
eye and brain. I paused, examining and

84 Imuxsxs'rm; u,

analysing all the minutiae ofcausation,
as exempliﬁed in the change from life
to death, and death to life, until from
the midst of this darkness a sudden light
broke inlupon me—a light so brilliant
and wondrous, yet so simple, that while
I became dizzy with the immensity-of
the prospect which it illustrated, I was ’
surprised, that among so many men of .
genius who had directed their inquiries
towards-the same science, that I alone
should be reserved to discover so aston-
ishing a secret.

Remember, I am not recording the
vision of a madman. The sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens,
than that which I now afﬁrm is true.
Some miracle might have produced it,
yet the stages of the discovery were di-
stinct and probable. After days and
nights of incredible labour and fatigue,

'nn USER PROHITHIUE. 86

I succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, I became
myself capable of bestowing animation
upon lifeless matter.

The astonishment which I had at ﬁrst
experienced on this discovery soon gave
place to delight and rapture. After so
much time spent in painful labour, to
arrive at once at the summit of my de-
, sires, was the most gratifying consum-
mation of my toils. But this discovery
was so great and overwhelming, that all
the steps by which I had 'been pro-
gressively led to it were obliterated, and
I beheld only the result. What had been
the study and desire of the wisest men
since the creation of the world, was now
within my grasp. Not that, like a magic
scene, it all opened upon me at once:
the information I had obtained was of
a nature rather to direct my endeavours

86 IlANllNlrm ;- u,

so soon as I should point them towards
the object of my search, than to exhibit
that object already accomplished. I Was
like the Arabian who had been buried
with the dead, end found 5 passage to
life, aided only by one glimmering, and
seemingly ineffectual, light. I '

I see by your eagerness, end the
wonder and hope which your eyes ex-
press, my friend, that you expeot to be
informed of the secret with which I am
acquainted; that cannot be: listen pu—
tiently until the end of my story, and
you will easily perceive why I am re-
served upon that subject. I will not
lead you on, unguarded and ardent as
I then was, to your destruction and in-
fallible misery. Learn from me, if not
by my precepts, at least by my example,
how dangerous is the acquirement of
knowledge, and how much happier that

m man: nous-nuns. 87

inn .is who believes his native toWn to
be the world, than he who aspires to be-
come greater than his nature will allow.

When I found so astonishing a power
placed within my hands, I hesitated a
long time concerning the manner in
which 1 should employ it. Although
{possessed the capacity of bestowing
animation, yet to prepare a frame for
the reception of it, with all its intri-
cacies of ﬁbres, muscles, and veins, still
remained a work of inconceivable dif-
ﬁculty and labour. I doubted at ﬁrst
whether I should attempt the creation
of a being like myself, or one of simpler
organization; but my imagination was
too much exalted by my ﬁrst success
to permit me to doubt of my ability to
give life to an animal as complex and
wonderful as man. The materials at
present within my command hardly ap—
peared adequate to so arduous an un~

r\

88 . PMNKINITI‘JN; on,

dertaking; but I doubted not that}
should ultimately succeed. I prepared
myself for a multitude of reverses; my
operations might be incessantly baﬂed,
and at last my work be imperfect: yet,
when I considered the‘ improvement
which every day takes place in science
and mechanics, I was encouraged'to
hope my present attempts would "at least
lay the foundations of future success.
Nor could I consider the magnitude
and complexity of‘my plan as any argu-
ment of its impracticability. It was"
with these feelings that I began the
creation of a human being. As the
minuteness of the parts formed a‘great
hindrance to my speed, I resolved,.con-
trary to my ﬁrst intention, to make the
being of a gigantic stature; that is to
say, about eight feet in height, and pro-.
portionably large. After having formed
this determination, and havmg spent

was nouns mountains. 89

some months in successfully collecting
and arranging my materials, I began.
No one can conceive the variety of
feelings which bore me onwards, like a
hurricane, in the ﬁrst enthusiasm of
success. Life and death appeared to
’me ideal bounds, which I should ﬁrst
break through, and pour a torrent of
light into our dark world. A new spe-
cies would bless me as its creator and ‘
source; many happy and excellent na-
tures would owe their being to me. No
father could claim the gratitude of his
child so completely as I should deserve .
theirs. Pursuing these reﬂections, I
thought, that if I could bestow anima-
tion upon lifeless matter, I might in pro-
cess of time (although I now found it im—
possible) renew life where death had ap-
parently devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits,

f‘

90 ' ruxnxsnm; on,

while I pursued my undertaking with
unremitting ardour. My cheek had
grown pale with study, and my person
had become emaciated with conﬁnement.
Sometime. on the very brink of cer-
tainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the
hope which the next day or the'next
hour might realize. One secret which
I alone possessed was the hope to which
I had dedicated myself; 'and the moon
gazed on my midnight labours, while,
with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness,
I pursued nature to her hiding-places.
Who shall conceive the horrors of my
secret toil, as I dabbled among the un-
hallowed damps of the grave, or tortured
the living animal to animate the lifeless
clay? My limbs now tremble, and my
eye swim with the remembrance; but
then a resiatless, and almost frantic im-
pulse, urged me forward; I seemed to

I'll -IODIBX PMIBTHEUS.

re lost all soul or sensation but for
5 one pursuit. It was indeed but a
sing trance, that only made me feel
h renewed acuteness so soon as, the
natural stimulus ceasing to operate, I
l‘retlu'ued to my old habits. I col.
led bones from charnel-houses; and
hotbed, with profane ﬁngers, the tre-
n’dous secrets of the human frame.
s'aolitary chamber, or rather cell, at
top of the house, and separated from
the other apartments by a gallery and
sense, I kept my workshOp of ﬁlthy
ation: my eyeballs were starting from
is' sockets in attending to the details
ny employment. The dissecting room
I the slaughter-house furnished many
my materials; and often did my hu-
u nature turn with loathing from my
upation, whilst, still urged on by an
erness which perpetually increased,
rought my work near to a conclusion.

5

‘ 92 rssmzm‘ux; on,

The summer months passed while I
was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
one pursuit. It was a most beautiful

‘ season; never did the ﬁelds bestow 5*
more plentiful harvest, or the vines
yield a more luxuriant vintage: but 'my
eyes were insensible to the charms of

1 nature. And the same feelings which
made me neglect the scenes around me
caused me also to forget those friends
who were so many miles absent, and
whom I had not seen for so long a
time. I knew my silence disquieted

’ them; and I well remembered the

words of my father: “ I know that
while you are pleased with yourself, you
will think of us with aﬁection, and we
shall hear regularly from you. You
must pardon me if I regard any inter-

ruption in your correspondence as a

proof that your other duties are equally
neglected.”

ran loosen rsousrueus. 98

I knew well therefore what would be
my father’s feelings; but I could not
tear my thoughts from my employment,
loathsome in itself, but which had taken
an irresistible hold of my imagination.
I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all
that related to my feelings of aﬂ‘ection
until'tbe great object, which swallowed
up every habit of my nature, should be
completed. '

I then thought that my father would
be .unjust if he ascribed my neglect to
vice, or faultiness on my part; but I
am now convinced that he was justiﬁed
in conceiving that I should not be al-
together free from blame. A human
being in perfection ought always to pre-
sen're a calm and peaceful mind, and
never to allow passion or a transitory
desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do
not think that the pursuit of knowledge
is an exception to this rule. .If the

947 rawxsxs'rsm; on,

study to which you apply yourself has
a tendency to weaken your aﬂ‘ections,
and to destroy your taste: for those
simple pleasures, in which no alloy can
possibly mix, then thatstudy is cer-
tainly unlawful, that is to say, not be-
ﬁtting the human mind. If this rule
were always observed; if no man sl-
lowed any pursuit whatsoever to inter-
fere with the tranquillity of his domestic
aﬁ'ections, Greece had not been en-
slaved; Caesar would have spared his
country; America would have been dis-
covered more gradually; and the em-
pires of Mexico and Peru had not been
destroyed. .
But I forget that I am moralizing-in
the most interesting part of my tale;
and your looks remind me to proceed.
My father made no reproach in his.
letters, and only took notice of my si-
lence by inquiring into my occupations

nu noon! mailman. 95

moreparticnlarly than before. Winter,
spring. and summer passed away during
my labours; but I did not watch the
blonom or the expanding leaves—sights
which-before always yielded me supreme
delight—so deeply was I engrossed in
my occupation. The leaves of that year
had withered before my work drew near
to a close; and now every day showed
me more plainly how well I had suc-
ceeded. But my enthusiasm was checked
by my anxiety, and I appeared rather
like one doomed by slavery to toil in the
mines, or any other nnwholesome trade,
than an artist occupied by his favourite
employment. Every night I was op-
pressed by a slow fever, and I became
nervous to a most painful- degree; a
disease that I regretted the more be-
cause I had hitherto enjoyed most ex-
cellent health, and had always boasted

, F

96 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

of the ﬁrmness of my nerves. But I
believed that exercise and amusement
would soon drive away such symptoms;
and I promised myself both of these
when my creation should be complete.

'l'ﬂl nonnN mountains. ' 97

CHAPTER IV.

Ir was on a. dreary night of Novem-
ber, that l beheld the accomplishment
of my toils. With an anxiety that al-
most amounted to agony, I collected
the instruments of life around me, that
I might infuse a spark of being into
the lifeless thing that lay at my feet.
It was already one in the morning; the
rain'pattered dismally against the panes,
and my candle was nearly burnt out,
when, by the glimmer of the half-extin-
guished. light, I saw the dull yellow
eye of the creature open; it breathed

V0 la. 1. - P

98 mnmsunr; or,

hard, and a convulsive motion agitated 
its limbs.

How can I describe my emotions at
this catastrophe, or how delineate the
wretch whom with such inﬁnite pains
and care I had endeavoured to form?
His limbs were in proportion, and 1‘
had selected his features as beautiful. '
Beautiful l—Great God ! His yellow skin
scarcely covered the work of muscles
and arteries beneath ; his' hair 'was of a
lustrous black, and ﬂowing; his teeth
of a pearly whiteness; but these luxu-
riances only'formed a more horrid con-
trast with his watery eyes, that seemed
almost of the same colour as the dun
white sockets in which they were set,
his shrivelled complexion, and straight
black lips.

The diﬂ'erent accidents of life are
net’so’ changeable as the feelings of
human nature. I had worked hard for

THE uonnnn rnonrnsus. 99

nearly two years, for the sole purpose of
infusing life ‘into an inanimate body,
For this I had deprived myself of rest
ind health. I had desired it with an
ardent that far exceeded moderation;
but now that I had~ ﬁnished, the beauty
of the dream vanished, and breathless
horror and disgust ﬁlled my heart.
Unable to endure the aspect of the
being I had created, I rushed out of
the room, and continued a long time
traversing my bed-chamber, unable to
compose my mind to sleep. At length
'lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had
before endured ; and I threw myself on
the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to
seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
But it was in vain: I slept indeed, but
I was disturbed by the wildest dreams.
’ I thought'I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom
of health, Walking in the streets of In-
golstadt. Delighted and surprised, I
r 2

f

100 FIANKENITIHN ; on,

embraced her; but as I imprinted the
ﬁrst kiss on ‘her’lips, they became livid
with the hue of} death ; her features ap-
peared to change, and I thought that I
held the corpse of my dead mother-fin
my arms; a shroud enveloped'her form,
and I saw the grave-worms crawling in
the folds of the ﬂannel. I started from
my sleep with horror; a cold dew co.-
vered my forehead, my teeth chatteredg
and every limb became convulsed'é
when, by the dim and yellow light of
the moon, as it forced its way through
the window shutters, I beheld the wretch
——the miserable monster whom I had
created. He held up the curtain of the
bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be
called, were ﬁxed on me: His jaws
opened, and he muttered some inarti-
culate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his
cheeks. He might have spoken, but I
did not hear; one 'hand was stretched

was lioness PBOHE’IHEUB. 101

out, seemingly to detain me, but I
escaped, and rushed down stairs. I took
refuge in the court-yard belonging to
the house which I inhabited; where I
remained during the rest of the night,
walking up and down in the greatest
agitation, listening attentively, catching
and fearing each sound as if it were to
announce the approach of the demoni-
acal corpse to which I had so miserably
given life. ,

Oh! no mortal could support the
horror of that countenance. A mummy
again endued with animation could not .
be- so hideous as that wretch. I had
gazed on him while unﬁnished; he was
ugly then; but when those muscles and
joints were rendered capable of motion,
it became a thing such as even Dante
could not have conceived.

I passed thenight wretchedly. Some—
times my pulse heat so quickly and

I

102 ‘ rnAnnnsnm; on; '-

hardly, that I felt the palpitation of every
artery; at others, I nearly sank to the
ground through languor and extreme
weakness. Mingled with this‘horrorﬂ
felt' the bitterness of disappointment;
dreams that had been my food and'plea-
sant rest for so long a space, were now
become a hell to me; .and the change
was so rapid, the overthrow so com-
plete !

Morning, dismal and wet,vat length ..
dawned, and discovered to my sleepless
and aching eyes the church of Ingol-
stadt, its white steeple and clock, which
indicated the sixth hour. The porter
opened the gates of the court, which had
that night been my asylum, and I issued
into the streets, pacing them with quick
steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch
whom I feared every turning of the
street would present to my View. I did
not dare return to the apartment which

1n nouns rsonmus. 108

I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry
on, although vetted by the rain which
poured from a. black and comfortless
sky'.

I continued walking in this manner
for some time, endeavouring, by bodily
exercise, to ease the load that weighed
upon my mind. I traversed the streets, >
without any clear conception of where I
was, or what I was doing. My heart
palpitated in the sickness of fear; and I
hurried on with irregular steps, not
daring to look about me :

Like one who, on I lonely rand,

' Doth walk in fear and dread,

And, having once turned round, walks on,
And turns no more his head;

Because he knows I frightful ﬁend
Doth close behind him trend".

Continuing thus, I came at length
opposite to the inn at which the various

* Coleridge's “ Andent Marina."

I

104' lmnxeusruu ; on,

diligences and carriages usually stopped.
Here I paused, Iknew not why ; but I re.-
mained some minutes with my eyes ﬁxed
on a coach that was coming towards
me from the other end of the street.
As it. drew nearer, I observed that it
was the Swiss diligence : it stopped just
where I was standing; and; on the door
being opened, I perceived Henry Cler-
val, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung
out. “ My dearFrankenstein,” exclaimed
he, “ how glad I am to see youlv how
fortunate that you should be here at the
very moment of my alighting !”
Nothing could equal my delight on
seeing Clerval; his presence brought
back to my thoughts my father, Eliza-
‘ beth, and all those scenes of home so
dear to my recollection. I grasped his -
hand, and in a moment forgot my hor-
ror and misfortune; I felt suddenly, and
for the ﬁrst time during many months,

r was: momma maximum. 105

calm and serene joy. I welcomed my
friend, therefore, in the most cordial
.manner, and we walked towardsmy
college. Clerval continued talking for
some time about our mutual friends,
and his own good fortune in being
permitted to come to lngolstadt. “ You
may easily believe,” said he, “ how
great was the diﬂiculty to persuade
my .fsther that it was not absolutely
necessary for a merchant not to under-
stand any thing except book-keeping;
and, indeed, I believe I left him incre-
dulous to the last, for his constant an-
"sWer to my unwearied entreaties was
the same as that of the Dutch school-
master in the Vicar of Wakeﬁeld: ‘I
have ten thousand ﬂorins a year with-
out Greek, 1 eat heartily without
Greek.’ But his affection for me at
length overcame his dislike of learning,
and he has permitted me to undertake
r 5

r

106 susxausrm; on,

a voyage of discovery to the land of,
knowledge". . . e .

“ It gives me the greatest delight to
see you; but tell me how you leftmy
father, brothers, and Elizabeth.”  .

“ Very well, and very happy, only a
little uneasy that they hear from you -
so seldom. By the by, 1 mean to lecture
you a little upon their account myself.—
But, my dear Frankenstein,” continued
be, stopping short, and gazing full in
my face, “ I did not before remark how
very ill you appear; so thin and pale;
you look as if you had been watching
for several nights.” - 4

“You have guessed right; I have
lately been so deeply engaged in 'one
occupation, that l have not allowed my-
self suﬂicient rest, as you see: but I
hope, I sincerely hope, that all these em-
ploymeuts are now at an end, and that I
am at length free."

m IIODEBN noun-ms. 107

l trembled excessively; I could not
endure to think of, and far less to allude
o the occurrences of the preceding
light. I walked with a quick pace,
ind we soon arrived at my college. I
hen reﬂected, and the thought made
ne’shiver, that the creature whom I
lad left in my apartment might still
be there, alive, and walking about.

'drended to behold this monster;
but I feared still more that Henry
hould see him. Entreating him there-
'ore- to remain a few minutes at the
mttom of the stairs, I darted up to—
vards my owu room. My hand was
\lready on the lock of the door before

recollected myself. I then paused;
and a cold shivering came over me. I
hrew the door forcibly open, as chil-
lren are. accustomed to do when they
«xpect a spectre to stand in waiting
hr them on the other side; but nothing

a

108 ' ramuusram; on,

appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the
apartment was empty; and my bed-
room was also freed from its hideous
guest. I could hardly believe that so
great a good-fortune could have be-
fallen me; but when I became assured
that my enemy had indeed ﬂed, I clap-
ped my hands for joy, and ran down to
Clerval. " ..

- We ascended into my room, and' the
servant presently brought breakfast;
but I was unable to contain myself.
It was not joy only that possessed me;
I felt my ﬂesh tingle with excess of sen:
sitiveness,-nnd my pulse beat rapidly.
l was unable to remain for a single in-
stant in the same place; I jumped-over
'the chairs, clapped my hands, and
laughed aloud. Clerval at ﬁrst attri-
buted my unusual spirits to joy on his
arrival; but when he observed me
more attentively, he saw a wildness in

THE IODEBN PEOHETHIUS. 109

my eyes for which he could not account;
and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter, frightened and astonished
him.

. “ My dear Victor,” cried-he, “ what,
for God’s sake, is the matter P Do not
laugh in that manner. How ill you are!
What is the cause of all this?

“ Do not ask me,” cried 1, putting
my hands before my eyes, for I thought
I saw the dreaded spectre glide into
the room; “ he can tell.—Oh, save me!
save me I" I imagined that the monster
Ieized me; I struggled furiously, and
fell down in a ﬁt. ,

Poor Clerval! what must have been
his feelings? A meeting, which he an-
ticipated with such joy, so strangely
turned to bitterness. Butl was not the
witness of hisgrief; for] was lifeless,
and did not recover my senses for a long,
long time.

p

110 IRANKENSTEIN; on,

This was the commencement of a"
nervous fever, .which conﬁned me for
several months. During all that time
Henry was my only nurse. I aﬁemards
learned that, knowing my father’s ad-
vanced age, and unﬁtness for so long a
journey, and how wretched my sickness
would make Elizabeth, he spared them '
this grief by concealing the extént'of
my disorder. He knew that I could
not have a more kind and attentive
nurse than himself; and, ﬁrm in the
hope he felt of my recovery, he did not
doubt that, instead of doing harm. he
performed the kindest action that he
could towards them.

But I was in reality very ill; and
surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could
have restored me to life. The form of ‘
the monster on whom I had bestowed
existence was for ever before my eyes,

ms noon: mourners. In

and I raved incessantly concerning him.
Doubtless my words surprised Henry:
he at ﬁrst believed them to be the wan-
derings of my disturbed imagination;
but the pertinacity with which 1 con-
tinually recurred to the same subject
persuaded him that my disorder indeed
owed its origin to some uncommon and
terrible event. .

By very slow degrees, and with fre:
quent relapses, that alarmed and grieved
my friend, I recovered. I remember
the ﬁrst time I became capable of ob-
serving outward objects with any kind
of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen
leaves had disappeared, and that the
young buds were shooting forth from
thetrees that shaded my window. It
was a divine spring; and the season
contributed greatly to my convalesc-
euce. I felt also sentiments of joy
and affection revive in my bosom; my

P

112 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

gloom’disappeared, and in‘ a short time
I became as cheerful as before I was
attacked by the fatal passion. . i I

“ Dearest .Clerval,” exclaimed I,
“ how kind, how very good you are to
me. This whole winter, instead of
being spent in study, as you promised
yourself, has been consumed in my
sick room. How shall I ever repay
you? I feel the greatest remorse for
the disappointment of which I have
been the occasion; but you will for-
give me." 

“ You will repay me entirely, if you
do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you
appear in such good spirits, I may
speak to you on one subject, may I
not?”

I trembled. One subject! what could
it be? Could he allude to an object on
whom I dared not even think?

TEE uonnnu vacuums. 118

“ Compose yourself,” said Clervol,
who observed my change of colour, “ l
‘ will not mention it, if it agitates you;
but your father and cousin would be
very happy if they received a letter‘from
you in your own hand-writing. They
. hardly know how ill you have been, and
are uneasy at your long silence."

“Is that all? my dear Henry. How
could you suppose that my ﬁrst thought
would not ﬂy towards those dear, dear
friends whom I love, and who are so de-
serving of my love."

“If this is your present temper, my
friend, you wileerhaps be glad to see a
letter that has been lying here some
days for'you: it is from your cousin, I
believe.” '

114 IIANKINSTEIN; on,

CHAPTER V.

CLERVAL then put the following letter
into my hands.

“To V. FRANKENSTEIN.

“ MY DEAR cousm,

“I cannot describe to you the un-
easiness we have all felt concerning
your health. We cannot help imagining
that your friend Clervel conceals the ex-
tent of your disorder: for it is now s‘e-
veral months since we have seen your
hand-writing; and all this time youhave
been obliged to dictate your letters to
Henry. Surely, Victor, you must have

ran nouns raoulranvs. 116

been exceedingly ill i and this makes us
all very wretched, as much so nearly as
after the death of your dear mother. My
uncle was almost persuaded that you
were indeed dangerously ill, and could
hardly be restrained from undertaking a
journey to Ingolstadt. Clerval always
writes that you are getting better; I
eagerly hope that you will conﬁrm this
intelligence soon in your own hand-
writing; for indeed, indeed, Victor, we
are all very miserable on this account.
Relieve us from this fear, and we shall
be the happiest creatures in the world.
Your father’s health is now so vigorous,
that he appears ten years younger since
last winter. Ernest also is so much im-
proved, that you would hardly know
him: .he is now nearly sixteen, and has
lost that sickly appearance which he had
some years ago; he is grown quite ro-

bust and active.

116 “mum-mm; on, :-

“My uncle and I conversed a long‘
time last night about whatlprofessio'n
Ernest should follow. His constant ill-
ness when young has deprived him of
the habits of application; and now that
he enjoys good health, he is continually
in. the open air, climbing the bills, or
rowing on the lake. . I therefore proa
posed that he should be a farmer;
which you know, cousin, is a favourite
scheme of mine. A farmer’s. is a very
healthy happy life; and the least hurts
ful, or rather the most beneﬁcial pro-
fession of any. My uncle had an idea
of his being educated as an advocate,
that through his interest he might be-
come a judge. But, besides that he is
not at all ﬁtted for such an occupation,
it is certainly more creditable to cultivate
the earth for the sustenance of man,‘
than to be the conﬁdant, and sometimes
the accomplice, of his vices; which is

132V uounu noun-nus. 117

th’professiou of a lawyer. I said, that
the employments of a prosperous farmer,
if they were not a more honourable,
they were at least a happier species
of occupation than that of a judge,
whose misfortune it was always to med-
dle with‘ the dark side of human nature.
My uncle smiled, and said, that I ought
.to be an advocate myself, which put an
end to the conversation on that sub-
ject.

x “And :now I must tell you a little
story that will please, and perhaps
amuse you. Do you not remember
Justine Moritz? Probably you do not;
I will relate her history, therefore,‘ in a
ﬂaw words. Madame Moritz, her mo-
ther, was a widow with four children,
of whom Justine was the third. This
girl had nlivays been the favourite of
her father; but, through a strange per-
versity,her mother could not endure

f

118 HANKBRBTIIN; on,

her, and, after the death of M. Moritz,
treated her very ill. My aunt observed
this: and, when Justine .was twelve
years of age, prevailed on her mother
to allow her to live at her house. The
republican institutions of our country
have produced simpler and 'happier'man-
ners than those which prevail in'the
great monarchies that surround it.-
Hence there is less distinction between
the several classes of its inhabitants;
and the lower orders being neither so
poor nor so despised, their manner!
are more reﬁned and moral. A ser-
vant in Geneva does not mean the same
thing as a servant in France and Ear
land. Justine, thus received in our fa-
mily, learned the duties of a servant: a
condition which, in our fortunate coun-
try, does not include the idea of igno-
rance, and a sacriﬁce of the dignity of a
human being.

rim Ionian raoxxrnnvs. 119

“Aﬁer what I have said, I dare say
you well remember the heroine of my
little tale: for Justine was a great fa.
vourite of yours; and I.recollect you
once remarked, .that if you were in an
ill humour, one glance from Justine
could dissipate it, for the same reason
that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty
ofAng-elica—she looked so frank-hearted
and happy. My aunt conceived a great
attachment for her, by which she was
induced to give her an education su-
perior to that which he had at ﬁrst
intended. This beneﬁt was fully re-
paid; Justine was the most grateful
little creature in the world: I do not
mean that she made any professions, I
never. heard one pass her lips; but you
could see by her eyes that she almost
adored her protectress. Although her
disposition was gay, and in many re-
lpects' inconsiderate, yet she paid the

f

120 murmurs!“ ; on,

greatest attention to every gesture of
my aunt. She thought her the model
of all excellence, and endeavoured to
imitate her phraseology and manners,
so that even now she often reminds me
of her. ' '

“ When my dearest aunt died, every-
one was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor Justine, who' had
attended her during her illness with the
most anxious affection. Poor Justine»-
was very ill; but other trials were re-
served for her.

“ One by one, her brothers and sister
died; and her mother, with the exception
of her neglected daughter, was left
childless. The conscience of the wo.
man was troubled; she began to think
that the deaths of her favourites was a
judgment from heaven to chastise her
partiality. She wasfa Roman Catholic;
and I believe her confessor conﬁrmed

ran men mmuws. 121

the idea which she had conceived. Ac-
cordingly, a few months after your de-
parture for lngolstadt, Justine was
called home by her repentant mother.
Pbor girl! she wept when she quitted
our house; she was much altered since
the death of my aunt; grief had given '
soﬁness and a winning mildnels to her
manners, which had before been re-
markable for vivacity. Nor was her
residence at her mother’s house of a
nature to restore her gaiety. The poor
woman was very vacillating in her re-
pentance. S-he sometimes begged Jus-
tine to forgive her unkindness, but much
oftener accused her of having. caused
the deaths of her brothers and sister.
Perpetual fretting at length threw Ma.-
dame Moritz into a decline, which at
ﬁat increased her irritability, but she
is .now at peace for ever. She died on
the ﬁrst approach of cold weather, at

VOL. I. G

r

122 rnsxxnnsnm; on,

the beginning of this last winter, Jus-
tine has returned to us; and I assure
you I love her tenderly. She is very
clever and gentle, and extremely pretty;
as I mentioned before, her mien and her
expressions continually remind me of
my dear aunt. .

“ I must say also a few words to you;
my dear cousin, of little darling Wil-
liam. I wish you could see him; he. is
very tall of his age, with sweet laughing
blue eyes, dark eye-lashes, and curling
hair. When he smiles, two little dim-
ples appear on each cheek, which are
rosy with health. He has already had
one or two little wives, but Louisa Biron
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of ﬁve
years of age.

“ Now, dear Victor, I dare say you
wish to be indulged in a little gossip
concerning the good people of Geneva.
The pretty Miss Mansﬁeld has already

run mum noun-rams. 128

received the congratulatory visits on
her approaching marriage with a young
Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq.
Her ugly sister, Manon, married M.
Du-villard, the rich banker, last an-
tumn. Your favourite schoolfellow,
Louis Manoir, has suﬂ'ered several mis-
fortunes since the‘ departure of Clerval
from Geneva. But he has already re-
covered his spirits, and is reported to
be on the point of marrying a very
lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame
.Tavernier. She is a widow, and much
older than Manoir; but she is very
much admired, and a favourite with
every body.

"I have written myself into good
spirits, dear cousin; yet I cannot con-
clude without again anxiously inqui-
ring concerning your health. Dear
Victor, if you are not very ill, write'
yourself, and make your father and all

0 2

A

125 mum-rem ; an,

of us happy; or I cannot hear to
think of the other side of the question;
my tears already ﬂow. Adieu, my dear-
est cousin. 1

 

“ Eu'zumru ILAvenn'.
“ Geneva, March 18th, 17—."

' « Dear, dear Elizabeth 1" I exclain.
ed when I had read her letter, "" I'will
write instantly, and relieve them from
the anxiety they must feel.’’ I wrote,
and this exertion greatly fatigued m‘;
but my convalescence had commenced;
and proceeded regularly. In another
fortnight I was able to leave my chum~
her.

1 One of my ﬁrst duties on my recovery
was to introduce Clerval to the several
professors of the university. In doing
this,l underwent akind of rough usage,
ill beﬁtting the wounds that my mind
had sustained. Ever since the fatal

A

rnn nonnm PMIIBTHEUS. 125

night, the end of my labours, and the
beginning of my misfortunes, I had con-
ceived a violent antipathy even to. the
‘ name of natural philosophy. When I
was otherwise quite restored to health
thesightofa chemical instrument would
renew all the agony of my nervous sym-
ptoms. Henry saw this, and had remov-
ed all my apparatus from my view. He
had. also changed my apartment; .for
be perceived that I had acquired a dis-
like for the room which had previously
been my laboratory. But these cares
of Clerval were made of no avail when I
visited the professors. M. Waldman in-
ﬂicted torture when be praised, with
kindness and warmth, the astonishing
progress I had made in the sciences.
He soon perceived that I disliked the
subject; but not guessing the real cause,
he attributed my feelings to modesty,
and changed the subject from my im-

126 mmnnsum ; on,

‘pmvement, to the science itself, with a
desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing inc
out. What could I do? He meant to
please, and he tormented me. I felt a
if he had placed carefully, one by one, in
my view those instruments which were
to be afterwards used in putting me to
a slow and cruel death. I writh‘ed
under his words, yet dared not exhibit
the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes
and feelings were always quick in dis;
cerning the sensations of others, de-
clined the subject, alleging, in excuse,
his total ignorance; and the conver-
sation took a more general turn. I
thanked my friend from my heart, but
1 did not speak. I saw plainly that he
was surprised, but he never attempted
to draw my secret from me; and al-
though I loved him with a mixture of
affection and reverence that knew no
bounds, yet I could never persuade

nix noun nousrnsus. If!

myself to conﬁde to him that event
which was so oﬁen present to my recol-
lection, but which I feared the detail
to another would only impress more
deeply.

M. Krempe was not equally docile;
and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his
harsh blunt encomiums gave me even
more pain than the benevolent appro-
bation of M. Waldman. “ D—n the
fellow !" cried he; “ why, M. Clerval,
I assure you he has outstript us all.
Ay, stare if you please; but it is ne-
vertheeless true. A youngster who, but
a few years ago. believed Cornelius
Agrippa, as ﬁrmly as the gospel, has
now set himself at the head of the uni-
versity; and if he is not soon pulled
down, we shall all be‘out of counte-
nance.~Ay, ay,” continued he, oh-
ssrving my face expressive of suffering,

r

128  “mums-ram; on,

“ M. Frankenstein is modest; in excel-
lent quality in a young man. Young
men should be diﬂident' of themselves;
you know, M. Clerval; I was myself
when young: but that wears out in is
very short time.” ,

M. Krempe bad now commenced an
eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that: was
so annoying to me.

Clerval was no natural philosopher.
His imagination was too vivid for the
minutise of science. Languages were his
principal study; and he sought, by ac-
quiring their elements, to open a ﬁeld for
self-instruction on his return to Geneva.
Persian, Arabic, and Hebrew, gained
his attention, after he had made himself
perfectly master of Greek and Latin. For
my own part, idleness had ever been
irksome to me; and now that I wished I
to ﬂy from reﬂection, and hated my for-

-A

was IODRBN non-mans. 129

mar studies, I felt great relief in being
tlie fellow-pupil with my friend, and
found not only instruction but consola-
tion in the works of the orientalists.
Their melancholy is soothing, and their
joy elevating to a degree I never expe-
rienced in studying the authors of any
other country. When you read their
writings, life appears to consist in a
warm sun and garden of roses,-—in the
smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and
the ﬁre that consumes your own heart.
How diﬂ‘erent from the manly and be-
roical poetry of Greece and Rome.
Summer passed away in these oc-
cupations, and my return to Geneva
was ﬁxed for the latter end of autumn; —
but being delayed by several accidents,
winter and snow arrived, the roads were
deemed impassable, and my journey
was retarded until the ensuing spring.

I‘ felt this delay very bitterly; for I
65

180 ramxnnsrsm ; on,

longed to see my native town. and my:
beloved friends. My return had only
been delayed so long from an unwil-
lingness to leave Clerval in a strange
place, before he had become acquainted
with any of its inhabitants, The win-1
ter, however, was spent cheerfully ; and
although the spring was uncommonly
late, when it came its beauty compeua
sated for its dilatoriness. '

The month of May had already com-
menced, and I expected the letter daily
which was to ﬁx the date of my depart:

ture, when Henry proposed a pedestrian
tour in the environs of Ingolstadt, that

I might bid a personal farewell to the.
country I had so long inhabited. I ac-
ceded with pleasure to this proposition :
I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had
always been my favourite companion in
the rambles of this nature that I had
taken among the scenes of my native
country. V

I'll HOD!!! mum-nus. I”

We passed a fortnight in these per-
mbulations : . my health and spirits had
long been restoréd, and they gained ad-
ditional strength from the salubrious
air I breathed, the natural incidents of
our progress, and the conversation of
my friend. . Study had before secluded
me‘ from the intercourse of my fellow-
creetures, and rendered me unsocial;
but Clerval called forth the better feel-
ings of my heart; he again taught me
to love the aspect of nature, and the
cheerful faces of children. Excellent
friend! how sincerely did you love me,
and endeavour to ‘elevate my mind,
until it was on a level with your own.
A selﬁsh pursuit had cramped and nnr—
rowed me, until your gentleness and
affection warmed and opened my senses;
I became the same happy creature who,
I few years ago, loving and beloved by
all, land no sorrow or care. When hap-r

n

' 182 masters; as,

py, inanimate nature had the power
of bestowing on me the most delight.
ful sensations. A serene sky and ver-
dant ﬁelds ﬁlled me with ecstasy. The
presentseason was indeed divine; the
ﬂowers of spring bloomed in the hedges,
while those of summer were already in
bud: I was undisturbed by thoughts
which during the preceding year had
pressed upon me, notwithstanding- my
endeavours to throw them 03‘, with an
invincible burden.

Henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and
sincerely sympathized in my feelings:
be exerted himself to amuse me, while
he expressed the sensations that ﬁlled
his soul. The resources of his mind
on this occasion were truly astonish-
ing: his conversation was full of imaé
gination; and very often, in imitation
of the Persian and Arabic writers, he
invented tales of wonderful fancy and

m mum "annulus. 188

sion. At other times he repeated
favourite poems, or drew me out
D arguments, which he supported
I! great ingenuity.

Ve returned to our college on a
day afternoon: the peasants were
icing, and every one we met ap-
red gay and happy. My own api~
were high, and I bounded along
[1' feelings of unbridled joy and
wity. '

1M ' “murmurs; on,

CHAPTER v1.

ON my return, I found the following
letter from my father 2—- "

“To V. Funnxznsrmn.

“MY DEAR VICTOR,

“ You have probably waited impa-
tiently for a letter to ﬁx the date of
your return to us;‘and I was at ﬁrst
tempted to write only a few lines, mere-
ly mentioning the day on which I should
expect you. But that would he a cruel
kindness, and I dare not do it. What
would be your surprise, my son, when

m not:an 1’IOMETEIITI. 1”

Nu expected a happy and gay welcome,

I to behold, on the contrary, tears and
wl'etchedness? And how, Victor, can I
relate our misfortune? Absence can-
lTlot have rendered you callous to our
joys and griefs; and how shall I inﬂict
pain on an absent child P I wish to pre<
pare you for the woful news, but I
know it is impossible; even now your
eye skims over the page, to seek the
words which are to convey to you the
horrible tidings.

“ William is dead l—that sweet child,
whose smiles delighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so
gay ! Victor, he is murdered !

“ I will not attempt to console you;
but will simply relate the circum-

. stances of the transaction.
“Last Thursday (May 7th) I, my
niece, and your two brothers, went to
walk in Plainpalais. The evening was

.I"

186 susxsssrmx ; on,

warm and serene, and we prolonged
our walk farther than'usnal. It was
already dusk before we thought of re-
turning; and then we discovered that
William and Ernest, who had gone on
before, were not to he found. We an;
cordineg rested ona seat until they
should return. Presently Ernest came,
and inquired if we had seen his bro-
ther; he said, that they had been play-
ing together, that William had run away
to hide himself, and that he vainly
sought for him, and afterwards waited
for him a long time, but that he did
not return. .

“ This account rather alarmed In.
and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when Elizabeth conjecJ
tured that he might have returned to
the house. He was not there. We re.
turned again, with torches; for I could
not rest, when I thought that my sweet

'rna noon: non-races. 18‘?

boy had lost himself, and was exposed
to all the damp: and dews of night;
Elizabeth also suﬁ'ered extreme anguish.
About ﬁve in the morning I discovered
my lovely boy, whom the night before
I had seen blooming and active‘ in
health, stretched on the grass livid and
motionless: the print of the murderer
ﬁnger was on his neck.

“ He was conveyed home, and the
anguish that was visible in my counte-
nance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth.
She was very earnest to see the corpse.
At ﬁrst I attempted to prevent her; but
she persisted, and entering the room
where it lay, hastily examined the neck
of the victim, and clasping her hands
exclaimed, ‘ 0 God ! l have murdered
my darlinginfant !’

“ She fainted, and was restored with
extreme diﬂiculty. When she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh.

n

188 rnmxsxsrsm; on,

She told me, that that same evening
William had teazed her to let him wear
a very valuable miniature that she posc
sessed of your mother. This picture is
gone, and was doubtless the temptation
which urged the murderer to the deed.
We have no trace of him at present,
although our exertions to discover him
.are unremitted; but they will not re-
tore my beloved William.

3' Come, dearest Victor; you alone
can console Elizabeth. She weeps con-
tinually, and accuses herself unjustly as
the cause of his death ; her words pierce
my heart. We are all unhappy; but
will not that be an additional motive
for you, my son, to return and be our
comforter? Your dear mother! Alas,
Victor! 1- now say, Thank God she did
not live to witness the cruel, miserable
death of her youngest darling!

“ Come,Victor ; not brooding thoughts

run Ionian mousrnsus. 189

\

of vengeance against the assassin, but
with feelings of peace and gentleness,
that will heal, instead of festering, the
wounds of our minds. Enter the house
.of mourning, my friend, but with kind-
ness and aﬂ'ection for those who love
' you, and not with hatred for your ene-
mics.

“ Your aﬂ'ebtionate and aﬂlicted father,
Anrnonss FRANKENSTEIN.

" Geneva, May 12th, 17—."

Clerval, who had watched my coun-
tenance as I read this letter, was sur-
prised to observe the despair that suc-
ceeded to the joy I at ﬁrst expressed
on- receiving news from my friends. I
' threw the letter on the table, and co-
vered my face with my hands.

“ My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed
Henry, when he perceived me weep
With bitterness, “are you always to be

A

140 rnsuuxsrzm; an,

unhappy? My dear friend, what his
happened P” ’ '

l motioned to him to' take up the
letter, while I walked up and dov'v-n the
room in the extremest agitation. Tenn
also gushed from the eyes of Clervnl.
as he read the account of my misfor-
tune. '

“-I can oﬁ'er you no consolation, my
friend,” said he; “ your disaster is ir-
reparable. What do you intend to
do 2” g . ' ‘

“ To go instantly to Geneva: come
with me, Henry, to order the horses.”

During our walk, Clerval endea.
voured to raise my spirits. He did not
do this by common topics of consolax
tion, but by exhibiting the truest sym
pathy. “ Poor William 1” said he, “that
dear child; he now sleeps with his sn-
gel mother. His friends mourn and
weep, but he is at rest: he does not

'rnl noon): maximum. 141

now feel the murderer's grasp; a sod
:overs his gentle form, and he knows
I0 pain. He can no longer be a ﬁt
subject for pity; the survivors are the
fastest students, and for them time is
he only consolation. Those maxims
If the Stoics, that death'was no evil,
Ind that the mind of man ought to be
iuperior to despair on the eternal ab-
sence of h beloved object, ought not to
)e urged. Even Cato wept over the
lead body of his brother." ‘

Ciel-val spoke thus as we hurried
:hrough the streets; the words im-
pressed themselves on my mind, and I
remembered them afterwards in soli-
tude. But now, as soon as the horses
arrived, I hurried into a cabriole, and
hide farewell to my friend.

My journey was very melancholy.
M ﬁrst I wished to hurry on, for l
longed to console and sympathize with

A

142 rssnxnnsum 3’33,

myloved and sorrowing friends; but
.v when I drew near my native town,l
slackened my progress. I could hardly
sustain the multitude of feelings that
crowded into my mind. Ipassed through
'scenes familiar to my youth, but which
I had not seen for nearly six years;
How altered every thing might be during'
that time! One sudden and desolating
change had taken place; but a thousand
little circumstances might have by de-
grees worked other alterations, which.
although they were done more tran-
quilly, might not be the less decisive.
Fear overcame me; I dared not advance;
dreading a thousand nameless evils that
made me tremble, although I was un-
able to deﬁne them.

I remained two days at Lausanne‘, in
this painful state of mind. I contem-
plated the lake: the waters were placid;
all around was calm, and the snowy

THE MODERN PEOIETHIUS.

Iountains, “the palaces of nature,” were
at changed. ,By degrees the calm and
eavenly scerie restored me, and I con-
nued my journey towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake,
(hich became narrower as I approached
Iy native town. I discovered more di-
linctly the black sides of Jura, and’the
right summit of Mont Blanc; I wept
Lkela child: “ Dear mountains !- my own
mutiful lake! how do you welcome your
wanderer? Your summits are clear; the
ky and lake are blue and placid. Is
his to prognosticat'e peace, or to mock
I my unhappiness t”

l.fear, my friend, that [shall render
nyselﬂtedious by dwelling on these pre-
irninary circumstances; but they were
lays of comparative happiness, and I
hiulc of them with pleasure. M'y coun—
ty, my beloved country! who but a na-

144- rnsxxsxsrmn; on,

tire can tell the delight I took in again
beholding thy streams, thy mountains,
and, more than all, thy lovely lake.

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief
and fear again overcame me. Night
also closed around; and when I could
hardly see the dark mountains, I felt
still more gloomily. The picture ap-
peared a vast and dim scene of evil, and
I foresaw obscurer that I was destined
to become the most wretched of human
beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and
failed only in one single circumstance,
that in all the misery I imagined and
dreaded, I did not conceive the ban-
dredth part of the anguish I was destined
to endure.

It was completely dark when 1 ar-
rived in the environs of Geneva; the
gates of the town were already shut;
and l was obliged to pass the night at

run uoonrm rnounmsvs. 145

Secheron, a village half a. league to the
east of the city. The sky was serene;
,and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved
to visit the spot where my poor William
had been murdered. As I could not
pass through the town, I was obliged
to cross the lake 'in a boat to arrive at
Plainpslnis. During this short voyage
I saw the lightnings playing on the
summit of Mont Blanc in the most
beautiful ﬁgures. The storm appeared
to spproach rapidly; and, on landing,
I mended a low hill, that I might ob-
serve its progress. It advanced; the
heavens were clouded, and I soon felt
the rain coming slowly in large drops,
but its violence quickly increased.
Iquitted my seat, and walked on,
although the darkness and storm in-
creased every minute, and the thunder
burst with a terriﬁc crash over my head.
It was echoed from Saléve, the Juras,
von. 1. n

h

1'46 “mums-rem; on,

and the Alps of Savoy; vivid ﬂashes of
lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating
the lake, making it appear like a vast
sheet of ﬁre; then for an instant-every
thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until
the eye recovered itself from the pre.
ceding ﬂash. The storm,- as is often
the case in Switzerland, appeared at
once in various parts of the heavens.
The most violent storm hung exactly
north of the town, over that part of the
lake which lies between the promontory ‘
of Belrive and the village of Cop“.
Another storm enlightened Jun with
faint ﬂashes; and another darkened and
sometimes disclosed the Mble, a peaked

' mountain to the east of the lake.

While I watched the storm, so belu-
tiful yet terriﬁc, I wandered on with a
hasty step. This noble war in the sky
elevated my spirits; I clasped my hands,
and exclaimed aloud, “ William, dear

m HOD“)! PIOIII'EIUI-

angel! this is thy funeral, this thy
Illrge!” As I said these words, I per-
ceived in the gloom a ﬁgure which
able from behind a clump of trees near
me; I stood‘ﬁxed, gazing intently: I
could not be mistaken. A ﬂash of light-
ning illuminated the object, and dis-
covered its shape plainly to me; its gi-
gantic stature, and the deformity of its
aspect, more hideous than belongs to
humanity, instantly informed me that it
was the wretch, the ﬁlthy daemon to
whom I had given life. What did he
there? Could he be (I shuddered at the
conception) the murderer of my brother ?
No sooner did that idea cross my ima-
gination; than I became convinced of its
truth; 'my teeth chattered, and I was
forced to lean against a tree for support.
The ﬁgure passed me quickly, and I lost
it- in'"the gloom. 'Nothing in human
1: 2

’5

148 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

shape could have destroyed that {sir
child. He was the murderer! I could
not doubt it. The mere pmsenu'of
the idea was an irresistible proof of the
fact. I thought of pursuing the devil;
but it would have been in vain, for
another ﬂash discovered him' to 'me
hanging among the rocks of the nearly
perpendicular ascent of Mont Sale",
a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the
south. He soon reached the summit,
and disappeared. ’

I remained motionless. The thunder
ceased; but the rain still continued.- and
the scene was enveloped in an impene-
trable darkness. I revolved in my mind
the events which I had until now sought
to forget: the whole train of my progreu
towards the creation ; the appearance of
the work or my own hands alive at my
bed side; its departure. Two years had

THE MODERN PBOIIETHIUS.

. now nearly elapsed since the night on
which he ﬁrst received life; and was
this his ﬁrst crime? Alas! I had turned
loose into the world a depraved wretch,
whose delight was in carnage and mi-
sery; had he not murdered my brother?

. Noione can conceive the anguish I
suﬂ'ered during the remainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in
the open air. But I did not feel the
inconvenience of the weather; my ima-
gination was busy in scenes of evil and
despair. I considered the being whom
I had cast among mankind, and en.
dawed with the will and power to effect
purposes of horror, such as the deed
which he had now done, nearly in the
light of my own vampire, my own spirit
let loose from the grave, and forced to
destroy all that was dear to me.

, Day dawned; and I directed my steps

b

t5!) rmuxsum; on,

townds the town. The gates were open,
and I hastened to my father’s-Z home;
My ﬁrst thought was to discover: what
I knew of the murderer, and cause in;
stunt pursuit to be made. But I pun-1d
when I reﬂected on the story that! had
to tell. A being whom I myself-had
formed, and endued with life, had met ‘
me at midnight among the precipieu
of an inaccessible mountain. Llama-
bered also the nervous fever witlmvhieh
'I had been seized just at the time. that
1 dated my creation, and which Kincaid
give an air of delirium to a tale other.-
wise so utterly improbable. I wellknnﬁ
that if any other had communicated
such a relation to merl should. have
looked upon it as the ravings of ilk
sanity. Besides, the strange nature .of
the animal would elude all pursuit, even
if I were so far credited as to persuade

m

um noun»! mourns“. 151

my relatives to commence it. Besides,

of what use would be pursuit? Who
could arrest a creature capable of scaling
the overhanging sides of Mount Saleve 2
These reﬂections determined me, and I
ruolved to remain silent.
. It was about ﬁve in the morning when
I entered my father’s house. I told the
serunts not to disturb the family, and
wentinto the library to attend their
usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed as a
dream but for one indelible trace, and
I stood in the same place where I had
last embraced my father before my de-
parture for lngolstadt. Beloved and
rapecteble parent! He still remained
tome. l gazed on the picture of my
mother, which stood over the mantel-
piece. It was an historical subject,
painted at my father’s desire, and re-

P

1'52 imxzxsi‘mu; on,

presented Caroline Beaufort in an-agony"
of despair,,kneeling by the cofﬁn of her
dead father. Her garb was rustic, and
her cheek pale; but there was an air
of dignity and beauty, that hardly per.
mitted the sentiment of pity. Below 
this picture was a miniature of William ;
and my tears ﬂowed when I looked upon
it. While I Was thus engaged, Ernest
entered: he l)ad,heard me arrive, and
hastened to welcome me. He expressed
a sorrowful delight to see ine: “ V‘V'el-
come, my dearest Victor,” said he. “AM
I wish you had come three months ago,
and then you would have found us all
joyous and delighted. But we are now
unhappy; and,I am afraid, tears instead
of smiles will be your welcome. Our
father looks so sorrowful: this dreadful
event seems to have revived in his mind
his. grief on the death of mamma. Poor

m: IDDIRN nous-rams. 158

Elizabeth, also, is-quite incousolable.”
' Ernest began to weep as he said these
words. i

>‘ ‘-‘ Do not,” said I, “welcome me thus ;
try to be more calm, that I may not be
absolutely miserable the momentl enter
my father’s 'house after so long an ab-
sence. But, tell me, howdoes my father
support 'his‘misfortunes? and how is my
poor Elizabeth ?”

"‘She indeed requires consolation ;
she accused herself of having caused
the‘desth of my brother, and that made
her very wretched. But since themur~
dere‘r has been discovered—"

“‘ The murderer discovered! Good
God! how can that be? who couldtatp
to pursue him? It is impossible;
one inight as well try to overtake the
winds, or conﬁne a mountain-stream
with a straw.”

“I do not know what you mean; but

a 5

rs

154 mmsrwt; as,

we were all very unhappy when. she-m
discovered. No one would believe its!
ﬁrst; and even now Elizabeth will not
be convinced, notwithstanding all the
evidence. Indeed, who would credinlpt
Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and
fond of all the family, could all at once
become so extremely wicked?” .

“ Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, ‘5
she the accused? But‘ it is wrongfully;
every one knows that; no one believes
it, surely, Ernest P” -

“ No one did at ﬁrst; but several cir-
cumstances came out, that have almost
forced conviction- upon us; and her own
behaviour has been so confused, as to
add to the evidence of facts 3 weight
that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt.
But she will be tried to-day, and you
will then hear all.”

He related that, the morning on which
the murder of poor William had been

TE! IODIRN mundane. 155

discovered, Justine had been taken ill,
.nnd conﬁned to her bed; and, after se-
wersl days, one of the servants, hap-
pening to examine the apparel she had
you on the night of the murder, had
ﬁseovered in her pocket the picture of
my mother, which had been judged to
he the temptation of the murderer. The
sernnt instantly showed it to one of the
othen, who, without saying a word to
Any of the family, went to a magistrate;
and, upon their deposition, Justine was
apprehended. On being charged with
the fact, the poor girl conﬁrmed the
suspicion in a great measure by her ex-
treme confusion of manner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not
ﬂuke my faith; and I replied earnestly,
“ You are all mistaken; I know the mub
deter. Justine, poor, good Justine, is
innocent.” ﬂ

156 rmnxnnsrmx’; on,

At that instant my father entered. '1
saw unhappiness deeply impressed ‘on
his countenance, but he endeavoured“
"Welcome me cheerfully; and, afterlm
had exchanged our mournful greeting,
would have introduced some other topic
than that of our disaster, had not Ernest
exclaimed, “ Good God, papa! Victor
says that he knows who was the mur-
derer of poor William.” '

“ We do also, unfortunately,” replied
my father; “for indeed I had rather
have been for eVer ignorant than have
discovered so much depravity and in-
gratitude in one I valued so highly.”

“ My dear father, you are mistaken;
Justine is innocent.”

“ If she is, God forbid that she shOnld
suffer as guilty. She'is to be tried‘to-
day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that
she will be acquitted.”

was 'IIODIBN nous-mus. 151

' This speech calmed me. I was ﬁrmly

convinced in my own mind that Justine,
and indeed every human being, was
g‘uiltless of this murder. I had no fear,
therefore, that any circumstantial evi-
dence could be brought forward strong,
enough to convict her; and, in this as-
surance, I calmed myself, expecting the
trial with eagerness, but without prog-
nosticating an evil result. .

We were soon joined by Elizabeth.
Time had made great alterations in her
«form since I had last beheld her. Sik
years before she had been a pretty,
good-humoured girl, whom every one
loved and caressed. She was now a
woman in stature and expression of
countenance, which "was uncommonly
lovely. An open and capacious fore-
‘head gave indications of a good under-
standing, joined to great frankness of
disposition. Her eyes were haze], and

r

158 BANKIXSTEIN; on,

expressive of mildness, now, through
recent afﬂiction, allied to sadness. Her 
hair was of a rich dark auburn, her
complexion fair, and her ﬁgure :siight
and graceful. She welcomed me with
the greatest aﬁ‘ection. “ Your arrival,
my'dear cousin,” said she, “ ﬁlls me
with hope. You perhaps will‘ﬁnd some
means to justify my poor guiltless Justine.
Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of
crime? I rely on her innocence as cer-
tainly as I do upon my own. Our mis-
ﬁn-tune is doubly hard to us; we have
not only lost that lovely darling hoy,lbut
this poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is
to be torn away by even a worse fate. If
she is condemned, I never shall know
joy more. But she will not, I am sure
she will not; and then I shall be happy
again, even after the sad death of my
little William.”

“ She is innocent, my Elizabeth," said

m noun neutrinos. rso

I, “ and that shall he proved; fear no-
thing, but let your spirits he cheered by
the assurance of her acquittal.”

“ How kind you are! every one else
believes in her guilt, and that made me
wretched, for I knew that it was im-
possible: and to see every one else pre-
judiced in so deadly a manner rendered
no hopeless and despairing.” She wept.

“ Sweet niece,” said my father, “dry
your tears. If she is, as you believe,
innocent, rely on the justice of our j udges,
Ind the activity with which I shall pre-
vent the slightest shadow of partiality.”

160' runuusnm; on,- v -

CHAPTER Vl‘l.

f We passed a few and hours, until
eleven o’clock, when the trial was -to
commence. My father and the rest of
the family being obliged to attend as
witnesses, I accompanied them to the
court. During the whole of this wretched
mockery of justice I snﬁ‘ered living tor-
ture. It was to be decided, whether the
result of my curiosity and lawless de.
vices would cause the death of two of
my fellow-beings: one a smiling babe,
full of innocence and joy; the other far
more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make

rsz‘ nouns non-ran“. 161

- the murder memorable in horror. J ustine
also was a girl of merit, and possessed
qualities which promised to render her
life happy: now all was to be oblitei
rated in an ignominious grave; and l
the cause! A thousand times rather
would I have confessed myself guilty of
the crime ascribed wJustine; but 1 was
absent when it was committed, and such
adeclaration would have been considered
as the ravings of a madman, and would
not have exculpated her who suffered
through me.

The appearance of Justine was calm.
She was dressed in mourning; and
her countenance, always engaging, was ,
rendered, by the solemnity of her feel-
ings, exquisitely beautiful. Yet she
appeared conﬁdent in innocence, and
did 'not tremble, although gazed on
and execrated by thousands; for all the

’N

162 runny-um; on,

kindness which her beauty might other,
wise have excited, was obliterated in
the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was
supposed to have committed. She [was
tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evi-
dently constrained; and as her con-
ﬁision had before been adduced as s
proof of her guilt, she worked up her
mind to an appearance of courage.
When she entered the court, she threw ,
her eyes round it, and quickly dis.-
covered where we were seated. A test
seemed to dim her eye when she saw
118; but he quickly recovered herself.
and a look of sorrowful aﬂ'ection seemed
to attest her utter guiltlessness.

The trial began; and, after the advo-
cate against her had stated the charge.
several witnesses were called. Several
strange facts combined against her,

magnum emulatst 106

which might have staggered any one
who had not such proof of ’her inno.
mice as I had. She had been70ut the
whole. of the night on whielrthe mdrder
he‘d been committed, and'towarde morn:
ing had been .perceived. by a. market-4
m'not far from the spot where the
body of the murdered child had beet:
‘oﬁenvnrdl found. The woman asked
her what she did there; but she looked
very-mengdy, and only returned a cons
ﬁned and unintelligible answer. She rei
turned to the house about eight o’clock ;
and, when one inquired where she Shad
pulsed the night, She replied that she
hid been looking for the child, ,and
demanded enmettly if any thing had
been bound concerning him. When
lh'mm‘ tho'body,» she fell into violent
Wes, Ind kept her- bed ﬁor severe}
' it”. The-picturewu then produced;
which the want had ﬁound in her

164 i ‘ runxsusrun; as,

pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a fle
tering voice, proved that it was the
same which, an hour befmethe child
hadibeen missed, she had placed round
his neck, a murmur of horror and inn
dig-nation ﬁlled the court. ' -

Justine was called on for her defence:
As the trial had proceeded, her coun-i
tenance. had altered. Surprise, horror,
and misery Were strongly expressed;
Sometimes she‘struggled with her team:
but, when she was desired to plead, she
collected her powers, and spoke in an
audible, although variable, voice :—

“ God knows,” she said, “ how ena'
tirely I am innocent. But I do not
pretend that my protestations should
acquit me: I rest my innocence on .a
plain and simple explanation of-‘the
facts which have been adduced against
me; and I hope the character I have;
always borne will incline my judges

was Iowan raounrnnus. — 166

n a favourable interpretation, where
any circumstance appears doubtful or
suspicious.”

;:-'She then related that, by the per-
mission of .Elizabeth, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the
murder had been committed at the house
of an aunt at C-héne, a village situated
at about a league from Geneva. On
her. return, at about nine o’clock, she
met a man, who asked her if‘ she had
seen any thing of the child who was
lost. ’ She was alarmed by this account,
and passed several hours in looking for
him, when the. gates of Geneva were
shut, and she was forced to remain
several hours of the night in a barn
belonging to a cottage, being unWilling
to call up the inhabitants, to whom she
was well known. Unable to rest or
sleep, she quitted her asylum early, that
she might again endeavour totﬁnd my

1w rassnmnx; on,

brother. If'she had gone near the spot
where his body lay, it was without her
knowledge. That she had been bewilé
dered when questioned by the market-
woman was not surprising, since she
had passed a sleepless night; and the
fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture she could give
no account.

“I know,” continued the unhappy
victim, “ how heavily and fatally this
one circumstance weighs against me,
but I have no power of explaining it;
and when I have expressed my utter
ignorance, I am only left to conjecture
concerning the probabilities by which it
might have been placed in my pocket;
But here also I am checked. I believe
that I have no enemy on earth, and‘
none surely would have been so wicked
as to destroy me wantonly. Did the'
murderer place it there? I know of

rm: IODEBN rnousruws. 167

no opportunity aﬁ'orded him ‘for so
doing; or, if I had, why should he
have stolen the jewel, to part with it
egoin so soon?

“ I commit my cause to the justice of
my judges, yet I see no room for hope.
I beg permission to have a few witnesses
examined concerning my character; and
if their testimony shall not overweigh my
supposed guilt, I must be condemned,
although I would pledge my salvation
on my innocence.”

Several witnesses were called, who
had knowu her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear, and
hatred of the crime of which they sup.
posed her guilty, rendered them timor-
ous, and unwilling to come forward.
Elizabeth saw even this last resource,

- her excellent dispositions and irre-
ploochoble conduct, about to fail the
accused, when, although violently agi-

168 FRANKENSTEIN; on, ‘

tated, she desired permission to address
the court.

“ I am,” said she, “ the cousin-of the
unhappy child who was murdered, or
rather his sister, for I was educated by, -
and have lived with his parents ever
since and even long before his birth.
It may therefore be judged indecent in
me to come forward on this occasion;
but when I see a fellowacreature about
to perish through the cowardice of her
pretended friends, I wish to be allowed
to speak, that I may say what'I know of
her character. I am well acquainted
with the accused. l have lived in the
same house with her, at one time for
ﬁve, and at another for nearly two years.
During all that period she appeared to
me the most amiable and benevolent of
human creatures. She nursed Madame
Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness,
with the greatest aﬂ'ection and care; and

ms sienna! menus“. 169

aﬂerwards attended- her own mother
during a tedious illness, in'a manner
that. excited the admiration of all who
knew her. After which she again lived
in my uncle's house, where she was
beloved hysall the family. She was
werme attached to the child who is
now dead, a‘nd acted towards him like
a nostaﬂ'ectionste mother. For my own
part, I do not hesitate to say, that, not;
withstanding all the evidence produced
ngninst her, I believe and rely on her
perfect innocence. She had no temp:-
Itnﬁon for such an action: as to the bau-
hle on which the chief proof rests, if she
‘hnd earnestly desired it, I should have
willingly given it to her; so much do
> I esteem not] value her.” I
ExcellentElizabet h! A murmur of ap-
probation‘wu heard; but it was excited
by her generous interference, and not
inﬁvoor of poor Justine, on whom the
von. 1. I 1‘

1'10 rsmxuusum 5 on,

public indignation was turned .with re-
newed violence, charging her with the
blackest ingratitude. She herself wept
as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not an-
swer. My own agitation and anguilll
was extreme during the whole trial. I
believed in her innocence; I knew it.
Could the daemon, who had (I‘didruot ‘
for a minute doubt) murdered my bro- .
ther, also in his hellish sport haveheé
trayed the innocent to death and igno-
miny.’ I could not sustain thevhorror
of my situation; and when I perceived
that the popular voice, and the counter
nances of the judges, had already conr
demned my unhappy victim, I rushed
out of the court in agony. The tortures
of the accused did not equal mine; she
was sustained by innocence, but the fangs
of remorse tore my bosom, and would
not forego their hold. ‘ 2

I passed a night of unmingled wretch

was Ions“ PIOIITEEUI. 171

edness. In.the morning I went to the
court; my lips and throat were parched.
l dared not ask the fatal question; but
I was known, and the ofﬁcer guessed
the cause of my visit. The ballots had
been thrown; they were all black, and
Justine was condemned. '
I cannot pretend to describe what I
then felt. I had before experienced
sensations of horror; and I have endea-
voured to bestow upon them adequate
expressions, but words cannot convey
In idea. of the heart-sickening despair
that I then endured. The person to
Whom I addressed myself added, that
Justine had already confessed her guilt.
" That evidence," he observed, “ was
hardly required ’in so glaring a case,
but I am glad of it; and, indeed, none
of our judges like to condemn a crimi-
nal upon circumstantial evidence, be it
eVel- so decisive.”
l 2

I'

172 munmlnt ; on,

When I returned home, Elizabeth
eagerly' demanded the result. ~ ' 4

“ My cousin,” replied I, “it is' de-
cided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent
should suﬁ'er, than that one guilty should
escape. But she has confessed.” '

This was a dire blow to'poor Elin-
beth, who had relied with ﬁrmness upon 1
J ustine’s innocence. “ Alas!” said
she, " how shall I ever again believe in
human benevolence? Justine, whom L
loved and esteemed as my sister, how
could she put on those smiles of inno/
cence only to betray; her mild eyeé
seemed incapable of any severity or i1.
humour, and yet she has committed a—I
murder.”

Soon after we heard that the poor '
victim had expressed a wish to see my
cousin. My father wished her not to
go; but said, that he left it to her own

my: moms noun'rnws. 1’18

judgment and feelings to decide.
“ Yes," said Elizabeth, “ I will go,
although she is guilty; and you, Victor,
shallaccompany me: I pannot go alone.”

~ The idea of this visit was torture to me,
yet I could not refuse.

 We entered the gloomy prison-cham-
ber, snd beheld Justine sitting on some
stn'w'at the further end; her hands
were mnnacled, and her head rested on
her; knees. She rose on seeing us en- ‘
ter; and when wevwere leﬂ alone with
her, she threw herself at the feet of
Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin
prt also. ' '

..“ 0h, Justine!” said she, why did
you robme of my last consolation. I
and on your innocence; and although
[was then very wretched, I was not so
miserable as I an; now.”

“‘ And do you also believe that I am
Io very, very wicked P Do you also

174.- ramxuus'rrzm; on,

join with my enemies ,to crush me P”
Her voice was suﬁ‘ocated with sob's. ‘

“ Rise, my poor girl,” said Eliza-
beth, “why do you kneel, if you are
innocent? I am not one of your cue '
mies; I believed you guiltless, notwith-
standing every evidence, until I heard
that you had yourself declared your
guilt. That report, you say, is false;
and be assured, dear Justine, that no-
thing can' shake my conﬁdence in you
for a moment, but your own' confes-
sion.” ' i

“I did confess; but I confessed a
lie. I confessed, that I might obtain
absolution ; but now that falsehood lies
heavier at my heart than all my other
sins. The God of heaven forgive me!
Ever since I was condemned, my cou-
fessor has besieged me; he threatened
and menaced, until I almost began to
think that I was the monster that he

run noon}: noun-runs. 175

said I was. He threatened excommu-
nication and hell ﬁre in my last mo-
ments, if I continued obdurate. Dear
lady, I had none to support me; all
looked on me as a wretch doomed to
ignom‘iny'and perdition. What could I
do? In an evil hour I subscribed to
I lie; and now only am I truly mise-
table.”

She paused, weeping, and then con-
tinued—“ I thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe
your Justine, whom your blessed aunt
had so highly honoured, and whom
you loved, was a creature capable of a
crime which none but the devil himself
could have perpetrated. Dear Wil-
liam! dearest blessed child! I soon
Ihall see you again in heaven, where
we shall all be happy; and that con-
soles me,‘ going as I am to suffer ig-
nominy and death.” '

o ‘ h

1'76 IIANKBHITBIN; on,

“ 0h, J ustinel forgive me for having
for one moment distrusted you. Why
did you confess? But do not mourn,
my dear girl; I will every where pro-
claim your innocence, ‘and force belief.
Yet you must die ; you, my playfellow,
my companion, my more than sister.
I never can survive so horrible a mis-
fortune.”

“ Dear, sweet Elizabeth, do not weep.
You ought to raise me with thoughts of
a better life, and elevate me from the
petty cares of this world of injustice and
strife. Do not you, excellent friend,
drive me to despair.” ' V 

“ I will try to comfort you ; but this,
I fear, is an evil too deep and poigth
to admit of consolation, for there is, no
hope. Yet heaven bless thee, my dear-
est Justine, with resignation, and a con-
ﬁdence elevated beyond this world.
Oh! how I hate its shows and mock,

1n: stony! mamas. 1‘17

aria-l when one creature is murdered,
another-is immediately deprived of life
in u slow torturing manner; then the
executioners,-their hands yet reeking
Uith the blood of innocence, believe that
Shy hnve done a great deed. They
all this retribution. Hateful name!
When that word is pronounced, I know
greater and more horrid punishments
are going to be inﬂicted than the gloom-
ielt tyrant has ever invented to satiate
hip, utmost revenge. Yet this is not con-
solation for you, my Justine, unless in-
deed that you may glory in escaping from
so miserable a den. Alas! 'I would I
were in peace with my aunt andnmy
lovely William, escaped from a world
which is hateful to me, and the visages
of men which I abhor.”

Justine smiled languidly. “This,
Hear lady, is despair, and not resigna-

I 5

1’18 “muss-rm; on,

tion. I must not learn the lesson that
you would teach me. Talk of some—
thing else, something that" will bring
peace, and not increase of‘misery."

' During this conversation [had retired
to a corner of the prison-room, where
I could conceal the horrid angliish that
possessed me. Despair! Who .dared
talk of that? The poor victim, who on
the inorrow was to the dreary
boundary between life and death, felt
not as 1 did, such deep and bitter agony;
l gnashed my teeth, and groimd them ‘
together, uttering a groan that came
from my inmost soul. Justine started.
When she saw who it was, she ap
proached me, and said, “ Dear Sir, you
are very kind to visit me; you, I hope,
do not believe that I am guilty.”

I could not answer. “ No, Justine,”
said Elizabeth; “ he is more convinced

m uomtnn rnonrnnua. 179

of your innocence than I was; for even
when he heard that you had confessed,
he did not credit it.” -

“I truly thank him. In these last
moments I feel the sincerest gratitude
towards those who think of me with
kindness. How sweet is the affection
of others to such a wretch as I am! It
removes more than half my misfortune;
,and I feel as if I could die in peace, now
that my innocence is acknowledged by
you, dear lady, and your cousin.”

Thus‘the poor suﬁ'erer tried to com-
fort others and herself. She indeed
gained the resignation she desired. But
I, the true murderer, felt the never-dying
worm alive in my bosom, which allowed
of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth
also wept, and was unhappy; but her’s
also was the misery of innocence, which,
like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides, but cannot tur-

r

180 antennas; on,

nish its hrightnessy Anguish and de-
spair had penetrated into the core of '
V heart; I bore a hell within me, whieh
nothing could extinguish. We staid 'se-
veral hours with Justine; and it was
‘ with great diﬁiculty that Elizabeth conid
tear herself away. “ I wish,” cried she.
“ that I were to die with you; Ieaunot
live in this world of misery." " '
' Justine assumed an air of cheerful-
ness, while she with diﬁiculty represed
her bitter tears. She embraced Eliza-
'lieth, and 'said, in a voice of half-sup-
pressed emotion, “ Farewell, sweet lady,
dearest Elizabeth, any beloved and only
friend; may heaven in its bounty bless
and preserve you; may this be the last
misfortune that you will ever suﬂ'er.
Live, and be happy, and make others

so
As we returned, Elizabeth said, “ You

know not, my dear Victor, how much I

V n: noun: nounnus. m

an relieved, now that I trust in the in-
1‘licence of this unfortunate girl. I
"ever could again have known peace,
i" had been deceived in my reliance on
her. For the moment that I did believe
her guilty, I felt an anguish that I could
Pot have long sustained. Now my heart
'3 lightened. The innocent suffers; but
she whom I thought amiable and good
has not betrayed the trust I reposed in
her, and I am consoled. 
' Amiable cousin! such were your
thonghts, mild and gentle as your own
dear eyes and voice. But 1—1 was a
Wreteh, and none ever conceived of the
haisery that I then endured.

182 tunnumm; 03,

CHAPTER Vlll.

' No‘mma is more painful to the hu-
man mind, than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession
of events, the dead calmness of inaction
and certainty which follows, and de-
prives the soul both of hope and fear.
Justine died; she rested; and I was
alive. The blood ﬂowed freely in my.
veins, but a weight of despair and re-
morse pressed on my heart, which no-
thing could remove. Sleep ﬂed from
my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit,
for I had committed deeds of mischief

Tn: noun» noulrnnus. 188

gond description horrible, and more,
uch more, (I persuaded myself) was
t behind. Yet 'my. heart overﬂowed
th kindness, and the love of virtue.
had begun life with benevolent in-
ntious, and thirsted for the moment
hen I should put them .in' practice,
d make myself useful to my fellow-
ings. Now all was blasted: instead
-that serenity of conscience, which
lowed me to look back upon the past
th self-satisfaction, and from thence
gather promise of new hopes, I was
.zed by remorse and the sense of guilt,
Iich hurried me away to a hell of in-
ise tortures, such as no language can
scribe. 

[his state of mind preyed upon my
slth, which had entirely recovered
m the ﬁrst shock it had sustained.
shunned the face of man; all sound
joy or complacency'was torture to

A

184 IMNKENI'HDH on,» a -

me; solitude was my. only'eonsoluiou-a
deep, dark, death-like solitude. - -- .

My father observed with pain‘theialte
ntion perceptible in my disposiﬁonjnd
habits, and endeavoured to reason with
me on the folly of giving way to imp»,-
derate grief. “ Do you think, Victor,”
said he, “ that I do not suffer also? Na.
one could love a child more than I loved
your brother;" (tears came into his
eyes as he spoke); “ but is it not a duty
to the survivors, that we should refrain
from augmenting their unhappiness by
an appearance of immoderate grief P- It
is also a duty owed to yourself; for-ex-
casive sorrow prevents improvement or
enjoyment, or even the discharge of
daily usefulness, without which no man
is ﬁt for society.”

This advice, although good, was to-
tally inapplicable to my case ; I should
have been the ﬁrst to hide my grief, and

m: .ilomn rmusrnnus. 185

console my-friends, if remorse had not
mingled its bitterness with my other
sensations. Now I could only answer
myta’ther with a look of despair, and
endeavour to hide myself from his View.

About this time we retired to our house
at Belrive. This change was particularly
agreeable to me. The shutting of the
gateslregularly at ten o’clock, and the
impossibility of remaining on the lake
after that hour, had rendered our re.
sidence within the 'walls of Geneva very
irksome tome. I was now free. Often,
aﬂer the rest of the family had" retired
for the night, I took the boat, andpassed
‘ many hours upon the ‘water. Some-.
times, with my sails set, I was carried
by the wind; and sometime, aﬂer row.
ing into the middle of the lake, I left
the boat to pursue its own course, and
gave way to my own miserable re-
ﬂections. I was often tempted, when

186 manna-m; on,

all was at peace around me, and I the
only unquiet thing that wandered restless
in a scene so beautiful and heavenly,if
I except some hat, or the frogs, whose
harsh and interrupted creaking was heard
only when I approached the shore-
often, I, say, I was tempted to plunge
into the silent lake, that the water!
might close over me and my calamities
for ever. But I was restrained, when]
thought of the heroic and suﬂ'ering Eliza,
beth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose
existence was bound up in mine. '1
thought also of my father, and surviving
brother: should I by my base desertion
leave them exposed and unprotected to
the malice of the ﬁend whom I had let
loose among them? . '

At these moments I wept bitterly,
and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that I might afford them
consolation and happiness. But that

Tun uonux PBOMETHBUS. 18"!

:ould not be. Remorse extinguished
every hope. I had been the anthor'of un-
tlterable evils; and I lived in daily fear,
‘at the monster whom I had created
thould perpetrate some new wicked-
ness. I had an obscure feeling that all
in: not over, and that he would still /
commit some signal crime, which by ,'
its enormity should almost eﬁ‘ace the
recollection of the past. There was
away: scope for fear, so long as any
thing I loved remained behind. My
nb'horrence of this ﬁend cannot be con.
ceived. When I thought of him, I
gnaqhedmy teeth, my eyes became in-
ﬂamed, and l ardently wished to extin-
guish that life which I had so thought-
lessly bestowed. When I reﬂected on
his crimes and malice,-my hatred and
revenge burst all bounds of moderation.
I would have made a. pilgrimage to the
highest peak of the Andes, could I, when

I“

188 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

there, have precipitated him to their
base. I wished to see him again, thstl
might wreak the utmost extent of anget
on his head, and avenge the deaths of
William and Justine. I

Our house was the house of mourn- '
ing. My father’s health was deeply
shaken by the horror of the recent
events." Elizabeth was sad and despond-
ing; she no longer took delight in her
ordinary occupations; allpleasureseemd
to her sacrilege toward the dead ; eternal
woe and tears she then' thought was the
just tribute she should pay to innocence
so blasted and destroyed. She warm ‘
longer that happy creature, .who in ‘
earlier youth wandered with. me :on the
banks of the lake, and talked with ecshcy
of our future. prospects. She had he-
come grave, and often conversed oft-he
intonstancy .of fortune, and .the insti-
hility of human life.

ma IODN raourusus. 130

- .“ When I reﬂect, my dear cousin,’,’
said she, “ on the miserable death of J us-
ﬁne Moritz, I no longer see the world
and its works as they before appeared
to me. Before, I looked upon the ac-
bounts of vice and injustice, that I read
in books or heard from others, as tales
of ancient days, or imaginary evils; at
least they were remote, and more fami-
liar to reason than to the imagination;
but now misery has come home, and
men appear to me as monsters thirsting
for each other’s blood. Yet I am cer-
tainly unjust. Every body believed that
poor girl to be guilty; and if she could
have committed the crime for-which she
Iuﬁ'ered. assuredly she would have been
the most depraved of human creatures.
For the sake of a few jewels, to have
murdered the son of her benefactor and
friend, a child whom she had nursed
from its birth, and appeared to love as

A

190 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

if it had been her own ! I could not con-
sent to the death of any human being;
but certainly I should have thought
such a creature unﬁt to remain in the
society of men. Yet she was innocent.
I know, I feel she was innocent; you
are of the same opinion, and that con-
ﬁrms me. Alas! Victor, when false—
hood can look so like the truth, who can
assure themselves of certain happiness?
I feel as if I were walking on the edge
of a precipice, towards which thousands
arecrowding, and endeavouring to plunge
me into the abyss. William and Justine
were assassinated, and the murderer
escapes; he walks about the world free.
and perhaps respected. But even ifI
were condemned to suffer on the scaﬂ'old
for the same crimes, I would not change
places with such a wretch.”

I listened to this discourse with the
extremest agony. I, not in deed, but

TEE Hanan rnousmsus. 191

in eﬁ'ect, was the true murderer. Eliza-
beth read my anguish in my countenance,
and kindly taking my hand, said, “ My
dearest cousin, you must calm yourself.
These events have affected me, God
knows how deeply; but I am not
so wretched as you are. There is an
expression of despair, and sometimes of
revenge, in your countenance, that makes
me tremble. Be calm, my dear Victor;
1 would sacriﬁce my life to your peace.
We surely shall be happy: quiet in our
native country, and not mingling in
the world, what can disturb our tran-
quillity ?”

She shed tears as she said this, (lis-
trusting the very solace that she gave;
but .at the same time she smiled, that
she-might chase away the ﬁend that
lurked in my heart. My father, who
saw in the unhappiness that was painted
in my face only an exaggeration of that

r

192 rummnm; on,

sorrow which I might naturally feel,
thought that an amusement suited to
my taste would be the best memo!
restoring to me my wanted serenity.
It was from this cause that he hadro—
moved to the country; and, induced by
the same motive, he now proposed thlt
we should all make an excursion to
the valley of Chamounix. I had been
there before, but Elizabeth and End
never had; and both had oﬂen exprulei
an earnest desire to see the scenery of
this place, which had been described to
them as so wonderful and sublime. Au
cordingly we departed from Geneva on
this tour about the middle of the month
of August, nearly two months aﬁer the
death of Justine. ‘

The weather was uncommonly-ﬁne;
and if mine had been a sorrow tobe
chased away by any ﬂeeting circum-
stance, this excursion would certainly

run uonnw nous-rams. 199

have had the eﬁ'ectintended by my father.
As it was, I was somewhat interested in
the scene; it sometimes lulled, although
it could not extinguish my grief. During
the ﬁrst day we travelled in a carriage.
In the morning we had seen the moun-
-tl.ins at a distance, towards which we
gradually advanced. We perceived that
the valley through which we wound, and
which was formed by the river Arve,
whose course we followed, closed in
upon us by degrees; and when the sun
had set, we beheld immense mountains
and precipices overhanging us on every
side, and heard the sound of the river
raging among rocks, and the dashing of
Inter-falls around.

The next day we pursued our journey
upon mules; and as we ascended still
higher, the valley assumed a more

. magniﬁcent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices

won. I. K

194 mnxnxsrm; on,

of piny mountains; the impetuous Arm
and cottages every'here and there peep-
ing forth from among the trees, formed
a scene of singular beauty. But it was
augmented and rendered sublime by the
mighty Alps, whose white and shining
pyramids and domes towered above all,
as belonging to another earth,‘ the ba-
bitations of another race of beingsu

We passed the bridge of Pelissicr,
where the ravine, which the river formlg
opened before .us, and we began to ss-
cend the mountain that overhangs it
Soon after we entered the valley of Chl-
mounix. This valley is more wonderful
and sublime, but not so beautiful and
picturesque as that of Servox, through
which we had justpussed. The high
and snowy mountains were its imme-
diate boundaries; but we saw no more
ruined castles and fertile ﬁelds. Im-
mense glaciers approached the mad:

9‘ '

1‘82 HOD“! nounnus. 195

we heard the rumbling thu'nder of the
“ing- arellnche, and marked the smoke
ofits passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme
end. magniﬁcent Mont Blanc, raised it.
self from the surrounding aigw'lles, and
i0 tremendous dome overlooked the
valley. ‘

During- this journey, I sometimes
joined" Elizabeth, and exerted myself to
point out to her the various beauties of
ﬁe scene. I often snﬁ'ered my mule to
lag behind, and indulged in the misery
of reﬂection. At other times I spurred
on the animal before my companions,
that I might forget them, the world,
and, more than all, myself. When at
a' distance, I alighted, and threw myself
on the grass, weighed down by horror
and despair. At eight in the evening I
arrived at Chamounix. My father and
Elizabeth were very much fatigued;
Ernest, who accompanied us, was de-

1:2

r‘

M ruNszsTEIN; on,

lighted, and in high spirits; the only
circumstance that detracted .from his
pleasure was the south wind, and the
rain it seemed to promise for the next
day.

We retired early to our apartments,
but not to sleep; at least I did not. ,I
remained manynhonrs at the Window,
watching the pallid lightning that played
above Mont Blanc, and listening to..the
rushing of the Arve, which ran below
1 my window. '

-;.

mt uonum noun-mans. "197

CHAPTER IX.

" Tn: next day, contraryto the prognos-
iic‘ntions of our guides, was ﬁne, al-
though clouded, We visited the source
of the Arveiron, and rode about the
velley until evening. These sublime
md magniﬁcent scenes afforded Inc the
'g'rea'test consolation that I was capable
of ieceiving. They elevated me from
fill‘littleness of feeling; and although
they did not remove my grief, they
hubdued and tranquillized it. In some
degree, also, they diverted my mind
from the thoughts hm which it had

P

us I ntmm; on, '-

l
brooded for the last month. I returned; l
in the evening, fatigued, but less an: l
happy, and conversed with my‘family
with more cheerfulness than had been
my custom for some time. My father
was pleased, and Elizabeth overjoyed.
“ My dear cousin,” said she, ‘~‘ you see
what happiness you diﬁ'use when you 1‘
are happy; do not relapse again!” '
The following: morning the min 3
poured down in torrents,‘. and thick ‘
mists hid the summits of the mow
tains. I rose early, but felt unusually
melancholy. The rain depressedme:
my old feelings recurred, and I W!
miserable. I knew how disappointed
my father would be at this sudden
change, and I wished to avoid'hltn
until I had recovered myself so far as to
be enabled to conceal those feeling!
that overpowered me. I knew thdt
they would remain that day at the inn:

ml nouns noun-nus. I”

and ,as I had ever inured myself to
pin, moisture, and cold, I resolved to
p) alone 'to the Summit of Montanvert.
L remembered the effect that the View
if the tremendous and ever-moving
glacier had produced upon mylmind
when! ﬁrst saw it. It had then ﬁlled
he with a sublime ecstacy that gave
wings to the soul, and allowed it to
not from the obscure world to‘ light
Ind joy. The sight of the awful and
majestic in nature had indeed always
the eﬂ'ect of solemnizing my mind, and
musing me to forget the passing cares
of life. I determined to go alone, for l
was well acquainted with the path, and
the presence of another would destroy
the solitary grandeur of the stem.

a The ascent is precipitous, but the
[nth is cut into continual and short
ﬁndings, which enable you to sur-
mount the perpendicularity of the

h

200 , mummy; on,

mountain. It is a scene terriﬁcally de-
' solate. In a thousand spots the tram
of the winter avelénch'e may be per.
ceived, where trees lie broken and
strewed on the ground; some entirely
destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the
jutting rocks of the mountain, or trame
verser upon other trees. The path, as
you ascend higher, is intersected by n-
vines of snow, down which stones con-
tinually roll from above; one of them
is particularly dangerous, as the slight:
est sound, such as even speaking in.a
loud voice, produces a concussion of
air suﬂicient to draw destruction upon
the head of the speaker. The pine:
are not tall or luxuriant, but they are
sombre, and add an air of severity to
the scene. I looked on the valley be-
neath; vast mists were rising from the
rivers which ran through it, and curl-
‘ng in thick wreaths around the oppo-

, m 'xon‘nx uonn’mnus. 501

mountains, whose summits were
hit] in the uniform clouds, 'while rain
'96an from the dark sky, and added
‘o'the' melancholy impression I received
from the objects "around me. Alas!
.v'vhy'does man boast of sensibilities su-
perior to those apparent in the brute;
it only renders them more necessary
beings. If our impulse were' conﬁned
to'hunger, thirst, and desire, we might
be nearly free; but now we are moved
by every wind that blows, and a chance
word or scene that that word may con-
vey to us.

We rest; I dram has power to poison sleepr
We rise; one wand'ring thought pollutu the dly.

We feel, conceive, or resaon; lsugh or weep,
Emhrsce fond woe, or cast our cues away;

it is the ssme: for, be itjoy or sorrow,

' The pstli of its departure still is free.

Inn's yesterdsy may ne'er he like his marrow ;

Nought my endure hut mutability !

K5

r

M ' museum; on,

- It was nearly noon when I arrived!
the top of the ascent. for sometime
‘ Isat upon the rock that overloohthe
sea of ice. A mist covered both tlm
and the surrounding mountains; Pm-
sently a breeze dissipated the cloud,
and I descended upon the glacier.. The
surface is very uneven, rising like the
waves of a troubled sea, descending .low,
and interspersed by rifts that sink
deep.- The- ﬁeld of ice is almost. a
league in width, but I spent nearly two
hours in crossing it. The opposite
mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.
From the side where I now stood Mont-
anvert wasexactly opposite',‘ atthe di-
stance of a league; and above it rose
Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I re
mained in a recess of the rock, gazing
on this wonderful and stupendous scene.
The sea, or rather the vast river of ice,
wound among its dependent mountains,

A

- 'Iﬂl loam nous-runs. m

whose aﬁriai summits hung over its re-
cesses. Their icy and glittering peaks
ehone in the sunlight over the clouds.
Myheart, which was before sorrowful,
now swelled with something like joy;
I. exnlaimed-—“ Wandering spirits, if
indeed ye wander, and do not rest in
your narrow beds, allow me this faint
happiness, or take me, as your com-
panion, away from thejoys of life.”

4 As I said this, I suddenly beheld the
ﬁgure of a man, at some distance, ad-
vancing towards me with superhuman
speed. He hounded over the crevices
in the ice, among which I had walked
with caution; his stature also, as he
approached, seemed to exceed that of
man. I was troubled: a mist came
over my eyes, and l felt a faintness seize
me; but I was quickly restored by the
cold gale of the mountains. I perceived,
as the shape came‘nearer, (sight tre-

I'

” Insulin-ms; on, -‘

mentions. and abhorred!) that it was
the wretch whom I had created. -I '
“trembled with rage and horror, resol-
ving to wait his approach, and then
close with him in mortal combat. He
approached; his countenance bespoke
bitter anguish, combined with disdain.
and maliguity, while its unearthly ug-
liness rendered it almost too horrible
'for human eyes. But I scarcely ob~
served'this; anger and hatred had at
ﬁrst deprived me of utterance, and -I
recovered only to overwhelm him with
.words expressive of furious detestation
and contempt.

“ Devil!” I exclaimed, “ do you dare
'approach me? and do not you fear the
ﬁerce vengeance of my arm wreaked on
your miserable head? Begoue, vile in-

Tsect! or rather stay, that I may trample
you to dust! and, oh, that I could, with
the extinction of your miserable exist-

In: nouns PBOME‘HIIUB. IOU

-ence, restore those victims whom you
have so diabolically murdered l"

“ I expected this reception,“ aid the
(human. “ All men hate the wretched;
,how then must I be hated, who am ini-
Jerable beyond all living things! Yet
you, my-creator, detest and spam me,
thy creature, to whom thou art bound by
ties only dissoluble by the annihilation
.of one of us. You purpose to kill me.
..How dare you sport thus with life?
..Do your duty towards me, and I will
do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind. If you will comply with my
conditions, I will leave them and you
at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut
the mm of death, until it be satiated
with . the' blood of your remaining
friends."

“ Abhorred monster! ﬁend that thou
.art! thetortures of hell are too mild a
vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched

A

206 asmxsrm; on,

devil ! you reproach me with your out
tion; come on then, that I may atla-
guish the spnrk which I so negligently
bestowed.” I .

My rage was without hounds; I
sprang on him, impelled by all thefesl-
ings which can arm one being. against
the existence of another. » -

He easily eluded me, and said,

“ Be calm! I entreat you to hear me.
before you give vent to your hatredon
my devoted head. Have I not suﬁ'ered
enough, that you seek to increase my
misery? Life, although it may only be
an accumulation of anguish, is dent to
me, and I will defend it. Remember,
thou hast made me more powerful than
thyself; my height is superior to thine;
my joints more supple. But I will not
be tempted to set myself in opposition
to thee. I am thy creature, and I.will
be even mild and docile to my natural

\

rm Ions“ mamas. so!

"a Slide king, if thou wilt also perform
hy part, the which thou owest me.
I’ll, Frankenstein, be not equitable to
ﬁery other, and trample upon me
done, -to whom t-hy justice, and even
by clemency’and‘oﬁ'ection, is most
he; Remember, that I am thy crea-
ure: I ought to be thy Adam; but I
“11' rather the fallen angel, whom thou
irlvest from joy for no misdeed. Every
lhere I see bliss, from which I alone
rm irrevocably excluded. I was bene-
volent and good; misery made me a
iend. Make me happy, and I aha-ll
lgain be virtuous.”

“ Begone! I will not hear you.
Me can be no community between
you and me; we are enemies. Beg-one,
or let us try our strength in a ﬁght, in
which one must fall.” -

“ How can I move thee? Will no
entreuties cause thee to turn a favour-

zoo mxnxruun; on,

able eye upon thy creature, who lm“
plores thy goodness and companion.
Believe me, Frankenstein : I was bene-
volent; my soul glowed with loveand
humanity: but am I not' alone, mice-
rably alone? You, my creator, abhor
me; what hope can I gather from your
fellow-creatures, who owe me nothing?
they spurn and hate me. The de-
sert mountains and dreary glacier!
are my refuge. I have wandered
here many days; the caves of ice,
which I only do not fear, are a dwell-
‘ing to me, and the only one which
man does not grudge. These bleak
skies I hail, for they are kindertome
than your fellow-beings. If the mul-
titude of mankind knew of my exist-
ence, they would do as you do, and
arm themsalves for my destruction.
Shall I not then hate them who abhor
me? I will keep no terms with my

m: lbnnu mun-nus. m

enemies. I am miserable, and they
shall share my wretchedness. Yet it
in in your power to recompense me, and
deliver them from an evil which it only
Icmains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your family, but thou-
sands of others, shall be swallowed up
in the whirlwind: of its rage. Let your
compassion be moved, and do not dis-
dain me. Listen to my tale: when you
have heard that,l abandon or commi-
sernte me, as you shall judge that I de-
serve. But hear me. The guilty are
allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own defence be-
fore they are condemned. Listen to me.
Frankenstein. You accuse me of mar.-
der; and yet you would, with a satisﬁed
conscience, destroy your own creature.
0h, praise the eternal justice of man!
Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to

,I‘

£10 rmunusnw; on,

me; and then, if you can, and if you
will, destroy the work of your hau ’-'
“Why do you call to my rem
brance,” l rejoined, “ circumstanqu
which I shudder to reﬂectJhst [hug
been‘ the miserable origin and author}
Cursed be the day, abhorred deviL-il
which you ﬁrst saw light! Cursed (al-
though I curse myself) be the hands, thll
formed you ! You have made me wretch-
ed beyond expression. You have, lei
me no power to consider whether I am
just to you, or not. Begoue! relieve
me from the sight of your detested
form." r
“Thus I relieve thee, my creator,"
he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which I ﬂung from me
with violence; “thus I take from thee
a sight which you abhor. Still thou
canst listen to me, and grant me thy

mn 'IODIRR max-anus. m

hphssiou. By the virtues that I once
leased, I ' denmnd this from you.
I niy tale; it is long and strange,
like temperature of this place is not
ing 'to your ﬁne sensations; come to
shut upon the mountain. The sun is
in the heavens; before it de-
ﬂds to hide itself behind you snowy
dprlces, and illuminateanother world,
L'will have heard my story, and can
lie; 0n 'you it rests, whether [quit
ever theneighbourhood of man, and
(f: a harmless .life, or become the
urge uf your fellow-creatures, and
author of your own speedy min.”

b benid this‘, he led the way across
le'ei ’I followed. My heart Was full.
[El-did not answer him; but, as l pro.
ded, I weighed the .vurious argus
at: that he had used, and determined
least to listen to his tale. I was
ﬂy urged by curiosity, and compas-

212 mmnsmm; on,

sion conﬁrmed my resolution. I had
hitherto supposed him to be the nmr-
derer of my brother, and I eagerly sought
a conﬁrmation or denial of this opinion. '
For the ﬁrst time, also, I felt what the
duties of a creator towards his creature
were, and that I ought to render: hi
happy before I complained of his wicked-
ness. These motives urged me tooom:
ply with his demand. We crossed the
ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
rock. The air was cold, and the rain

again began to descend: . we entered'the
hut, the ﬁend with an air-of exultation,

l with a heavy heart, and depressed spi-
rits. But I consented to listen; and,
seating myself by the ﬁre which my'
odious companion had lighted, he thus
began his tale.

ran uonnﬂ noun-nus. 218

CHAPTER 3:.

“ [1' is with considerable diﬂiculty
that I remember the original era of my
being: all the events of that period ap-
pear confused and indistinct. A strange
multiplicity of sensations seized me, and
I saw, felt, heard, and smelt, at the same
time; and it was, indeed, a long time
before I learned to distinguish between
the operations of my various senses. By
degrees, I remember, a stronger light
pressed upon my nerves, so that I was
obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then
came over me, and troubled me; but
hardly had I felt this, when, by opening
my eyes, as I now suppose, the light

I'

914 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

poured in upon me again. I walked,
and, I believe, descended; but I pre-
sently found a great alteration in my
sensations. Before, dark and opaque
bodies had surrounded'me, impervious .
to my touch or sight; but I now found
that I could wander on at liberty, with
no obstacles which I could not either
surmount or avoid. The light became
more and more oppressive to' me; and,
the heat wearying‘ me as l walked-J
sought a. place where I could receive
shade. This was the forest near In-
golstadt; and here 1 lay by the side
of a brook resting from my fatigue, until
I felt tormented by hunger and thirst.
This roused me from my nearly dormmt
state, and I ate some berries whichl
found hanging on the trees, or lying on
the ground. I slaked my thirst at the
brook; and then lying down, was over-
come by sleep.

THE noun: manna-nus. 215

“It was dark when I awoke; I felt
:old also, and half-frightened, as it were
patinctively, ﬁnding myself so deso-
bte. Before I had quitted your apart-
not, on a sensation of cold, I had co-
vered myself with some clothes; but
Base were insufﬁcient to secure.me
iom the. dews of night. - I was a poor,
helpless, miserable wretch; lknew, and
rapid distinguish, nothing; but feeling
pain invade me on all side, I sat down
Ind wept. .

“‘ Soon a gentle light stole over the
heavens, and gave me a sensation of
pleasure. I started up, and beheld a
sodium form rise from among the trees ‘.
E gazed with a kind of wonder. It
wed slowly, but it enlightened my
path; and lagsin went out in search of
berries. I was still cold, when under

'Themoon.

216 usnzxsum; on,

one of the trees I found a huge cloak,
with which I covered myself, and sat
down upon the ground. No distinct
ideas occupied my mind; all was oun- '
fused. I felt light, 'and hunger, and
thirst, and darkness; innumerable
sounds rung in my ears, and on all
side various scents saluted me: the
only object that I could distinguish was
the bright moon, and I ﬁxed my eyes on
that with pleasure. ,

“ Several changesof day and night
passed, and the orb of night had greatly
lessened, when I began to distinguish
my sensations from each other. I gra»
dually saw plainly the clear strum
that supplied me with drink, and the
trees that shaded me with their foliage.
I was delighted when I ﬁrst discovered
that a pleasant sound, which oﬂen
saluted my ears, proceeded from the
throats of the little winged animals who

wul'uonnnu noun-anus. \ 217

had often intercepted the light from
my-eye's. - I began also to observe,.with
greater accuracy; the. forms that sur-
rounded me, and to perceive the bound-
aries of the radiant roof of light which
canopin me. Sometimes] tried to imi-
tate the pleasant songs of the birds; but
was unable. Sometimes I wished to ex-
press my sensations in my own inode,
but‘the uncouth and insrticulate sounds
which 'hroke from me frightened 'me
in'to'silence again.

“ The moon had disappeared from the
night, and again, 'with a' lessened form,
showed itself, whilel still remained in
the forest. ' My sensations had, by this
time,‘hecome distinct, and my mind re-
ceived everyday additional ideas; 'My
"eyes became accustomed to the light,
'imd tov'percei‘ve objects in their 'right
-ﬁirm's;' I distinguished the insect from
the herb, and, by degrees, one herb from

won. I. I.

218 rmnms’rns; on,

another. I found that the sparrow ut-
tered none but harsh notes, whilst those
of the blackbird and thrush were sweet
and enticing.

“ One day, when I was oppressed by
cold, I found a ﬁre which had been leﬁ
by some wandering beggars, and ms
overcome with delight at the warmthl
experienced from it. In my joy I thrust
my hand into the live embers, but
quickly drew it out again with a cry of
pain. How strange, I thought, that the
same cause should produce such oppo-
site eﬂ'ects! I examined the materials
of the ﬁre, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood; I quickly collected
some branches; but they were wet, and
Would not burn. l was pained at this,
and sat still watching the operation of
the ﬁre. The wet wood which I had
placed near the heat dried, and itself
became inﬂamed. I reﬂected on this:

n

ml stools)! rsous-rnsus. 219

and, by touching the various branches.
I diseoVered the cause, and bullied my-
self in collecting a great quantity of
wood, that I might dry it, and have a
plentiful supply of ﬁre. When night
came on, and brought sleep with it, I
.was in the greatest fear lest my ﬁre
should be extinguished. I'covered it
carefully with dry wood and leaves, and
placed wet branches upon it; and then,
spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground,
and sunk into sleep.

“ It was morning when I awoke. and
my ﬁrst care was to visit the ﬁre. 1 un-
covered it, and a gentle breeze quickly
fanned it into aﬂame. I observed this
else, and contrived a fan of branches,
which roused the embers when they
were nearly extinguished. When night
came again, I found, with pleasure, that
thetﬁre gave light as well as heat; and

f

220 rmnxnnsrmx; on,

that the discovery of this‘element was
useful to me in my food”; for I found
some of the oﬁ'als that the travellers had
left had been roasted, and tasted much
more savoury than the berries I gathered
from the trees. I tried, therefore, to dress
my food in the same manner, placing it
on the live embers. I found that the
berries were spoiled by this operatitm,
and the nuts and roots much improved.
“ Food, however, became scarce; and
I often spent the whole day searching
in vain tbr a few acorns to assuage the
pangs of hunger. When I found this,
I resolved to quit the place that I had
hitherto inhabited, to seek for one when
the few wants I experienced would be
' more easily satisﬁed. In this emigration,
I exceedingly lamented the loss of the
ﬁre which I had obtained through acci-f
dent, and knew not how to re-produce

'rns uonenn monsmsus. 221

it. I gave several hours to the serious
consideration of this diﬂiculty; but I was
obliged to relinquish all attempt to sup.
ply it; and, wrapping myself up in my
cloalr, I struck across the wood towards
the setting sun. I passed three days in
these rambles, and at length discovered
the open country. A great fall of snow
had taken place the night before, and
' the ﬁelds were of one uniform white;
the appearance was disconsolate, and I
found my feet chilled by the cold damp
substance that covered the ground.

“ It was about seven in the morning,
"and I longed to obtain food and shelter;
at length I perceived a small but, on a
rising ground, which had doubtless been
built for the convenience of some shep-
herd. This was a new sight to me;
and I examined the structure with great
'curiosity. Finding the door open, I en-

IN

222 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

tered. An old man sat in it, near a ﬁre,
over which he was preparing his break-
fast. He turned on hearing a noise;
and, perceiving me, shrieked. loudly,
and, quitting the but, ran across the
ﬁelds with a speed of which his debili-
-tated form hardly- appeared capable.
His appearance, diﬂ'erent from any I hid
ever before seen, and his ﬂight, some-
what surprised me. But I was enchanted
by the appearance of the hut: here the
snow and rain could not penetrate; the
ground was dry; and it presented to me
then as exquisite and divine a retreat as
Pandemonium appeared to the daemon!
of hell after their suﬁ'erings in the lake
of ﬁre. I greedin devoured the rem-
nants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which
consisted of breed, cheese, milk, and
wine; the latter, however, I did not
like. Then, overcome by fatigue, 1

'rnu MODERN PROMETHEUS. 228

lay down amohg seine straw, and fell
asleep. 

“ It was noon when I awoke; and,
allured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on- the white ground, I
determined to recommence my travels;
and, depositing the remains of the pea-
sant’s breakfast in a-wallet I found, I
proceeded across the ﬁelds for several
hours, until at sunset I arrived at a
village. How miraculous did this ap-
pear! the huts, the neuter cottages, and
stately houses, engaged my admiration
by turns. The vegetables in the gar-
dens, the milk and cheese that I saw
placed at the windows of some of the
cottages, sllured my appetite. One of
the best of these I entered; but I had
hardly placed my foot within the door,
before the children shrieked, and one
of the women fainted. The whole village

224- PBANIENBTIIN ; on,

was roused; some ﬂed, some attacked
'me, until, grievoust bruised by stones
and many other kinds‘of missile weapons,
I escaped to the open country, and fear-
fully took refuge in a low hovel, quite
bare, and making a wretched appearance
after the palaces I had beheld in the
.village. This' hovel, however, joined a
cottage of a neat and pleasant appear-
ance; but, after my late dearly-bought
experience, 1 dared not enter it. My
place of refuge was constructed of wood;
but so low, that I could with difﬁculty
sit upright in it. No wood, however,
was placed on the earth, which formed
the ﬂoor,-but it was dry; and although
the wind. entered it by innumerable
chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum
from the snow and rain.

“ Here then I retreated, and lay down,
- happy to have found a shelter, however

was nonan mous'rnsus. 225

miserable, from the inclemency of the
season; and still‘more-from the barbarity
ot‘ man. ,
“ As soon as'morning dawned, I crept
frommy kennel, that I might views the
adjacent cottage, and discover if I could
remain in the habitation I had found.
It was, situated against the back of the
cottage,'aud; surrounded on the sides
whichwere exposed by a pig-stye and a
clear pool of water. One part was open,
and by that I had crept in; but now I
covered every 'crevice by which I might
be'perceived with stones and wood, yet
.in' such a manner that I might move
them on occasion to pass out: all the
light I enjoyed ca‘me thrOugh the stye,
and that was suﬂicient for me. n

“ Having thus arranged my dwelling,
and carpeted it with clean straw, I re-
tired ;‘ for I saw the ﬁgu're of a man at a

' L 5

226 rnmxzus'rsm; on,

distance, and "l remembered too well my
treatment the night before, to trust my-
self in his power. I had ﬁrst, however,
provided for my sustenance for that day,
by a loaf of coarse bread, which [pur-
loined, and a cup with which I could
drink, more conveniently than from my
hand, of the pure water which ﬂowed by
my retreat. The ﬂoor was a little raised,
so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by
its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage
it was tolerably warm. -

“ Being thus provided, I resolved
reside in this hovel, until something
should occur which might alter my de-
termination. It was indeed a paradise,
compared to the bleak forest, my former
residence, the rain-dropping branches,
and dank earth. late my breakfast with
pleasure, and was about to remove I
plank to procure myself a little water,

ru uonnnx monmsus. 227

when I heard a step, and, looking through
a small Chink, I beheld a young creature,
with apail on her head, passing before
my hovel. The girl was young and of
gentle. demeanour, unlike what I have
since found cottagers and farm-house
servants to be. Yet she was meanly
dressed, a coarse .blue petticoat and a
linenjacket being her only garb; her
fair hair was plaited, but not adorned;
she looked patient, yet sad. I lost sight of
' her; and in about a quarter of an hour
she returned, bearing the. pail, which
‘ was now partly ﬁlled with milk. . As she
walked along, seemingly incommoded
~by the burden, a young man met her,
whose countenance expressed a deeper
despondence. Uttering a few sounds
with an air of melancholy, he took the
pail from her head, and bore it to the
cottage himself. She followed, and they
disappeared. Presently I saw the young-

228 runxlms'run; on,

man again, with some tools in his hand,
cross the ﬁeld behind the cottage; and
the girl was also busied, sometimes in .
the house, and sometimes in the yard. :
“ 0n examining my dwelling, [found
that one of the windows of the’cottage'
had formerly occupied a part of it, but
the panes had been ﬁlled up with wood.
In one of these was a sins]! and 'almo'st
imperceptible chink, through which the
eye could just penetrate. Through this
crevice a small room was visible, white-
washed and clean, but very bare of
furniture. In one corner, near a small
ﬁre, sat an old man, leaning his head
on his hands in a disconsolste attitude.
The young girl .was occupied in ar-
ranging the cottage; but presently she
took something out of a drawer, which
employed her hands, and she sat down
beside the old man; who, taking up an
instrument, began to play, and to pro-

Tn: uonnnu rnousrnzus. 229

‘duce sounds sweeter than the voice of
the thrush or the nightingale. It'was a’
lovely sight, even to me, poor Wretch!
who had never beheld aught beautiful
before. The silver hair and benevolent
countenance of the aged cottager w'on
' my reverence, while the gentle manners ,
of the girl enticed-my love. He played
a sweet moumful air, which I perceived
drew tears from the'eyes of his amiable
companion, of which the old man took
no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he
then pronounced o'few sounds, and the
fair: creature, leaving her work, 'knelt
at'his feet. He raiSed her, and smiled
with such kindness and aﬁ‘ection; that
I felt sensations .of a peculiar and over-'
powering nature: they were a mixture
of pain and pleasure,’such as I had
never before experienced, either from
hunger or cold, warmth or food; 'and l

280 Insults-run; on,

withdrew from the window, unable to
hear these emotions.

“ Soon after this the young .man re-
turned, hearing on his shoulders at losd
of wood. The girl met him at the door,
helped to relieve him of his burden, and,
taking some of the fuel into the cottage,
placed it on the ﬁre; then she and the
youth went apart into a nook of the cot-
tage, and he showed her a large loaf and.
a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased,
and went into the garden for some roots
and plants, which she placed in water,
and then upon the ﬁre. She aﬁerwardt
continued her work, whilst the young
man went into the garden, and appeared
busily employed in digging and pulling
up roots. After he had been employed
thus about an hour, the young woman
joined him, and they entered the cottage
together.

ma Mann's PRQMETHEUS. 231

“ The old man had, in the mean time,
been pensive; but, on the appearance
of‘h‘is companions, he assumed a more
cheerful air, and they sat down to eat.
The meal was quickly despatched. The
young woman was again occupied in
arranging the cottage; the old‘ man
walked before the cottage in‘ the sun
for a few minutes, leaning on the arm
of the youth. Nothing could'exeeed in
beauty the contrast between these two
exeellent creatures. One was old, with
silver hairs and a countenance beaming
with benevolence and love: the younger
was slight and graceful in his ﬁgure,
and his features were moulded with the
ﬁnest symmetry; yet his eyes and atti-

“tude expressed the utmost. sadness and
despondeucy. The old man returned
to the cottage; and the youth, with
tools diﬂ'erent from those he had used

332 suxxsssnrs; on,»

in the morning, directed. his steps-across
the ﬁelds. . ‘ '
“ Night quickly shut in; but, tony
extreme wonder, I found that, the cot-
tagers had a means of prolonging light
by the use of tapers, and was delighted
to ﬁnd that the setting of the sun did
not put an end to the pleasure I ex-
perienced in watching my human neigh-
bours. In the evening, the young girl
, and her companion were employed in
various occupations which I did not
understand; and the old man again
took up the instrument which produced
the divine sounds that had enchanted
me in the morning. So soon as he had
ﬁnished, the youth began, not to play,
but to utter soundsd‘that were mono-
tonous, and neither resembling the bar-
mony of the old man’s instrument or the
songs of the birds: I since found that

um 1169mm PROKETHEUS. 238

me read aloud; but at that time lknew
iotbing of the science of words or letters.

“ The family, after having been thus
)écupied 'for a short time, extinguished
:heir lights, and retired, as I conjectured,
to rest.

m FRANKENSTEIN; on, 

CHAPTER XI.

“ l LAY on my straw, but I could I:
sleep. [thought of the occurrence!
the day. What chieﬂy struck me I
the gentle manners of these people; a!
l longed to join them, but dared n
[remembered too well the treatment
had suffered the night before from t
barbarous villagers, and resolved, wlm
ever course of conduct I might hereof
think it right to pursue, that for 1
present I would remain quietly in I
hovel, watching, and endeavouring
discover the motives which inﬂuenc
their actions.

'rnz Ionian mountains. 285

“ The cottagers arose the next morn:
ing before the sun. The young woman
arranged the cotlage, and prepared the
food; and the youth departed after the
ﬁrst meal.

“ This day was passed in the same
routine as that which preceded it. The
young man was constantly employed out
of doors, and the girl in various labo-
rious occupations within. The old man,
whom I soon perceived to be blind,

employed his leisure hours on his in-
strument or in contemplation. Nothing
could exceed the love and respect which
the younger cottagers exhibited towards
their venerable companion. They per-
formed towards him 'every little ofﬁce
of affection and duty with gentleness;
ﬁnd be rewarded them by his benevolent
smiles. .

“ They Were not entirely happy. The
young man and his companion often

~ 286 ramnnnnx; on, .

went. apart, and appeared to weep. I
saw no cause for their unhappinali' 2'
but I was deeply affected by it. If
such lovely creatures were miserable.
it was less strange that I, an imperfect
and solitary being, should be wretched.
Yet why were'these gentle beings un-
happy? They possessed a delightful
house (for such it was in my ey) and
every luxury; they had a ﬁre to want:
them when chill, and delicious viani
when hungry; they were dressed in
excellent clothes; and, still more, tbs]
enjoyed one another’s company and
speech, interchanging each day loalll
of aﬁ'ectionaud kindness. What did
their tears imply P Did they really ex-
press pain? I was at ﬁrst unable '1»
solve these questions; but perpetual st.
tention and time explained to me many

appearances which were at ﬁrst enig-
matic.

ms nouns PROME'THEUS. 237‘ '

“ A considerable period elapsed be.
fore I discovered one of the causes of
the uneasiness of thi amiable family: it
was poverty; and they suﬁ'ered that evil
in a‘ very distressing degree. Their
nourishment consisted entirely of the
vegetables of their garden, and the milk
of One cow, who gave very little during
the winter, when its masters could
scarcely procure food to support 'it.
They often, I believe, suffered the pangs
of hunger very poignantly; especially the
two ﬁnger cottagers; for several times
tl‘eyplnc‘ed food before the old man,
when they reserved none. for them-
selves; '

, ‘v “ This trait of kindness moved me
‘ sensibly. I I had been accustomed, dur-
ing-the night, to steal a part of their
store for my own consumption; but
when I found that in doing this I in-
ﬂicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained,

288 unnatural; on,

and satisﬁed myself with berries, nut. ‘
and roots, which I gathered from I
neighbouring wood.

“ I discovered also another men
through which I was enabled to uni!
their labours. I found that the youth
spent a great part of each day in col-
lecting wood for the family ﬁre; and,
during the night, I often took his tools,
the use of which I quickly discovered,
and brought home ﬁring suﬂicient for
the consumption of several days. V

“ I remember, the ﬁrst time that I ‘
did this, the young woman, when she
opened the door in the morning, ap-
peared greatly astonished on seeing I
great pile of wood on the outside. She
uttered ome words in a loud voice,
and the youth joined her, who allo
expressed surprise. I observed, with
pleasure, that he did not go to the
forest that day, but spent it in repair,

ran noun: nouns-anus. $39

ing the cottage, and cultivating the
garden.

“ By degrees I made a discovery of
still greater moment. I found that
these people possessed a method of
communicating their experience and
feelings to one another by articulate
sounds. I perceived that the words.
they spoke sometimes, produced plea-
sure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
minds and countenances of the hearers.
This was indeed a godlike science, and
I ardently desired to become acquainted
with it. But I was baﬂied in every at-
tempt I made for this purpose. Their
pronunciation was quick; and' the
words they uttered, not having any
apparent connexion with visible ob-
jects, I was unable to discover any clue
by which I could unravel the mystery
of their reference. By great applica-
tion, however, and after having re~

240 rmrzxnusrnm; on,

mained during the space of several
revolutions of the moon in my hovel,l
discovered the names that were given
to some of the most familiar objects- of
discourse; I learned and applied the
words, ﬁre, milk, bread, and wood. I
learned also the names of the-cottageﬂ
themselves. The 'youth and his com-
panion had each of them several names,
but the old man had only one, which
was father. The girl was called mm,
or Agatha; and the youth Felix, brother,
or son. 1 cannot describe the delight -
[felt when I learned the ideas appro-
priated to ench of these sounds, and
was able to pronounce them. I distiu- .
guished several other words, without
being able as yet to understand or sp-
ply them; such as good, dearect, us!-
happy.

“ I spent the winter in this manner.
The gentle manners and beauty of the

rn: nonnu noun-nus. 241

mttagers greatly endeared them to me:
{men they were unhappy, I felt depress—
Iil; when they rejoiced, I sympathized
intheir joys. I saw few human beings
Ilﬂide them; and if any other happened
:‘0 enter the cottage, their harsh manners
Md =rude gait only enhanced to me the
lilperior accomplishments of my friends.
1"be old man, I could perceive, often
Endeavour-ed to encourage his children,
ll sometimes I found that he called
hem, to cast 03‘ their melancholy, He
V'Ould talk in a cheerful accent, with
II expression of goodness that bestowed
'leasure even upon me. Agatha list-
=ned with respect, her eyes sometimes
“led with tears, which she endeavoured
to wipe away unperceived ; but I gene-
rally found that her countenance and
tone were more cheerful after having
listened to the exhortations of her fa-
ther. It was not thus with Felix. He
yon. l. M

,-

m rams-rm; on,

was always the saddest of I the groupe;
and, even to my unpraetised lenses, he
appeared to have suffered more deeply
than his friends. But if his counte-
nance was more sorrowful, his voice
was more cheerful than that of his sil-
ter, especially when he addressed the
old man. '

“ I could mention innumerable in-
stances, which, although slight, marked
the dispositions of these amiable cot- v
tagers. In the midst of poverty and
> want, Felix carried with pleasure to his
sister the ﬁrst little white ﬂower that
peeped out from beneath the snowy
ground. Early in the morning before
she had risen, be cleared away the
snow that obstructed her path to the
milk-house, drew water from the well,
and brought the wood from the out-
house, where, to his perpetual astonish-
ment, he found his store always repleo

1n: tonnes rnonnnzus. 243

nished by an invisible hand. In the
day, I believe, he worked sometimes
bra neighbouring farmer, because he
oﬂen went forth, and did not return
until dinner, yet brought no wood with
him. At other times he worked in the
garden; but, as there was little to do
in the frosty season, he read to the old
man and Agatha.

‘ “ This reading had puzzled me ex-
tremely at ﬁrst; but, by degrees, I dis-
covered that he uttered many of the
name sounds when he read, as when he
talked. I conjectured, therefore, that
he found on the paper signs for speech
which he understood, and I ardently
longed to comprehend these also; but
how 'was that possible, when I did not
even understand the sounds for which
they stood as signs? Iimpl‘oved, how-
ever, sensibly in this science, but not
suﬁiciently to follow up any kind of

244 runes-stem; on,

conversation, although I applied my
whole mind to the endeavour: forI
easily perceived that, although I ea-
gerly longed to discover myself to the
cottagers, I ought not to make the at-
tempt until I had ﬁrst become master
of their language; which knowledge
* might enable me to make them over-
look the deformity of my ﬁgure; for
with this also the contrast perpetually
presented to my eyes had made me
acquainted.

“ I had admired the perfect forms of
my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and
delicate complexions: but how was!
terriﬁed, when I viewed myself in a
transparent pool! At ﬁrst I started
back, unable to believe that it was in-
deed I who was reﬂected in the mirror;
and when I became fully convinced
that I was in reality the' monster thatl
am, I was ﬁlled with the bitterest sen-

THE unlaan PROMETHEUS. 247 '

occasions, utter the words good spirit,
nondezﬁd; but I did not then under-
stand the signiﬁcation of these terms.

“ My thoughts now became more
active, and I longed to discover the
natives and feelings of these lovely
emtures; I was inquisitive to know
why Felix appeared so miserable, and
Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish
:wretch !) that it might be in my power
to restore happiness to these deserving
people. When I slept, or ,was absent,
the forms of the venerable blind father,
the gentle Agatha, and the exoellent
Felix, ﬂitted before me. I looked upon
them as superior beings, who would be
the arbiters of my future destiny. I
formed in my imagination a thousand
pictures of presenting myself to them,
and their reception of me. I imagined
that they would be disgusted, until, by
my gentle demeanour and coneiliating

248 ﬁrmness-rem; on,

words, I should ﬁrst win their-favour,
and afterwards their love. . I

“ These thoughts exhilarated me,
and led me to apply with fresh ardour
to the acquiring the art of language.
My organs were indeed harsh, but sup-
ple; and although my voice was very
unlike the soft music of their tones,
yet I pronounced such words as I un-
derstood with tolerable ease. It was
as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely
the gentle ass, whose intentions were
affectionate, although his manners were
rude, deserved better treatment than
blows and execration.

“ The pleasant showers and genial
warmth of spring greatly, altered the
aspect of the earth. Men, who bfore
this change seemed to have been hid
in caves, dispersed themselves, and
were employed in various arts of culti-
vation‘. The birds sang in more cheer-

THE nonznn rnonsrnsus. 246

sations of despondence and mortiﬁca-
tion. Alas! I did not yet entirely
know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity.

“ As the sun became warmer, and
the light of day longer, the snow va-
nished, and] beheld the bare trees and
the black earth. From this time Felix
was more employed: and the heart-
moying indications of impending fa-
mine disappeared. Their food, as I
aﬂerwards found, was coarse, but it
was wholesome; and they procured a
suﬂiciency of it. Several new kinds
of plants sprung up in the garden,
which they dressed; and these signs of
comfort increased daily as the season
advanced.

“ The old man, leaning on his son,
walked each'day at noon, when it did
not rain, as [found it was called when

the heavens poured forth its waters.
M 3

246 FRANKthTEm ; on,

This frequently took place ; but a high
wind quickly dried the earth, and the
season became far more pleasant than
it had been.

“ My mode of life'in my hovel was
uniform. During the morning‘I at-
tended the motions of the cotta‘gers;
and when they were dispersed in va-
rious occupations, I slept: the remain-

‘ der of the day was spent in observing
my friends. When they had retired to
rest, if there was any moon, or the night
was star-light, I went into the woods,
and collected my own food and fuel
for the cottage. ‘When I returned, as
often as it was necessary, I cleared their
path from the snow, and performed
those oﬂices that I had seen done by
Felix. I afterwards found that these
labours, performed by an invisible
hand, greatly astonished them; and
once or twice I heard them, on these

nu: none“ noun-mans. 249

ill mites, and the leaves began to bud
'l'tll on the trees. Happy, happy
rth! ﬁt habitation for gods, which,
short a time before, was bleak, damp,
d unwholesome. My spirits were
é—vated by the enchanting appearance
mature; the past ’was blotted from
7 memory, the present was tranquil,
d the future gilded by bright rays
hope, and anticipations of joy.”

END 0? VOL. I.

 

LONDON:
nun» n Ixoxu mvxsos. wunztuns.

’ FRANKENSTEIN:

on.

r'HE MODERN PROM E THE US.

BY

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT SHELLEY.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. II.

 

A NEW EDITION.

 

LONDON :

PRINTED FOR 6. AND W. B. WHITTAKER,
AVE-lAnIA-LANI.

Es.

2,5? . ‘w- 5/3"“

 

FRANKENSTEIN;

on,

yTHE MODERN PROMETHEUS.

CHAPTER I.

“I NOW hasten to the more moving
part of my story. I shall relate events,
that'impressed me with feelings which,
ﬁ'om what I had been, have made me
nhat I am.

“ Spring advanced rapidly; the wea-
ther became line, and the skies cloud-
less. it surprised me, that what before
was desert and gloomy should now
bloom with the most beautiful ﬂowers
and verdure. My senses were gratiﬁed
and refreshed by a thousand scents of
delight, and In thousand sights of
beauty.

VOL. 11. . a

2 IRANKENITEIN ; on,

“ It was on one of these days, when
‘ my cottagers periodically rested from
labour—the old man played on his
guitar, and the children listened to
him—that I observed the countenance of
Felix was melancholy beyond expresn
sion; he sighed frequently; and once
his father paused in his music, and I
conjectured by his manner that he iqu
quired the cause of his son’s sorrow.
Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and
the old man was recommencing his
music, when some one tapped at the
door.

“ It was a lady on :horseback, accom-
panied by a countryman as a guide.
The lady was dressed in a dark suit, and
covered with a thick black veil. Agatha
asked a question; to which the
stranger only replied by pronouncing, in
a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her
voice was musical, but unlike that of

THE' MOD“)! PBOMETHEUS. 3

either of my friends. 011 hearing this
word, Felix came up hastily to the lady;
who, when she saw him, threw up her
veil, and l beheld a countenance of an-
gelicﬂheauty and expresion. Her hair
of a shining raven black, and curiously
braided ; her eyes were dark, but gentle,
although animated; her features of a
regular proportion, and her complexion
wondroust fair, each cheek tinged with
n lovely'pink.

' “ Felix seemed ravished with de-
light when he saw her, every trait
of sorrow vanished from his face,
and 'it instantly expressed a degree
of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly
have believed it capable; his eyes
sparkled, as his cheek ﬂushed with
pleasure; and at that moment l thought
him as beautiful as the stranger. She
ipp'eared affected by different feelings;
Wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes,

3 2

4 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

she held out her hand to Felix, who
kissed it rapturously, and called her, as
well as 1 could distinguish, his sweet
Arabian. She did not appear to under-
stand him, but smiled. He assisted her 
to dismount, and dismissing her guide,
conducted her into the cottage. Some
conversation took place between him
and his father; and the young‘ stranger
knelt at the old man’s feet, and would
have kissed his hand, but he raised her,
and embraced her aﬁ’ectiouately;

“ I soon perceived, that although the
stranger uttered articulate sounds, and
appeared to have a language of her
own, she was neither understood by, nor
herself understood, the cottagers. They
made many signs which I did not com-
prehend; but I saw that her presence
diffused gladness through the cottage,
dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissi~
pates the morning mists. Felix seemed

m: uonux momma. 5

peculiarly happy, and with smiles of
delight welc0med his Arabian. Agatha,
the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands
 of the lovely stranger; and, pointing to
her brother, made signs which appeared
to me to mean that he had been sorrow-
ful until she came. ' Some hours passed
thus, while they, by their countenances,
expressed joy, the cause of which I did‘
not comprehend. Presently I found, by
the frequent recurrence of some sound
which the stranger repeated after them,
that she was endeavouring to learn
their language; and the idea instantly
occurred to me, that I should make use
of ' the same instructions to the same
end. The stranger learned about
tWenty words at the ﬁrst lesson, most
of them, indeed, were those which I had
V before understood, but I proﬁted by the
others. .
“ As night came on, Agatha and the

6 mmnmsnrx; or, ' '

Arabian retired early. When they se-
parated, Felix kissed the band of the
stranger, and said, ‘ Good night, sweet
Saﬁe.’ He sat up mu‘ch longer, con;
versin'g with his father; and,'by the'
frequent repetition of her name, I con-7
jectured that their lovely guest was the
subject of their conversation. I ardently
desired to understand them, and bent
every faculty towards that purpose, bn
found it utterly impossible. "
“ The next morning Felix went out
to his work; and, after the usual occu-
pations of Agatha were ﬁnished, the
Arabian sat at the feet of the old man,
and, taking his guitar, played some airs
so entrancingly beautiful, that they at
once drew tears of sorrow and delight
from my eyes. She sang, and her voice
ﬂowed in a rich cadence, swelling or
dying away, like a nightingale of th
woods. ‘

was nouns uonmus. 7

-- 5‘ .W hen she had ﬁnished, she gave the
guitar to Agatha, who at ﬁrst declined
k.“ She played a simple air, and her
voice accompanied it in sweet accents,
but unlike the'wondrous strain of the
danger. The old man appeared en-
hptured, and said some words, which
t'g‘atha endeavoured to explain to Saﬁe,
and by which he appeared to wish' to
express that she bestowed on him the
greatest delight by her music.
mi“ The days now passed as peaceably as
before, with the sole alteration, that joy
Ind taken place of sadness in the coun-
hnanoes of my friends. ‘ Saﬁe was always
by and happy; she and I improved
rapidly in the knowledge of language.
i0 that in two months I began to com-
prehend most of the words uttered by ’
my protectors.

‘‘ In the meanwhile also the black
ground was covered with herbage, and

8 rmuxsnrx; on, 

the green banks interspersed with in-
numerable ﬂowers, sweet to the scent
and the eyes, stars of pale radiance
among the moonlight woods; the sun
became warmer, the nights clear and
balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were
an extreme pleasure to me, although
they were considerably shortened by the
late setting and early rising of the‘ sun;
for I never ventured abroad during day-
light, fearful of meeting with the same
treatment I had formerly endured in the
ﬁrst village which I entered. '

“ My days were spent in close atten-
tion, that I might more speedily master
the language; and I may boast that I
improved more rapidly than the Ara-
bian, who understood very little, and
conversed in broken accents, whilst I
comprehended and could imitate almost
every word that was spoken.

“ While I improved in speech, I also

...na'

'rnn loom! noun-runs. 9

learned the science of letters, as it was
taught to the stranger; and this opened
before me a wide ﬁeld for wonder and
delight. .

"‘ The book from which Felix in-
structed Saﬁe was Volney’s Ruins q/‘EmT
pins. I should not have understood the
purport of this book, had not Felix, in
reading it, given very minute explana-
tions. He had chosen this work; he
said, because the declamatory style was
framed in imitation of the eastern au-
thors. Through this work I obtained a
cursory knowledge of history, and a view
of the several empires at present existing
in the world; it gave me an insight into
the manners, governments, and religions
of the different nations of the earth. I
heard of the slothful Asiatics; of the
stupendous genius and mental activity
of the Grecians; of the wars and won-

derful virtue of the early Romans—of
B 5

10 rnmnnsnm; on, . 7

their subsequent degenerating-40f the
decline of that mighty empire; ofchi-
valry, Christianity, and kings. I heard {
of the discovery of the American hemi-
sphere, and wept with S'aﬁe over the
hapless fate of its original inhabitants.

“ These wonderful uni-rations inspired
me with strange feelings. Was man, in-
deed, at once so powerful, so virtuous, 
and magniﬁcent, yet so vicious and
base? He appeared at one time a mere
scion of the evil principle, and at an-
other as all that can be conceived of no-
ble and godlike. To be a great and vir-
tuous man appeared the highest honour
that can befall a sensitive being; to be
base and vicious, as many on record
have been, appeared the lowest degra-
dation, a condition more abject than that
of the blind mole or harmless worm. For
a long time [could not conceive how one
man could go forth to murder his fellow,

THE 1101)“)! 9301131111173. 11

or even why there were laws and go-
. vernments; but when I heard details of
Vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased,
ﬁnd I turned away with disgust and
loathing. *

' “. Every conversation of the cottagers
now opened new wonders to me. While
I listened to the instructions which Fe-
iix- bestowed upon the Arabian, the
strange system of human society was ex-
plained to me. I heard of the division
of property, of immense wealth and
squalid poverty; of rank, descent, and
noble blood.

“ The words induced me to turn to-
wards myself. I learned that the pos-
sessions most esteemed by your fellow-
creatures were, high and unsullied de-
scent united with riches. A man might
be'respecﬁed with only one of these ad-
vantages ; but without either he was con-
sidered, except in very rare instances,

I! ruxnnm; on. -

as a Vagabond and a slave, doomed to
waste his powers for the proﬁt of the
chosen few? And what was I? 0! my
creation and creator I was absolutely
ignorant; but I knew that I
no money, no friends, no kind of pro-
perty. .I was, besides, endued withm
ﬁgure‘ hideously deformed and loath-
some; Iwaa not even of the same no6
ture as man. I was more agile than
they, and could subsist upon coarser
diet; I bore the extremes of heat and
cold .with less injury to my frame; my
stature far exceeded theirs. When I
looked around, I saw and heard of none
like me. Was I then a monster, a blot
upon the earth, from which all men ﬂed,
and whom all men disowned?

“ I cannot describe to you the agony
that these reﬂections inﬂicted upon me';
I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only
increased with knowledge. Oh, that

Tue nouns mountains. 13

I had for ever remained in my native
wood, nor known nor l'elt beyond
the sensations of hunger, thirst, and
heat!

-. “ Of what a strange nature is know:
ledge! It clings to the mind, when it
has once seized on it, like a lichen on
the rock. I wished sometimes to shake
of all thought and feeling ; but I learned
that there was but one means to over-
come the sensation of pain, and that
was death—a state which I feared yet
did not understand. I admired virtue
and good feelings, and loved the gentle
manners and amiable qualities of my
cottagers; but I was shut out from in-
tercourse with them, except through
means which I obtained by stealth, when
I was unseen and unknown, end which
rather increased than satisﬁed the desire
I had of becoming one among my fel-
lows. The gentle words of Agatha, and

  

l4 mulesnsm; on,-

the animated smiles of the charmisg' Vii
Arabian, were not for me. The mild I“
exhortations of the old man, and the'
lively conversation of the loved Felix,
Were not for me. Miserable, unhappy
wretch! .

“ Other lessons were impressed upon
me even more deeply. I heard of the
diﬂ‘erence of sexes; of the birth and
growth of children; how the hither
doated on the smiles of the infant, and
the lively sallies of the older child:
how all the life and cares of the mother
were wrapped up in the precious charge;

' how the mind of youth expanded and
gained knowledge; of brother, sister,
and all the various relationships which
bind one human being to another in mu-
tual bonds.

“ But where were my friends and ‘
relations? No father had watched my
infant days, no mother had blessed me

rim sonny nonunus. 15

l with smiles and caresses; or if they had,
.' all my past life was now a blot, a blind
3 vacancy in which I distinguished no-
- thing. From my earliest remembrance

I had been as I then was in height and
proportion. I had never yet seen a be-
ing resembling me, or who claimed any
intercourse with me. What was I P The
question again recurred, to be answered
only with groans. -

' “ I will soon explain to what these
feelings tended; but allow me now to
return to the cottagers, whose story ex-
cited in me such various feelings of
indignation, delight, and wonder, but
which all terminated in additional love
and reverence for my protectors (for so
I loved, in an innocent, half painful self-a
deceit, to call them).

16 ruxummu; on,

CHAPTER. II.

“ Some time elapsed before I learned
the history of my-friends. It was one
which could not fail to impress itself
deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did
a number of circumstances, each inte-
resting and wonderful to one so utterly
inexperienced as I was. ,

“ The name of the old man was De
Lacey.‘ He was descended from a good
family in France, where he had lived
for many years in aﬂluence, respected
By his superiors, and beloved by his
equals. His son was bred in the ser-

was IODIIN noun-runs. 17

vice of his country: and Agatha had
ranked with ladies of the highest di-
stinction. A few months before my ar-
rival, they had lived in a large and
luxurious city, called Paris, surrounded
by. friends, and possessed of every en-
joyment which virtue, reﬁnement of in-
tellect, or taste, accompanied by a mode-
rate fortune, could aﬂ'ord.

“ The father of Soﬁe had been the
cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish
merchant; and had inhabited Paris for
many years, when, for some reason
which I could not learn, he became
obnoxious to the government. He was.
seized and cast into prison the very day,
that Saﬁe arrived from Constantinople
to join him.. He was tried, and con-
demned to death. The injustice of his
sentence was very ﬂagrant; all Paris
was indignant; and it was judged that
his religion and wealth, rather than the

18 "mans-um; -03,

crime alleged against him, had heel

the cause of his condemnation. -

» “ Felix had accidentally been present
at the trial; his horror and indignation
were uncontrollable, when he heard the
decision of the court. He made, at that
moment, a solemn vow to deliver him,
and then looked around for the means.
After many fruitless attempts to gain
admittance to the prison, he found a
strongly grated window in an unguarded
part of the building, which lighted the
dungeon of the unfortunate Mahometan;
who, loaded with chains, waited in de-
spair the execution of the barbarous
sentence. Felix visited the grate at
night, and made known to the prisoner
his intentions in his favour. The Turk;
amazed and delighted, endeavoured to
kindle the zeal of his deliverer by pro-
mises of reward and wealth. Felix-
rejected his offers with contempt; yet

ran- 'Ilonlml 'Pnolmulnus. 19

then he saw the' lorer Ssﬁe, who was
allowed to'risit ‘her father, and who, by '
Er gestures, expressed her lively gra-
mu'de, the youth could not help owning
to his own mind, that the captive pos-
le'sed a treasure which would fully re-
Card his toil and hazard. -
-‘“ The Turk quickly perceived the
impression that his daughter had made
in the heart of Felix, and endeavoured
lb secure him more entirely in his inte-
rests by the promise of her hand-in
ﬁarriage, so soon as he should becon.
reyed to a place of safety. Felix was
too delicate to accept this offer; yet he
looked forward to the probability of the'
mm as to the consummation of his
happiness.

“ During the ensuing days, while the
preparations were going forward for the
escape of the merchant, the zeal of-
Relix was warmed by several letters

20 nmxsxsnm; on, ,

that he received from this lovely girl,
who found means to express her thoughts
in the language of her lover by the aid
of an old man, a servant of her father,
who understood French. She thanked
him in the most ardent terms for his
intended services towards her parent; I
and at the same time she gently deplored
her own fate.

“ I have copies of these letters; for I
found means, during my residence in
the hovel, to procure the implements
of writing; and the letters were oﬁen
in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Be-
fore I depart, I will give them to you,
they will prove the truth of my tale;
but at present, as the sun is already far
declined, I shall only have time to re-
peat the substance of them to you. '

“ Saﬁe related, that her mother was
a Christian Arab, seized and made a
slave by the Turks; recommended by

v we moons maximum. 21

her beauty, she had won the heart of
the father of Satie, who married her.
l,l'he young girl spoke in high unden-
thusiastic terms of her mother, who,
horn in freedom, spurned the bondage
to which she was now reduced. She
instructed her daughter in the tenets of
her religion, and taught her-to aspire
to higher powers of intellect, and an
independence of spirit, forbidden to the
female followers of Mahomet. This lady
died ; but her lessons were indelibly im-
pressed on the mind of Saﬁe, who sick-
ened at the prospect of again returning
to' Asia, andvbeing immured within
the walls of a harem, allowed only to
occupy herself with infantile amuse-
ments, ill suited to the temper of her
loul, now accustomed to grand ideas
and a noble emulation for virtue. The
prospect of marrying a Christian, and
remaining in 9. country where women

    
 
   
   
 
  

22 rmxxsnsnm; on.

were allowed to take a rank in sadly.
was enchanting to her. . .

“ The day for the execution oft!
Turk was ﬁxed; but, on the nightllt- It"
vious to it, he quitted his prisqnﬂi
before morning was distant many lesgu ‘0
from Paris. Felix had procured pslr'
ports in the name of his father, sistd.
and himself. He had previously coli-
municated his plan to the former, wlio
aided the deceit by quitting his haunt,
under the pretence of a journey, and
concealed himself, with his daughter, in
an obscure part of Paris.

“ Felix conducted the fugitives through
France to Lyons, and across Mont Cenil
to Leghorn, where the merchant had
decided to wait a favourable opportunity
of passing into some part of the Turkish
dominions.

“ Saﬁe resolved to remain with her
father until the moment of his depar-I

was IODIBN noun-tnva 28

ture, before which time the Turk re-
newed his promise that she should be
united to his deliver-er; and Felix re-
mained with them in expectation of
that event; and in the mean time he
. enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who
exhibited toWards him the simplest and
tenderest aﬁ‘ection. They conversed with
I one another through the means of an
interpreter, and sometimes with the in-
terpretation of looks; and Saﬁe sang to
him the divine airs of her native country.

“ The .Turk allowed this intimacy to
take place, and encouraged the hopes
of the youthful lovers, while in his
heart he had formed far other plans.
He loathed the idea that his daughter
should be united to a Christian; but he
feared the resentment of Felix, if he
should appear lukewarm; for he knew
that he was still in the power of hit
deliverer, if he should choose to betray

24 manner-um; on,

him to the Italian state which they in-
habited. He revolved a thousand plans
by which he should be enabled tapro-
long the deceit until it might be no
longer necessary, and secretly to take his
daughter with him when he departed.
His plans were greatly facilitated by the
news which arrived from Paris.

4‘ The government of France were
greatly enraged at the escape of their
victim, and spared no pains to detect
and punish his deliverer. The plot of
Felix was quickly discovered, and De
Lacey and Agatha were thrown into
prison. The news reached Felix, and
roused him from his dream of pleasure.
His blind and aged father, and his
,genile sister, lay in a noisome dungeon,
while he enjoyed the free air, and the
society of her whom he loved. This
idea was torture to'him. He quickly
arranged with the Turk, that if the lat-

ran MODERN rmuzruns. 36

ter should 'ﬁnd a: favourable opportu-
nity‘ for escape before Felix could re-
turn to Italy, Saﬁe should remain as a
binder at a convent at Leghorn; and
ﬁnen, quitting the lovely Arabian, he
hastened to Paris, and delivered him-
ielf unto the vengeance of the law,
hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by
this proceeding. ,

.“‘ He did not Succeed“; They re-
mained conﬁned for ﬁve months before
the trial took place; the result of which
deprived them «if their fortune, and con-
demned them‘ to a perpetual exile from
their native country. '

3“ They found a‘miserable asylum in
:he? ecttage in Gem'mny, where 1 dis-
:overed them. Felix soon learned that
:he treacherous Turk, for v'vhom he and
his family endured such unheard-of op-
pression, on discovering that his de-
liverer was thus reduced to poverty and '

v0L. n. I c

26 runners-um; on,

impotence, became a traitor to good
feeling and honour, and had quitted
Italy with his daughter, insultineg send-
ing Felix a pittance of money, to aid
him, as he said, in some plan of future
maintenance.

“ Such were the events that preyed
on the heart of Felix, and rendered
him, when I ﬁrst saw him, the most
miserable of his family. He could
have endured poverty, and while thin
distress had been the meed of his vir-
tue, he gloried in it: but the ingmti-
tude of the Turk, and the loss of his
beloved Saﬁe, were misfortunes more
bitter and irreparable. The arrival of
the Arabian now infused new life into
'his soul. '

“ When the news reached Leghorn,
that Felix was deprived of his wealth
and rank, the merchant commanded
his daughter to think no more of her

'rna IOD‘EEN .rnoumnavs. 2’7

lover, but to prepare to return to her
native country. The generous nature
If Saﬁe was outraged by this command;
the attempted to expostulate with her
Either, but he left her angrily, reiterating
his tyrannical mandate.
'02' “ A few days after, the Turk entered
his daughter’s apartment, and told her
hastily, that he had reason to believe
that his residence at Leghorn had been
divulged, and that he should speedily‘
be delivered up to the French govern-
ment; he had, consequently, hired a
vessel to convey him to Constantinople,
for which city he should sail in a few
hours. Heintended to leave his daugh-
ter. under the care of aeonﬁdential
servant, to follow at her leisure with
the greater part of his property, which
had not yet arrived at Leghorn.

“ When alone, Saﬁe resolved in her

own mind the plan of conduct that it
c 2

28 runner-xxx; on,

would become her to pursue in‘this
emergency. Aresidence in Turkey was a;
abhorrent to her; her religion and her 1
feelings were alike adverse to it. By
some papers of her father,"tvhich fell
into her hands,.she-»heerd-iof-rthe exile
of her lover, 'and learnt the named
the spot where he then resided. ~-She
hesitated some time, but at length‘she
formed her determination. ' Taking with
her some jewels that belonged to her,
and a small sum of money, she quitted
Italy, with an attendant, ainative of
Leghorn, but who understood the com-
mon language of Turkey, and departed
for Germany.

“ She arrived in safety at a town
about twenty leagues from the cottage
of De Lacey, when her attendant fell
dangerously ill. Saﬁe nursed'her with
the most devoted aﬁ'ection; but -the
poor girl died, and the Arabian was

we no!)an none-urns. V 29

left alone, unacquainted with the lan-
guage of the country, and ntterly igno-
rant of the customs of the world. She
fell, however, into good hands.‘ The
Italian had mentioned the name of the
' spot for which they were bound; and,
‘ aﬁer her death, the woman of the house
in which they had iived took care that
Soﬁe should arrive in safety at the cot-
tage of her lover.

80 FRANKENSTEIN ; 0;,

CHAPTER III.

“ Sven was the history of my beloved
cottagers. it impressed me deeply. I
learned, from the views of social life
which it developed, to admire their vir-
tues, and to deprecate the vices of man- V
kind.

“ As yet I looked upon crime as a di-
stant evil; benevolence and generosity
were ever present before me, inciting
within me a desire to become an actor
in the busy scene where so many ad-
mirable qualities were called forth and
displayed. But, in giving an account
Ethe progress of my intellect,l must

  

THE IODEIN recurrence 31

not omit a circumstance which occurred
in the beginning of the month of August
of the same year.

“ One night, during my accustomed
~ visit to the neighbouring wood, where
I collected my own food, and brought
home ﬁring for my protectors, I found
on the ground a leathern portmanteau,
containing several articles of dress and
some books. I eagerly seized the prize,
and returned with it to my hovel. For-
tunately the books were written in the
language the elements of which I had
acquired at the- cottage; they con-
sisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of
Plutarch’s Lives, and the Sorrows of
Warm. The possession of these trea-
sures gave me extreme delight; I now
continually studied and exercised my
mind upon these histories, whilst my
friends were employed in their ordinary
occupations.

32 mmxessnm ; on,

“ I can hardly describe to you the
e'ﬁ‘ect of these books. They produced
in me an inﬁnity of new‘ images and
feelings, that sometimes raised me to '
ecstasy, but more frequently'sunk me
into the lowest dejection. In the Sorrows
of Werter, besides the interest of its 5
simple and affecting story, so many
opinions are canvassed, and so many
lights thrown upon what had hitherto
been to me obscure’subjects, that I
found in it a never-ending source of
speculation and astonishment. The
gentle and domestic manners it de-
scribed, combined with lotty sentiments
and feelings, which had 'for their ob-
ject something out of self, accorded well
with my experience among my prop 
tectors, and with the wants which were
for ever'alive in my own bosom. But
I thought Werter himself a more di-
vine being than I had ever beheld or

m nouns noun-runs. 33

imagined; his character contained no
- pretension, but it sunk deep. The dis-
quisitions upon death and suicide were
calculated to ﬁll me with wonder. I
did not pretend to enter into the merits
of the case, yet I inclined towards the
Opinions of the hero, whose extinction
' l wept, without precisely understand-
ing it. ‘

“ As I read, however, I applied
much personally to my own feelings
and condition. Ifound myself similar,
yet at the same time strangely unlike to
the beings concerning whom I read,
and to whose conversation I was a.
listener. I sympathized with, and partly
understood them, but I was unformed
in mind; I was dependent on none,
and 'related to none. ‘ The path of
my departure was free ;' and there was
none to lament my annihilation. My

person was hideous, and my-stature
‘ 06

84 mum; on,

gigantic: what did this mean? 'Who
was I? What was I P Whence did I
come? What was my destination ? These
questions continually recurred, butI '
was unable to solve them.

“ The volume of Plutarch’s Line:
which I possessed contained the hi-
stories of the ﬁrst founders of the an-
‘cient republics. This book had a far
different eﬂ'ect upon me from the Sor—
rows of Werter. I learned from Wer-
ter’s imaginations despondency and
gloom: but Plutarch taught me high
thoughts; he elevated me above the
wretched sphere of my own reﬂections,
to admire and love the heroes of past
ages. Many things I read surpassed
my understanding and experience. I
had a very confused knowledge of king-
doms, wide extents of country, mighty
rivers, and boundless seas. But I was
perfectly unacquainted with towns, and

THE IODIIN rnournns. 86

large assemblages of men. The cob
‘tage of my protectors had been the only
school in which I had studied human
nature; but this book developed new
and mightier scenes of action. I read
of men concerned in public aﬂ'airs, go-
verning or massacring their species. I
felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise
within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
far as I understood the signiﬁcation of
those terms, relative as they were, as I
applied them, to pleasure and pain alone.
Induced by these feelings, I was of course
led to admire peaceable law-givers,
Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in pre-
ference to Romulus and Theseus. The
patriarchal lives of my protectors caused
these impressions to take a ﬁrm hold on
my mind; perhaps, if my ﬁrst introduc—
tion to humanity had been made by a
young soldier, burning for glory and

36 smuxsssrexx; on,

slaughter, I should have been imbued
with diﬁ’ereut sensations. ' . .

“ But Paradise Lost excited diﬁ'exent
and. far deeper emotions. I readit, asl
had read the other volumes which had
fallen into my hands, as a true history.
It moved every» feeling of wonder and
awe, that the picture of an omnipotent
God warring with his creatures was
capable of exciting. .I often referred
the several situations, as'their similarity
struck me, to my own.‘ Like Adam,I
was apparently united by no link to any
other being in existence; but his state
was far different from mine in every
other respect. He had come forth from
the hands of God a perfect creature,
happy and prosperous, guarded by the
especial care of his Creator; hewas
allowed to converse with, and acquire
knowledge from beings of a superior

THE HODEBN IBOII’I‘EIUS-

nature: but. I was wretched, helpless,
. and alone. Many times I considered
Satan as the ﬁtter emblem of my con-
dition ; for often, like him, when I viewed
the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall
of envy rose within me. ‘ - ,

“ Another circumstance strengthened.
and' conﬁrmed these feelings. Soon
after my arrival in the how], I dis-
covered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which I had taken from your
laboratory. At' ﬁrst I had neglected
them; but now that I was able to de-
cypher the characters in which they
were written, I began to study them
with diligence. It was your journal of
the four months that preceded my crea-
tion. You minutely described in these 1
papers every step you took in the pro-
gress of your work; this history was
mingled with accounts of domestic oc—
currences. You, doubtless, recollect

38 rusnxsrm; on,

these papers. Here they are. Every
thing is related in them which bears
reference to my aecnrsed origin; the
Whole detail of that series of disgusting
circumstances which produced it is set
in view; the minutest description of my
odious and loathsome person is given,
in language which painted your own
horrors, and rendered mine indelible;
I sickened as I read. ‘ Hateful day
when I received life!’ I exclaimed in
agony. ‘ Cursed creator! Why did you
form a monster so hideous that even you
turned from me in disgust P God in pity
made man beautiful and alluring, aﬁer
his own image; but my form is a ﬁlthy
type of yours, more horrid even from
the very resemblance. Satan had his
companions, fellow-devils, to admire and
encourage him; but I am solitary and
detested.’ 
“ These were the reﬂections of my

rm: Ironan noun-runs. 89

hours of despondency and solitude; but
when I contemplated the virtues of the
cottagers, their amiable and benevolent
dispositions, I persuaded myself that
when they should become acquainted
with my admiration of. their virtues,
they would compassionate me, and over-
look my personal deformity. Could they
turn from their door one, however mon-
~trous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship? I resolved, at least,
not to despair, but in every way to ﬁt
myself for an interview with them which
would decide my fate. I postponed
this attempt for some months longer;
for the importance attached to its snc.
cess inspired me with a dread lest I
should fail. Besides, I found that my
understanding improved so much with
every day’s experience, that l was un-
willing to commence this undertaking
until a few more months should have
added to my wisdom.

f

40 “nuns-um; on, ‘ ' ‘

“ Several changes, in the mean time,
took place in the cottage. The pre-
sence of Soﬁe diﬂ'used happiness among
its inhabitants; and I also found that:
greater degree of plenty reigned there.
Felix and Agatha spent more time in
amusement and conversation, and were
assisted in their labours by servants. ‘
They did not appear rich, but they
were contenied and happy;»their feel-
ings-were serene and peaceful, while
mine became every day more tumul-
tuous. Increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a
wretched outcast I was. I cherished
hope, it is true; but it vanished, when I
beheld my person reﬂected in water, or
my shadow in the moonshine, even‘
as that frail image and that inconstant
shade. "

“ I endeavoured to crush these fears;
and to fortify myself for the trial which
in a few months I resolved to undergo;

ml MODERN PBOIIETEIIJB. 4-1

and sometimes I allowed my thoughts,
unchecked by reason, to ramble in the
ﬁelds of Paradise, and dared to fancy
amiable and lovely creatures sympa-
thizing with my feelings and cheering
‘my gloom; their angelic countenances
breathed smiles of consolation. But it
was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
' sorrows, or shared my thoughts; Iwas

alone. I remembered Adam’s suppli-
catiou to his Creator. But where was
mine.> He had abandoned me, and, in
the bitterness of my heart, I .cursed
him.

“ Autumn passed thus. I saw, with
surprise and grief, the leaves decay and
fall, and nature again assume the barren
and bleak appearance it had worn
when I ﬁrst beheld the woods and the
lovely moon. Yet I did not heed the
bleakness of the weather; I was better
ﬁtted by my conformation for the en-
durance of cold than heat. But my chief

4v: runxansum ; on,

 
     
  

delights were the sight of the item lid
the birds, and all the gay apparell Hie
summer; when those deserted me.‘ "'
turned with more attention towards“!
cottagers. Their happiness was It
decreased by the absence of summa-
They loved, and ympathized with one
another; and their joys, dependingm it
each other, were not interrupted M “l
the casualties that took place aroou ll
them. The more I saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim the“
protection and kindness; my heatt
yearned to be known and loved by
these amiable creatures: to see their
sweet looks turned towards me with
aﬁ'ection, was the utmost limit of my
ambition. I dared not think that they
would turn them from me with disdain
and horror. The poor that stopped at
their door were never driven away. I
asked, it is true, for greater treasures
than a little food or rest; I required

n01

Tar. uonaax Pnoulrnus. 48

ndness and sympathy; but I did not
:lieve myself utterly unworthy of it.

“ The winter advanced, and an entire
mlntion of the seasons had taken
ice since I awoke into life. My at-
htion, at this time, was solely directed
Wards my plan of introducing myself
to the cottage of my protectors. I re-
Ilved many projects; but that on
hich I ﬁnally ﬁxed was, to enter the
velling when the blind old man should
2‘ alone. I had sagacity enough to
scover, that the unnatural hideous-
:ss of my person was the chief object
'horror with those who had formerly
:held me. My voice, although harsh,
id nothing terrible in it; I-thought,
erefore, that if, in the absence of his
tildren, I could gain the good-will and
ediation of the old De Lacey,.I might,
7 his means, be tolerated by my
singer protectors.

4-4- snmnusrxm; on,

“ One day, when the sun shone on
 the red leaves that strewed the groan
and diﬁ‘used cheerfulness, although it
denied warmth, Saﬁe, Agatha, and Fe
lix, departed on a longr.couutry walk,
and the old man, at his own desire, was
left alone in the cottage. -When hi:
children had departed, he took up his
guitar, and played several mournful,
but sweet airs, more sweet and mournful
than I had ever heard him play before.
At ﬁrst his countenance was illuminated
with pleasure, but, as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded;
at length, laying aside the instrument.
he sat absorbed in reﬂection“

“ My heart beat quick; this was the
hour and moment of trial, which would
decide my hopes, or realize my fears.
The servants were gone to a neighbour-
ing fair. All was silent in and around
the cottage: it was an excellent oppor-

 THE MODERN PBOIIITBEUI. 4'5

Enity‘; 'yet, when I‘ proceeded to exe-
Uute my plan, my'liinhs failed me, and
[sunk to the ground.'- Again I rose;
ind, exerting all the ﬁrmness 'of which '
I‘was master, removed the planks whi'ch
[thad placed before my have] to conceal
my retreat. The fresh air revived me,
and; with renewed determination, I ap-‘
ﬁroached the door of their cottages

5' “ I knocked. ‘ Who is there?’ said'
the old man—‘ Come in.’ ' r '
V “ Ient‘ered; ‘ Pardon this intrusion,’
kid I, " I am a traveller in want of .a'
little rest; you would greatly oblige me;
if ' you would allow me to remain a few
minutes before the ﬁre.’ '
- “ ‘ Enter,’ said De Lacey; ‘ and I will
try in what manner I can relieve your
wants; but, unfortunately, my children
are from home, and, as I am' blind, I
sin afraid I shall ﬁnd. it difﬁcult to'pro-
cure food for you.’ -

£6 rmxnnuux; on,

“ ‘ Do not trouble yourself, my kiml
host, I have food; it is warmth and I!"
only that I need.’ '

“ I sat down, and a silence ensued:
I knew that every minute was precious
to me, yet I remained irresolute in what
manner to commence the interview:
when the old man addressed me— '

“ ‘ By your language, stranger, I
suppose you are my countryman;—-m
you French P"

“ ‘ No; but I was educated by a
French family, and understand that lan-
guage only. I am now going to claim
the protection of some friends, whom
I sincerely love, and of whose favourI
have some hopes.’ '

“ ‘ Are they Germans?’

“ ‘ No, they are French. But let no
change the subject. I am an unfor-
tunate and deserted creature; I look
around, and I have no relation or friend

THE IODIBN PIOKETHEUS- ‘7

Ipon earth. These amiable people to
ihom I go have never seen me, and
know little of me. I am full of fears;
ht'if I fail there, I am an outcast in the
ﬂorid for ever.’

“.‘ Do not despair. To be friendless
lindeed to be unfortunate; but the
hearts of men, when unprejudiced by
my obvious self-interest, are full of bro-
therly love and charity. Rely, therefore,
on your hopes; and if these friends are
good and amiable, do not despair.’

“ ‘ They are kind—they are the
most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced
against me. [I have good dispositions;
my life has been hitherto harmless, and
in some degree beneﬁcial; but a fatal
prejudice clouds their eyes, and where
they ought to see a feeling and kind
friend, they behold only a detestable
I'nonster.’

48 suuxzus'rmu ; on,

a“ ‘ That is indeed unfortunate; but '
if you are really blameless, cannot you

undeceive them ?'
“ ‘ I am about to undertake that ,~

task; and-it is on that account thatI
feel so many overwhelming terrors. I
tenderly love these friends; I have, un-'
known to them, been for many months
in the habits of daily kindness towards
them; but they believe that I wish to
injure them, and it is that prejudice
which I wish to overcome.’

“ ‘ Where do these friends reside?’

“ ' Near this spot.’

5‘ The old man paused, and then
continued, ‘ If you will unreservedly
conﬁde to me the particulars of your
tale, I perhaps may be of use in un-'
deceiving them. I am blind, and can:
not judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words, which
persuades me that you are sincere. I

nu: napalm vacuums. 49

mm poor, and an exile: but it will afford
.me true pleasure to be in any way ser-
viceable'to a human creature.’

“ ‘ Excellent man! I thank you, and
accept your generous oﬂ‘er. You raise
me from the dust by this kindness; and
i trust that, by your aid, I shall not be
driven from the society and sympathy
of your fellow-creatures.’

“ ‘ Heaven forbid! even if you were
really-criminal; for that can only drive
you to desperation, and not instigate
you to virtue. I also am unfortunate;
I and my family have been condemned,
although innocent: judge, therefore, if
'I do not feel for your misfortunes.‘ '

“ ‘ How can I thank you, my best
and only benefactor? from your lips
ﬁrst have I heard the voice of kind-
ness directed towards me; I shall
be for ever grateful; and your pre-
sent humanity assures me of success

von. 11. n

60 rnxuxsnm; on,

with those friends whom I am on the
point of meeting.’

“ ‘ May I know the names and resi-
dence of those friends 9’

“ I paused. This, I thought, was
the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of, or bestow happiness on me
for ever. I struggled vainly for ﬁrm-
ness suﬂ‘icient to answer him, but .
the effort destroyed all my remaining
strength; I sank on the chair, and
sobbed aloud. At that moment I heard
the steps of my younger protectors. I
had not a moment to lose; but, seizing
the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘ Now
is the timel—save and protect me!
You and your family are the friends
whom I seek. Do not you desert me
in the hour of trial !’

“ ‘ Great God!’ exclaimed the old
man, ‘ who are you ?'

“ At that instant the cottage door

mu Ionian smnnns. 51

was opened, and Felix, Saﬁe, and Aga—
tha entered. Who can describe their
horror and consternation on beholding
me? Agatha fainted; and Saﬁe, unable
to attend to her friend, rushed out of
the cottage. Felix darted forward, and
with supernatural force tore me from
his father, to whose knees I clung: in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the
ground, 'and struck 'me violently with a
stick. I could have torn him limb from

~limb, as the lion rends the antelope.
But my heart sunk within me as with
bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw
him on the point of repeating his blow,
when, overcome by pain and anguish,
I quitted the cottage; and in the gene-
ral tumult escaped unperceived to my
hovel.

n2

52 V sunnusnnt; on,

CHAPTER 1v. '

“ Cunsnn,'cnrsed creator! Why did
I live? Why, in that instant, did I
not extinguish the spark of existenCe
which you had so'wantonly'bestowed?
I know not; despair had not yet taken
possession of me; my feelings were
those of rage and revenge. I could
with pleasure have destroyed the cot-
tage and its inhabitants, 'and have
glutted myself with their shriek: and
misery. v

“ When night came, I quitted my
retreat, and wandered in the wood;
and now, no longer restrained ‘by the

V THE MODIBN PIOHITHIUS. 53

fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings. I was like
awild beast that had broken the toils;
destroying the objects that obstructed
me, and ranging through the wood with
a stag-like swiftness. Oh! what a
miserable night I passed I the cold stars
shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me: now
and then the sweet voice of a bird burst
'forth amidst the universal stillness.
All, save I,‘ were at rest or in enjoyment:
I, like the arch ﬁend, bore shell within
me; and, ﬁnding myself unsympa-
thized with, wished to tear up the trees,
spread havoc and destruction around
me, and then to have sat down and
enjoyed the ruin.

“ But this was a luxury of sensation
that could not endure; I became fa-
tigued with excess of bodily exertion,
and sank on the damp grass in the

54- ‘nnxnusrnm: on, ‘

sick impotence of despair. There was
none among the myriads of men that
existed who would pity or' assist me;
and should I feel kindness towards 'my
enemies? No: from that moment I
declared everlasting war against the
species, and, more than all, against

him who had formed me, and 'sent me
’ forth to this insupportable misery.

“ The sun rose: I heard the voices
of men, and knew that it was impos.
sible to return to my retreat during
that day. Accordingly I -hid myself in
some thick underwood, determining to
devote the ensuing hours to reﬂection
on my situation.

“ The pleasant sunshine, and the
pure air of day, restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when I
considered what had passed at the cot-
tage, I could not help believing that I
had been too hasty in my conclusions.

ms MODERN mous'rxnus. 55

I had certainly acted imprudently. it
was apparent that my conversation had
interested the father in my behalf, and
'I was a fool in having exposed my
person to the horror of his children.
I ought to have familiarized the old
De Lacey to me, and by degrees to have .
discovered myself to the r'est of his
family, when they should have been
prepared {or my approach. But I did
not believe my errors to be irretriev-
able; and, after much consideration,
I resolved to return to the'cottage, seek
the old man, and by my represeth
tions.win him to my party.

“ These thoughts calmed me, and in
the afternoon I sank into a profound
sleep: but the fever of my blood did
not allow me to be visited by peaceful
dreams. The horrible scene of ' the
preceding day was for ever acting be-
fore my eyes: the females were ﬂying,

56 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

and the enraged Felix tearing Ine'from

‘ his father’s feet. I awoke exhausted;
and, ﬁnding that it was already night,
I crept forth from my hiding—place; and
went in search of food.

“ When my hunger was appeased, I
directed my steps towards the well-
known path that conducted to the cot-
tage. All there was at peace. I- crept
into my hovel, and remained in silent
expectation of the accustomed hour
when the family arose; That hour past,
the sun mounted high in the heavens,
but the cottagers did not appear. I
trembled violently, apprehending some
dreadful misfortune. The inside of
the cottage was dark, and I heard no
motion; 1 cannot describe the agony
of this suspense.

“ Presently two countrymen passed
by; but, pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent

run none“ moun'rnxus. 5'!

gesticulations; but I did not understand
what they said, as they spoke the lan-
guage of the country, which diﬂ'ered
from that of my protectors. Soon after,
however, Felix approached with an-
other man: I was surprised, as I knew
that he had not quitted the cottage that
morning, and waited anxiously to dis-
cover, from his discourse, the meaning
of these unusual appearances.
“ ‘ Do you consider,’ said his com-
panion to him, ‘ that you will be obliged
{to pay three. months' rent, and to lose
the produce of your garden? I do not
wish to take any unfair advantage, and
I beg therefore that you will take some
days to cansider of your determina-
. tion.’
“ ‘ It is utterly useless,’ replied Fe-
lix, ‘ we can never again inhabit your
cottage. ,The life of my father is in

the greatest danger, owing to the dread-
!) 6

58 mmuns‘rsm; on,

ful circumstance thst I have'lrellmd. I
My wife Ind my sister will never re-
cover their horror. l entreat you'notto
reason with me any more. Take pos-
session of your tenement, and let line
from this place.’ 4- ‘

“ Felix trembled violently as he said
this. He and his companion entered
the cottage, in which they remninod
for a few minutes, and then deported.
I never saw any of the family of De Lacey
more.

“ I continued for the remainder of
the day in my hovel in a state of utter
and stupid despair: My protectors had
departed, and had broken the only link
that held me to the world. For the ﬁrst
time the feelings of revenge and hatred
ﬁlled my bosom, and I did not strive
to control them; but, allowing myself
to be borne away by the stream, I bent
my mind towards injury and death.

ran uonann uouaruus. 59

When I thought of my friends, of the
mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle
eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite

 beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts
vanished, and a gush of tears some-
what soothed me. But again, when
J reﬂected that they had spurned and

 deserted me, anger returned, a rage of
anger; and, unable to injure any thing
human, I turned my, fury towards inani-
mate objects. As night advanced, I
placed a variety of combustibles around
the cottage; and, after having destroyed
every vestige of cultivation in the gar-
den, I waited with forced impatience
nntil the moon had sunk to- commence
my operations.

“ As the night advanced, a ﬁerce
wind arose from the woods, and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered
in the heavens: the blast. tore along
like a mighty avelénche, and. produced

60 ssssxnssrux; on,

a kind of insanity in my. spirits, that
burst all bounds of reason and reﬂec-
tion. I lighted the dry branch. of a
'tree, and‘danced with fury around the
devoted cottage, my eyes still ﬁxed on
the western horizon, the edge of which
the moon nearly touched. A part of
its orb was at length bid, and .I waved
my brand: it sunk, and, with- a loud
scream, I ﬁred the straw, and heath, and
bushes, which I had collected. The
wind fanned the ﬁre, and the cottage was
quickly enveloped by the ﬂames, which
clung to it, and licked it with their
forked and destroying tongues.

“ As soon as I was convinced that
no assistance could save any part of the
habitation, I quitted the scene, and
sought for refuge in the woods.

“ And now, with the world before
me, whither should I bend my steps? I
resolved to ﬂy far from the scene of my

Tun MODERN mous'msus. 61

.-misfortunes; but to me, hated and de-
spised, every country must be equally
=horrible. At length the thought of
you crossed my mind. I learned from
your papers that 'you were my father,
my creator; and to whom could I apply
'with more ﬁtness than to him who had
given me life ? Among the lessons that
Felix had bestowed upon Saﬁe geogra-
phy had not been omitted : I had learned
‘ from these the relative situations of the
diﬂ‘erent countries’of the earth. You
had mentioned Geneva as the name of
your native town ; and towards this place
I resolved to proceed.

” But how was I to direct myself?
Ilmew that I must travel in a south-
westerly direction to reach my destina-
tion; but the sun was my only guide.
I did not know.the names of the towns
that I was to pass through, nor could
I ask information from a single human

62 “museum; on,

being; but Idid not despair. From
you only could I hope for suocour, al-
though towards you I felt no sentiment
but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heart--
less creator! you had endowed me with
perceptions and passions, and then cut
me abroad an object for the scorn and
horror of mankind. But on you only
had I any claim for pity and redress, and
from you I determined to seek that jus-
tice which I vainly attempted to gain
from any other being that wore the hu-
man form.

“ My travels were long, and the suf-
ferings I endured intense. It was late
in autumn when I quitted the district
where I had so long resided. I tra- '
velled only at night, fearful of encoun-
tering the visage of a human being.
Nature decayed around me, and the
sun became heatless; rain and snow
poured around me; mighty rivers were/

rx

rm: MODERN noun-runs. 63

 frozen; the surface of the earth was
' hard, and chill, and bare,and I found no
shelter. 0h, earth! how often did I im-
precate curses on the cause of my being!
The mildness of my nature had ﬂed,
and all within me was turned to gall and
'bitterness. The nearer I approached to
your habitation, the more deeply did I
feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in
my heart. Snow fell, and the waters
,were hardened, but I rested not. A
few incidents now and then directed
me, and I possessed a map of the coun-
try; but I often wandered wide from
my path. The agony of my feelings
allowed me no respite: no incident
occurred from which my rage and mi-
sery could not extract its food; but a
circumstance that happened when - I
arrived on the conﬁnes of Switzerland,
when the sun had recovered its warmth,
and the earth again began to look

64 tnANunsms; on,

green, conﬁrmed in an especial man-
ner the bitterness and horror of my
feelings. .

. “ I generally rested during the day,
and travelled only when l was secured
by night from the view of man. One
morning, however, ﬁnding that my
pnthiay through a deep wood, I ven-
tured to continue my journey after the
sun had risen; the day, which was one
of the ﬁrst of spring, cheered even me
by the loveliness of its sunhine and
the balminess of the air. I felt emo-
tions of gentleness and pleasure, that
had long appeared dead, revive within
me. Half surprised by the novelty of
these sensations, I allowed myself to be
borne away by them; and, forgetting
my solitude and deformity, dared to be
happy. Soft tears again bedewed my
cheeks, and I even raised my humid
eyes with thankfulness towards the

ma not)an Paousruans. 65

. blessed sun which bestowed such joy
upon me.

I “I continued to wind among the
V 'paths of the wood, until I came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep
and rapid river, into which many of the
trees bent their branches, now budding
with the‘ fresh spring. Here I paused,
not exactly knowing what path to pur-
sue, when I heard the sound of voices,
'that induced me to- conceal myself un-
der the shade of a cypress. I was
' scarcely hid, when a young girl came
running towards the spot where I was
concealed, laughing as if she ran from
some one in sport. She continued her
course along the precipitous sides'of
the» river, when suddenly her foot slipt,
and she fell into the rapid stream. I
rushed from my hiding-place, and, with
extreme labour from the force of the
current, saved her, and dragged her

66 ransxsxsrsm ; on,

I to shore. She was senseless; and I
endeavoured, by every means in my
power, to restore animation, when I
was suddenly interrupted by the ap-
proach of a rustic, who was probably
the person from whom she had play-
fully ﬂed. On seeing me, he darted
towards me, and, tearing the girl from
my arms, hastened towards the deeper
parts of the wood. I followed speedily,
I hardly knew why; but when the man
saw me draw near, be aimed a gun.

which he carried, at my body, and ﬁred.
Iain]: tn ﬂu: manual and my injure“

nun... .v “n, Bun-nu,

with increased swiftness, escaped into
the wood.

“ This was then the reward of my
benevolence! I had saved a human
being from destruction, and, as a re-
compense, I now writhed under the
miserable pain of a wound, which shat-
tered the ﬂesh and bone. The feelings

ms: uonxax mounrnus. 67

- of kindness and gentleness, which I had
; entertained but a few moments before,
Vgave place to hellish rage and gunsh-
‘ing of teeth. Inﬂamed by pain, I vowed
eternal hatred and vengeance to all
mankind. But the agony of my wound
overcame me; my pulses paused, and I
‘- fainted.

“ For some weeks I led a miserable
life in the woods, endeavouring to cure
the wound which I had received. The

' hall had entered my shoulder, and I

7 lmew not whether it had remained there

k or passed through; at any rate I had

no means of extracting it. My suffer-
ings were augmented also by the oppres-
sive sense oi‘ the injustice and ingra-
titude of their-inﬂiction. My daily vows
rose for revenge—a deep and deadly re-
venge, such as would alone compensate
for the outrages and anguish I had en-
dured. '

68 rnwxzss'rnm; on,

“ After some weeks my wound healed,
and I continued my journey.‘ The I»
boursI endured were no .longer to be
alleviated by the. bright sun or gentle
breezes of spring; all joy was but a
mockery, which insulted my. desolate
state; and made me feel more painfully
that I was not made for the enjoymentof

pleasure. . »
“ But my toils now drew near a close;

and, in two months from this time,I
reached the environs of Geneva.

“ It was evening when I arrived, and
I-vretii'ed to a hiding-place among the
ﬁelds that surround it, to meditate in
what manner I should apply to you. I
was oppressed by fatigue and hunger,
and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle
breezes of evening, or the prospect of
the sun setting behind the stupendous
mountains of J are.

“ At this time a slight sleep relieved

-.——.-,... ..

69

TH! IODIRN I'MHETHBUI.

‘me from the pain of reﬂection, which
‘was disturbed by the approach of a

beautiful child, who came running into

3 the recess I had chosen, with all the
; Iportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as
, I- gazed (in him, an idea seized me, that

this little creature was unprejudioed,
and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity. I",
therefore, I could seize him, and edu-
cate him as my companion and friend,

l-should not be so desolate in this peo-
pled earth.

: “ Urged by this impulse, l. seized on
the boy as he passed, and drew him to-
wards me. As soon ashe beheld my
form, he placed his hands before his
eyes, and uttered a shrill scream: I
drew his hand forcibly from his face,
and said, ‘ Child, what is the meaning
of this? I do not intend to hurt you;
listen to me.’

70 rmusnm; on,

“ He struggled violently; ‘ Let me
go,’ he cried; ‘ monster! ugly wretch!
you wish to eat me, and tear meta
pieces—You are an- ogre—Let me go, I
or I will tell my papa.’

“ ‘ Boy, you will never see your father
again; you must come with me.’ ,

“ ‘ Hideous monster! let me go. My
papa is a Syndic—he is M. Franken-
stein—he will punish you. You due -
not keep .me.’

“ ‘ Frankenstein! you belong then
to my enemy—to him towards whoml
have sworn eternal revenge; you shall
be my ﬁrst victim.’ ~ -

“ The child still struggled, and loaded
me with epithets which carried despair
to my heart: ‘I grasped his throat to

 silence him, and in a moment he lay
dead at my feet.

“‘ I gazad on my victim, and my

heart swelled with exultation and hell-

\

was nouns nonmnus. n

ilh triumph: clapping my hands, I ex-
claimed, ‘ I, too, can create desolation;
my. enemy is not impreguable; this
death will carry despair to him, and a
thousand other miseries shall torment
and destroy him.’

"‘ As I ﬁxed my eyes on the child, I
saw something glittering on his breast.
I took it; it was a portrait of a most
lovely woman. In spite of my malig-
uity, it softened and attracted me. For
a few moments I gazed with delight on
her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes,
end her lovely lips; but presently my
rage returned: I remembered that I
.vvu forever deprived of the delights
that such beautiful creatures could be-
stow; and that she whose resemblance
I contemplated would, in regarding me,
have changed that air of divine benig-
nity to one. expressive of disgust and

aﬁ'right.
(

72 p nunnnnnm; on,

“ Can you wonder that such thoughts
transported me with rage? I only
wonder that at that moment, instead of
venting my sensations in eiclamatiom
and agony, I did not rush among man-
kind, and perish in the attempt to do.
stroy them. . .

“ While I was overcome by their
feelings, I left the spot where I had
committed the murder, and was seeking
a more secluded hiding-place, when ‘l
perceived a woman passing near me.
She was young, not indeed so beautiful
asher whose portrait I held, but of an
agreeable aspect, and, blooming in the
' loveliness of youth and healtli.~- Here,
.I thought, is one‘of those whose smiles
are bestowed on all but me; she shall
not escape: thanks to the lessons of
Felix, and the sanguinary laws of man,
»I have learned how to work mischief. I
approached her unperceived, and placed

THE MODERN PROHETHEUS.

the portrait securely in one of the folds
‘of her dress.

“ For some days I haunted the spot
' where these scenes had taken place;
sometimes wishing to see you, some-
times resolved to quit the world and its
V miseries for ever. At length I wan-
.« 'dered towards these mountains, and
 have ranged through their immense re-
cesses, consumed by a burning passion
which you alone can gratify. We may
not part until you have promised to
comply with my requisition. I am
alone, and miserable; man will not as-
sociate with me; but one as deformed
and horrible as myself would not deny
herself to me. My companion must be
of the same species, andhave the same
defects. This being you must create."

   

VOL. 1!. . B

74 rnsxxnzwsnm; on,

CHAPTER V.

THE being ﬁnished speaking, and
ﬁxed his looks upon me in expectation
of a reply. Butl was bewildered,
perplexed, and unable to arrange my
ideas sufﬁciently to understand the full
extent of his proposition. He con—
tinned-

“ You must create a'female for me,
with whom I can live in the inter-
change of those sympathies necessary
for my being. This you alone can do ;
and I demand it of you as a right which
you must not refuse to concede."

The latter part of his tale had kin-
dled anew in me the anger that had

(

Inn 1101mm noun-near. 75

died away while he narrated his peace-
ﬁll life among the cottagers, and, as he
said this, I could no longer suppress the
{age that burned within me.
“ I do refuse it,” I replied; “ and no
'mﬂure shall ever extort a consent from
ﬁre. ' You may render me the most
miserable of men, but you shall never
make me base in my own eyes. Shall
create another like yourself, whose
joint wickedness might desolate the
world. Begone! I have answered you;
you may torture me, butI will never
consent.”
' “ You are in the wrong,” replied the
ﬁend; “ and, instead of threatening, I
.am content to reason with you. lam
malicious because I am miserable. Am
.I not shunned and hated by all man-
kind ? You, my creator, would tear me
to pieces, and triumph; remember that,
‘and tell me why lshould pity man
15 2

76 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

more than he pities me? You would
not call it murder, if you could precipi-
tate me into one of those ice-rifts, and
‘destroy my frame, the work of your
own hands. Shall I respect man, when
he contemns me? Let him live with
me in the interchange of kindness; and,
instead of injury, I would bestow every
beneﬁt-upon him with tears of grati-
tude at his acceptance. But that can-
not be ; the human senses are insur-
mountable barriers to our union. Yet
mine shall not be the submission of
abject slavery. I will revenge my in-
juries: if I cannot inspire love, I will
cause fear; and chieﬂy'towards you
my arch-enemy, because my creator, do
I swear inextinguisliable hatred. Have
a care: I will work at your destruc-
tion, nor ﬁnish until I desolate your
heart, so that you shall curse the hour
of your birth.”

ms noon): raouarnsus. ‘77

r A ﬁendish rage animated him as he
said this; his face was wrinkled into
contortions too horrible for human eyes
to behold; but presently he calmed
himself, and proceeded—

- “ I intended to reason. This passion
'is detrimental to me; for you do not
reﬂect that you are the cause of its
excess. If any being felt emotions of
benevolence towards me, I should re-
turn them an hundred and an hundred
Hfold; for that one creature’s sake, I
would make peace with the whole kind!
But I now indulge in' dreams' of bliss
that cannot be realized. What I ask
of- you is reasonable and moderate; I
demand a creature of anothersex, but
as hideous as myself; the gratiﬁcation
is small, but it i all that I can receive,
and it shall content me. -It is true, we
shall be monsters, cut 06' from allthe
world ; but on that account we shall be

r

’18 nauxmvsnm; on,

more attached to one another. Our
lives will not be happy, but they will be-
harmless, and free from the misery l
now feel. Oh! my creator, make me
happy; let me feel gratitude townnls
you for one beneﬁt! Let me' 'see
that I excite the sympathy o£ some
eiisting thing; do not deny 'me my n-
quest!” ' - -

I was moved. I shuddered when]
thought of the possible consequence!
of my consent; but I felt that there was
some justice in his argument. His
tale, and the feelings he now expressed,
proved him to be a creature of ﬁne sen-
‘ sations;' and did I not as his maker,
owe him all the portion of happiness
that it was in my power to bestow PI He
saw my change of feeling, and con-
tinued— ' '1

“ If you consent, neither you ’nor any
other human being shall ever see us

TEE NOD23)! noun'rnnvs. 79

again: I will go to the vast wilds of
South America. My food is not that of
man; I do not destroy the lamb and
the kid to glut my appetite; acorns
' and berries aﬂ‘ord me sufﬁcient nourish-
ment. My companion will be of the
' same nature as myself, and will be
content with the same fare. We shall
I make our bed of dried leaves; the sun
will shine on us as on man, and will
ripen our food. The picture I present
to you is peaceful and human, and you
must feel that you could deny it only in
the wantonness of power and cruelty.
Pitiless as you have been towards me,
I now see compassion in your eyes; let
me seize the favourable moment, and
persuade you to promise what I so at-
dently desire.”
“ You propose,” replied I, “ to ﬂy
from the habitations of man, to dwell

80 rasnuns’run; on, -

in those wilds where the beasts of the
ﬁeld will be your only companionl.
How can you, who long for the‘ love
and sympathy of man, persevere in this
exile? You will return, and again
seek their kindness, and yOu will-meet
with their detestation; your evil p‘as—
sions will be renewed, and you will then
have a companion to aid you in the task I
of- destruction.’ This may not be: cease
to argue the point, for I cannot eon-
sent.”

“ How incpnstant are your feelings!
but a moment ago you were moved by
my representations, and why do you
again harden yourself to my com-
plaints? I swear to you, by the earth'
which I inhabit, and by you that made
me, that, with the companion you
bestow, I will quit the neighbour-
hood of man, and dwell, as it may

um non)an nounrum. 81

chance, in the most savage of places.
My evil passions will have ﬂed, for I shall
meet with sympathy! my life will ﬂow
quietly away, and, in my dying moments,
I shall not curse my maker.” .

His words had a strange effect upon
. me. ’I compassionated him, and some-
times felt a Wish to console him; but
when I looked upon him, when I saw
the ﬁlthy mass that moved and talked,
my heart sickened, and my feelings
were altered to those of horror and
hatred. I tried to stiﬂe these sensa-
tions; I thought, that as I could not
sympathize with him, I had no right to
withhold from him the small portion'of
happiness which was yet in my power
to bestow. »

“ You swear,” I said,‘ “ to be harm-
less; but have you not already shown a

degree of malice that should reason-
2 5

82 rnsnxznsum; on,

ably make me distrust you P 3 May not
even this be a faint that will increase
your triumph by ,aﬁ'ordiug a wider
scope for your revenge.”

“ How is this ? I must not be trliled
with ; and I demand an answer. If I have
no ties and no aﬁ'ections, hatred and
' vice must be my portion; the love of
another eviil destroy the cause of my
crimes, and I shall become a thing, of
whose existence every one will be igno-
rant. My vices are the children of a
forced solitude that I abhor; and my
virtues will necessarily arise when I live
in communion with an equal. I shall
feel the affections of a sensitive being,
and become linked to the chain of ex-
istence and events, from which I am
now- excluded.”

I paused some time to reﬂect on all
he had related, and the various argu-

THE MODERN PBOKETHEUS. 88

ments which he had employed. I thought
of the promise of virtues which he had
displayed on the opening of his existence,

.and the subsequent blight of all kindly

feeling by the loathing and scorn which
his protectors had manifested towards

'him. His power and'threats were not

omitted in my calculations: a creature
who could exist in the ice-caves of the
glaciers, and hide himself from pursuit
among the ridges of inaccessible preci-
pices, was a being possessing faculties
it Would be vain to cope with. Alter a
long pause of reﬂection, I concluded
that the justice due both to him and my
Yellow-creatures demanded of me that I
should comply with his request. Turn-
ing to him, therefore, I said—

“ I consent to your demand, on your
solemn oath to quit Europe for ever,
and every other place in the neighbour-

84! puritans-rain; on,

hood of man, as soon as I shall deliver
into your hands a female who will ac-
company you in your exile.”

“ I swear,” he cried, “ by the sun,
and by the blue sky of heaven, that if
you grant my prayer, while‘they exist
you shall never behold me again. Be-
part to your home, and commence your
labours: I shall watch their'progre'ss
with unutterable anxiety; and fear not
but that when you are ready I shall
appear.” i

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me,
fearful, perhaps, of any change in my
sentiments. I saw him descend the
mountain with greater speed than the
ﬂight of an eagle, and quickly lost him
among the undulations of the sea of ice. ’

I‘lis tale had occupied the whole day;
and the sun was upon the verge of the
horizon when he departed. I knew

THE MODERN FEOIII‘HIUS. 85

that I ought to hasten my descent to-
wards the valley, as I should soon be
' encompassed in darkness; but my heart
-was heavy, and my steps slow. The
. labour 'of winding among the little
paths of the mountains, and ﬁxing my
feet ﬁrmly as I advanced, perplexed
me, occupied as I was by the emotions
which the occurrences of the day had
produced. Night was far advanced,
when I came to the half-way resting-
-place, and seated myself beside the
fountain. The stars shone at intervals,
as the clouds passed from over them;
the dark pines rose before me, and
every here and there a broken tree lay
on the ground: it was- a scene of won-
derful solemnity, and stirred strange
thoughts within me. I wept bitterly;
and, clasping my hands in agony, lI
exclaimed, “ Oh! stars; and clouds,
and winds, ye are all about to mock

86 rumxsrnm; on,

me: if ye really pity me, crush semia-
' tion and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart and
leave me in darkness.” '

These were vvild and miserable
thoughts; but I cannot describe to you
how the eternal twinkling of the stars
weighed upon me, and bowl listened to
every blast of wind, as if it were a dull
ugly siroc on its way to consume me.

' Morning dawned before I arrived at
the village of Chamounix; but my pre-
sence, so haggard and strange, hardly
calmed the fe'ars of my family, who had
waited the whole night in anxious ex-
pectation of my return.

The following day we returned to-
Geneva. The intention of my father
in coming had been to divert my mind,
and to restore me to my lost tranquillity;
but the medicine had been fatal. And,
unable to account for the excess of

was Mons“ rnounrnus. 87

i misery I appeared to suﬂ‘er, he hastened
Etc return home,,hoping the quiet and
’ monotony of a domestic life would by
5 degrees. alleviate my sufferings from
F whatever cause they might spring.
It- For myself, I was. passive-in all their
arrangements; and the gentle affection
1- of my beloved Elizabeth was inade-
. quate to draw me from the depth of my
despair. The promise I had made to
the daemon weighed upon my mind,
.. like Dante’s iron cowl on the heads of
the hellish hypocrites. All pleasures
. of earth and sky passed before me like
a dream, and that thought only bad to
me the reality of life. Can you wonder,
that sometimes a kind of insanity pos-
sessed me, or that I saw continually
about me a multitude of ﬁlthy ani-
~ mals inﬂicting on me incessant torture,

that often extorted screams and bitter
groans?

88 ' 23421132131313; 0:,

By degrees, however, these feelings
became calmed. I entered again into
the every-day scene of life, if not with
interest, at least with some degree of
tranquillity. V

run MODERN rnoumsus. 89

CHAPTER VI.

DAY after day, week after week, passed
away on my return to Geneva; and I
1 could not collect the courage to recom-
rfigmence my work. I feared the vengeance
the disappointed ﬁend, yet I was
- “unable to overcome my repugnance to
the task.which was enjoined me. I
found that I could not compose a fe-
male without again devoting several
months to profound study and labo-

» rious disquisition. I had heard of
some discoveries having been made by

I'

90 rnxxmsmm; on,

an English philosopher, the knowledge
of which was material to my success,
and I sometimes thought of obtaining ‘
my father’s consent to visit England
for this purpoe; but I clung to every
pretence of delay, and could not resolve
to interrupt my returning tranquillity.
My health, which had hitherto declined,
was now much restored; and my spi-
rits, when unchecked by the memory of
my unhappy promise, roso proportion-
ably. My father saw this change with
pleasure, and he turned his thoughts
towards the best method of eradicating
the remains of my melancholy, which
every now and then would return by
ﬁts, and with a devouring blackness
overcast the approaching sunshine. At
these moments I took refuge in the
. most perfect solitude. I passed whole
days on the lake alone in a little boat,

THE uoanN raounmzus. 9!

munching the clouds, and listening to
{the rippling of the waves, silent and
‘ listless. But the fresh air and bright
-. sun seldom failed to restore me to some
td'egree of composure; and, on my re-
: turn, I met the salutations of my friends

with a readier smile and a more cheer-
. ful heart, '

It was after my return from one of
these rambles that my father, calling
me aside, thus addressed me :—

“I am happy to remark, my dear
son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures, and seem to be returning to
yourself. And yet you are still un-
happy, and still avoid our society. For
some time I was lost in conjecture as
to the cause of this; but yesterday an
idea struck me, and if it is well founded,
I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on
such a point would be not only use.

92 snsnunsrmx; on,

less, but draw down treble misery'o'n us
all.” I ‘

I trembled violently at this exordium,
and my father continued— .

“ I confess, my son, that I have al-
ways looked forward to your marriage
with your cousin as the tie of our do-
mestic comfort, and the stay of my de-
clining years. You were attached to
each other from your earliest infancy;
you studied together, and appeared, in
dispositions and tastes, entirely suited
to one another. But so blind is the
experience of man, that what I con-
ceived to be the best assistants to my
plan may have entirely destroyed it.
You, perhaps, regard her as your sister,
without any wish that she might be-
come your wife. Nay, you may have
met with another whom you may love;
and, considering yourself as bound in

TEE IODERN PROHETHEUS. 93

honour to your cousin, this struggle
may oCcasion the‘poignant miery which
. you appear to feel." ' '
“ My dear father, re-assure yourself.
- I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely.
»l:never saw any woman, who excited,
' as Elizabeth does, my warmest admira-
tion and aﬁ'ection. My future hopes
and prospects are entirely bound up in
the expectation of our union.” 1
“ The expression of your sentiments
on this subject, my dear Victor, gives
me more pleasure than I have for some
time experienced. If you feel thus,
we shall assuredly be happy, however
present events may cast a gloom over
us. . But it is this gloom which ap-
pears to have taken so strong a hold of
your mind, that I wish to dissipate.
Tell me, therefore, whether you object
to an immediate solemnization of the
marriage. We have been unfortunate,

941 FRANKENSTEIN; OR. A

and recent events have drawn as from
that every-day tranquillity beﬁtting my
years and inﬁrmities. You are younger;
yet I do not suppose, possessed‘as you
are of a competent fortune, that "an
'early marriage would at all interfere
with any future plans of honour and
utility that you may have formed. Do
not suppose, however, that I wish to
dictate happiness to you, or that a delay
on your part would cause me any se-
rious uneasiness. Interpret my words
with candour, and anSWer me, 1 com,
jure you, with conﬁdence and sincerity.”

I listened to my father in silence,
and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly
in my mind a multitude of thoughts,
and endeavoured to arrive at some con-
clusion. Alas! to me the idea of an
immediate union with my cousin was
one of horror and dismay. l was‘bound

ms, MODERN raomunnus. 95

by a solemn promise, which I 'had not
yet fulﬁlled, and dared not break; or’,
if I did, what manifold miseries might
not impend over me and my devoted
ﬁmily! Could I enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging
wund my neck, and bowing me to the
'grlound. I must perform my' engage-
ment, and let the monster depart with
his mate, before I allowed myself to en-
joy the delight of an union from which
I expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity im-
posed upon me of either journeying to
England, or entering into a long corre—
opondence with those philosophers of
that country, whose knowledge and dis-
coveries were of indispensable use to
me in my preent undertaking.’ The
latter method of obtaining the desired
intelligence was dilatory and unsatis-
factory: besides, any variation was

96 rmuxsus’rm; on,

agreeable to me, and I was delightql
with the idea of spending a year or two
in change of scene and variety of occu-
pation, in absence from my family;
during which period some event might
happen which would restore me to them
in peace and happiness: my promise
might be fulﬁlled, and the monster
have departed; or some accident might
occur to destroy him, and put an end to '
my slavery for ever.

These feelings dictated my answer to
my father. I expressed a wish to visit
England; but, concealing the true rem
sons of this request, I clothed myde-
sires under the guise of wishing to
travel, and see the world before I sat
down for life within the walls of my nap
tive town. .

I urged my‘ entreaty with earnest-
ness, and my father was easily induced
to comply; for a more indulgent and

THE MODERN PROMITEEVL

Hess dictatorial parent did not exist
iiiitipon earth. Our plan was soon ar-
Ej‘anged. I should travel to Strasburgh,
{"mhereClerval would join me. Some
rt time would be spent in the towns
ﬁof Holland, and our principal stay
vyould be in England. We should re-
‘fturn by France; and it was agreed
What. the~tour should occupy the space
pf’two years.
‘ .My father pleased himself with the
reﬂection, that my union with Elizabeth
should take place immediately. on my
. return to Geneva, “ These two years,”
rid he, “ will pass swiftly, and it will
thelast delaythat will oppose itself
to your happiness. And, indeed, I
earnestly desire that period to arrive,
when we shall all be united, and nei-
ther hopes or fears arise to disturb our
domestic calm.”

“ I am content,” I replied, “ with

VOL. II. I?

   

\

98 - rmxnsrmm on,

your arrangemeng By that time we
shall both have become wiser, andl
hope happier, than we at present are."
I sighed; but my father kindly forbore
to question me further concerning the
cause of my dejection. He hoped that
new scenes, and the amusement oftnp
velling, would restore my tranquillity.
I now made. arrangements for my
journey; but one feeling haunted me,
which ﬁlled me with fear and agitation. 5
During my absence 1 should leave my
friends unconscious of the existence of
their enemy, and unprotected from his
attacks, exasperated as he might be by
my departure. But he had promised
to follow me wherever 1 might go; and
would he not accompany me to Eng-
land? This imagination was dreadful
in itself, but soothing, inasmuch as it
supposed the safety of my friends. I
was agonized with the idea of the pos-

m 'MODIIN PMEI‘HEUS. 99

rxibility that the reverse of this might
3 happen. But through the whole period
I during which I was the slave of my
vtl'eature, I allowed myself-to he go-
5‘- verned by the impulses of the moment;
.5' and my present sensations strongly inti-
' noted that the ﬁnd would follow me,
and exempt- my family from the danger
of his machinations.

It was in the latter end of August
that I departed, to pass two years of
exile. Elizabeth approved of the res-
asons of my departure, and only re-
gretted that she had not the same op-
portunities of enlarging her experience,
and cultivating her understanding. She
wept, however, as she bade me fare-
well, and entreated me to return happy
and tranquil. “ We all,” said she,

"“,depend upon you; and if you are
miserable, what must be our feel-
ings i”

r 2

100 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

' I threw myself into the carriage that
was to convey me' away, hardly know-
ing whither I was going,’and careless
of what was passing around. .I .re-
membered only, and it was with..a
bitter anguish that I reﬂected on it.
to order that my chemical instruments
should be packed to go with me: for
I resolved to fulﬁl my promise while
abroad, and return, if possible, a free
man. Filled with dreary imaginations,
I passed through many beautiful and
majestic scenes; but my eyes were ﬁxed
and unobserving. I could only think
of the bourne of my travels, and the
work which was to occupy me whilst
they endured. ,

After some days spent in listless indo-
lence, during which I traversed many
leagues, I arrived at Strashurgh, where I
waited two days for Clerval. He came.
Alas, how great was the contrast between

'n-In no!)an nonrnaus. 101

usi He was alivetoevery new scene; joy-
~ ful when he saw the beauties of the set-
ting' sun, and more happywhen he beheld
. it rise, and recommence a new day. He
pointed out to me the shifting colours
10f the landscape, and the appearances
' of the sky. “ This is what it is to-
live,” he cried, “ now I enjoy existence!
" But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherei
fore are youdesponding and sorrow-
ful !”' In truth, I was occupied by
gloomy thoughts, and neither saw the
descent of the evening star, nor the
golden sun-rise reﬂected in the Rhine.—
.And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Clerval,
who observed the scenery with an eye of
feeling and delight, than in listening to
my reﬂections. l, a miserable wretch,
haunted by a curse that shit up every
avenue to enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine

I.

102 mammal; on,

in a boat from Strasbnr'gh to Rotten
dam, whence we might take shipping
for London. During this voyage, we
passed by manywillowy islands, and
saw several beautiful towns. We staid
a day- at Manheim, and, on the ﬁﬁh
from our departure from Strasburgh,
arrived at Mayence. The course of~ths
Rhine below Mayence becomes much
more picturesque. The river descenﬁ
rapidly, and. winds between hills, not
high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. '
We saw many ruined castles standing
on the edges of precipices, surrounded
by black woods, high and inaccessible.
This part of the Rhine, indeed, pre-
sents a singularly variegated landscape.
In one spot you view rugged bills,
ruined castles overlooking tremendous
precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing
beneath; and, on the sudden turn of-a
promontory, ﬂourishing vineyards, with

THE MODERN PROMITEBUS. -

green sloping banks, and a meandering
river, and populous towns, occupy the
Ioeue.

 We travelled at the time of the vint-
Ige, and heard the song of the la-
bourers, as we glided down the stream.
Even I, depressed in mind, and my-
Ip‘irits continually agitated by gloomy
failings, even I was pleased. I lay at
the bottom of. the boat, and, as I gazed
on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed
to drink in a. tranquillity to which I
hid long been a stranger. And if these
were my sensations, who can describe
those of Henry? He felt as if he had
been transported to Fairy-land, and en-
joyed a happiness seldom tasted by
man. “ I have seen,” he said, “the
most beautiful scenes of my own
country; I have visited the lakes of
Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy
mountains descend almost perpendicu-

r

104 tnunxsum; on,

larly to the water, casting black and im-
penetrahle shades, which would muse
a gloomy and mournful appearance,
were it not for the most verdant islands
that relieve the eye by their gay appear-
ance; I have seen this lake agitated
by a tempest, when the wind tore up
whirlwinds of water, and gave you an
idea of what the water—spout must be
on the great ocean, and the waves dash
with fury the base of the mountain,
where the priest and his mistress were
overwhelmed by an aveIAnche', 'and
where their dying voices are still said
to be heard amid the pauses of the
nightly wind; I have seen the moun-
tains of La Valais, and the Pays de
Vaud: but this country, Victor, pleases
me more than all those wonders. The
mountains of Switzerland are more
majestic and strange; but there is a
charm in the banks of this divine river,

run noon): noun-mans. 105

that I never before saw equalled. - Look
v-at that castle which overhangs yon pre-
cipice; and that also on the island, al-
most concealed amongst the foliage of
those lovely trees; and now that group
of labourers coming from among their
vines; and that village half hid in the
recess of the mountain. 0h, surely,
the spirit that inhabits and guards
this place has a soul more in bar-
mony with man, than those who pile
the glacier, or retire to the inaccessible
peaks of the mountains of our own
.country.” '
 Clervall beloved friend! even now
it delights me to record your words, and
to dwell on the praise of which you are
so eminently deserving. He was a
being formed in the “ very poetry of
nature." His wild and enthusiastic
imagination was chastened by the sen-
sibility of his heart. 1 His soul over-
! 5

I

106 ' mnunsrmg- on;

ﬂowed with ardent aﬂ'ections; and-ht
friendship was of that devoted and won‘
drous nature that the worldlyminded
teach us to look for only in the imagil
nation. But even human sympathies
were not suﬂicient to satisfy his eager
mind. The scenery of external nature,
which others regard only with admiri-
tion, he loved with ardour: .‘ '

 

“ The sounding cataract
Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,

The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to him >
An appetite; a feeling, and a love,

That had no need of a remoter charm,

By thought supplied, or any interest

Unhorrawed from the eye*."

And where does he now exist»? Is
this gentle and lovely being lost for
ever? Has this mind so replete with

' Wordsworth'l Tintern Abbey.

ms: HODka PBOIIETHEDB. m

ﬂeas. imaginations fanciful and mag-
iﬁcent, which formed a world, whose
histence depended on-the life of its
Renter; has this mind perished? Does
i now only exist in' my memory? No,
Rx is not thus; your form so divinely
nought, and beaming with beauty,
ha decayed, but your spirit still visits
Ind consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these
ineﬁ'ectual words are but a slight tribute
to the unexampled worth of Henry,
but they soothe my heart, overﬂowing
with the anguish which his remem-
brance creates. I will proceed with
my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the
plains of Holland; and we resolved to
post the remainder of our way; for the
wind was contrary, and the stream of
the river was too gentle to aid us.

Our journey here lost the interest

- r

108 "mans-rm; on,

arising from beautiful scenery; but we
arrived in a few days at'Rotterdsm,
whence we proceeded by sea to Eng-
land. .It was on a clear morning,
in the latter days of December, that 'I
ﬁrst saw the white cliﬁ's of Britain.
The banks of the Thames presented a
new scene; they were ﬂat, but~fertile,
and almost every town, was marked by
‘ the remembrance of some story. , We
saw Tilbury Fort, and remembered the
Spanish armada; Gravesend, Woolwich,
and Greenwich, places which I had
heard of even in my country.
 At length we saw the numerons
steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering
above all, and the Tower famed in
English history.

ran uonnx mun-anus. 109

CHAPTER VII.

LONDON was ourpresent point of rest;
'we determined to remain several months
in this wonderful and celebrated city.
Clerval desired the intercourse of the
men of 'genius and talent who ﬂou-
rished at this time; but this was with
me a secondary object; I was princi-
pally occupied with the means of ob.
'uining the' information necessary for
'the completion of my promise, and
quickly availed myself of the letters of
introduction that I had brought with
me, addressed to the most distinguished
natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during

I

110 - FRANKENSTEIN; on,

my days of study and happiness, it would
have aﬂ'orded me inexpressible pleasure.
But a blight had come over my exist-
ence, and I only visited these people for
the sake of the information'they might
give me on the subject in which my
interest wasso terribly profound. Com-
pany was irksome to me; when alone,
[could ﬁll my mind with the sightsof
heaven and earth; the voice of Henry
soothed me, and I could thus cheat my-
self into a transitory peace. But busy
uninteresting joyous faces brought back
despair to my heart. ‘I saw an insur-
mountable barrier placed between me
and my fellow men; this barrier was
sealed with the blood of William and
Justine; and to reﬂect on the event!
connected with those names ﬁlled my
soul with anguish. . 
But in Clerval I saw the image of my
former self; he was inquisitive, ant

was nouns mn’rms. 111

anxious to gain experience and instruc-
tion. The diﬁ‘erence of manners which
he observed was to him an inex-
haustible source of instruction and
V amusement. He was for ever busy; and
the only check to his enjoyments was
my sorrowful and dejected mind. I
tried to conceal this as much as pos-
sible, that I might not debar him from
the pleasures natural to one, who was
entering on a new scene of life, undis-

turbed by any care or bitter recollec-
' tion. I often refused to accompany
him, alleging another engagement, that
 I might remain alone. I now also be-
gan to collect the materials necessary
for- my new creation, and this was to
me- like the torture of single drops of
water continually falling on the head.
Every thought that was devoted to it
was an extreme anguish, and every
word that I spoke in allusion to it

112 nausea-1m; on,

caused my lips to quiver,‘ and myhelrt
to palpitate.

Aﬁer' passing some months in Lon-
- don, we received a letter from a person .
in Scotland, who had formerly been
our visitor at Geneva. He mentioned
the beauties of his native country,-and
asked us if those were not suﬂ‘icient
allurements to induce us to prolong
our journey as far north as Perth, where
he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to
accept this invitation; and I, although
I abhorred society, wished to view
again mountains and streams, and all
the wondrous works with which Nature
adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

We had arrived in England at the
beginning of October, and it was now
February. We accordingly determined
to commence our journey towards the
north at the expiration of another
month. In this expedition we did not

rm: noon: mamas. 118

5 intend to folldu the great road to Edin-
burgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford,
Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes,
resolving to arrive at the completion of
this tour about the end of July. I
packed up my chemical instruments, and
the materialsl had collected, resolving
to ﬁnish my labours in some obscure
nook in the northern highlands of Scot-
land. .
. We .quitted London on the 27th of
March, and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful fo-
rest. This was a new scene to u moun-
taineers; the majestic oaks, the quan-
tity of game, and the herds of stately
deer, were all novelties to us.

From thence we proceeded to 0x-
' ford. As we entered this city, our minds
were ﬁlled with the remembrance of
the events that had been transacted
there more than a century and a half

r

114 FIANKINB'I‘BII; on,

before. It was here that Charles I.
had collected his forces. This city had
remained faithful to him, after the whole
nation had forsaken his cause to join
the standard of parliament and liberty.
The memory of that unfortunate king.
and his companions, the amiable Falk-
land, the insolent Goring, his queen;
and. son, gave a peculiar interest to
every part of the city, which they might
be supposed to have inhabited. The
spirit of elder days founda dwelling
here, and . we delighted to trace its
footsteps. If these feelings had.not
found an'imaginary gratiﬁcation, the
appearance of the city had yet in itself
suﬂicient beauty to obtain our admira-
tion. The colleges are ancient and
picturesque; the streets are almost mag-
niﬁcent; and the lovely Isis, which
ﬂows beside it through meadows of ex-
quisite verdure, is spread forth into a

ms nouns): nounmus. 115

"placid expanse of waters, which reﬂects
hits majestic assemblage of towers, and
{aspires and domes, emboomed among
Eng-ed trees.

I enjoyed this scene; and yet my en-
joyment was embittered both by the
memory of the past, and the anticipa-
tion of the future. I was formed for
peaceful happiness. During my youth-
ful‘. days discontent never visited my
mind: and if 1 was ever overcome by-
ennui, the sight of what is beautiful in
nature, or the study of what is excellent
and sublime in the productions of man,
could always interest my heart, and‘
communicate elasticity to my spirits.
But I am a blasted tree; the bolt has
entered my soul ; and I felt then that I
should survive to exhibit, what I shall
soon cease to be~—a miserable spectacle
of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others,
and intolerable to myself.

116 . FRANKENSTEIN; on,

We passed a considerable period at
Oxford, rambling among its environs, .
and endeavouring to identify every spot
which might relate to the most ani-
mating epoch of English history. Our
little voyages of discovery were often
prolonged by the successive objects that ‘
presented themselves. We visited the ‘
tomb of the illustrious Hampdenfand
the ﬁeld on which that patribt fell. ‘ For
a moment my soul was elevated from
its debasing and miserable fears to con-
template the divine ideas of liberty and
self sacriﬁce, of which these sights were
the monuments and the remembrancers.
For an instant I dared to shake off my
chains, and look around me with a free
and lofty spirit; but the iron had eaten
into my ﬂesh, and I sank again, trem-
bling and hopeless, into my miserable
self. --

We left Oxford with regret; and pm

was none“ mourning. 117

receded to Matlock, which was our next
place of rest”. The country in the neigh-
bourhood of this village resembled, to a
g'mterdegree, the scenery of Switzer-
land; but every thing is on a lower-
Icale, and the green hills want the crown
of distant white Alps, which. always at-
tend on the piny mountains of my native
~country. We visited the wondrous cave,
and the little cabinets of natural history,
where the curiosities are disposed in the
same manner as in the collections at
‘ Servox and Chamounix. The latter
name made -me tremble, when pro-
nounced by Henry; and I hastened to
‘ quvithatlock, with which that terrible
i scenewas thus associated.

From Derby still journeying north-
ward, we passed two months in Cum-
herland and Westmorland. I could

i now almost fancy myself among the

118 mmxsrm; on,

Swiss mountains. The little patches of
snow which yet lingered on the northern
sides of the mountains, the lakes, and!!!
dashing of the rocky streams, were all
familiar and dear sights to me. Hen
also we made some acquaintances, who
almost contrived to cheat me into hap-
' pinees. The delight of Clerval was pro-
portionany greater than mine; his mind
expanded in the company of men of
talent, and he found in his own nature
greater capacities and resources than he
could have imagined himself to have
possessed while be associated with his
inferior-s. “ i could pass my life here,”
said he to me; “ and among these
mountains I should scarcely regret Switz-
erland and the Rhine.”
But he found that a traveller’s life is
one that includes much pain .amidst its
enjoyments. His feelings are for ever

ma nonnnx Pnounrasus. ‘119

pin the stretch; and when he begins to
' 'nk into repose, he ﬁnds himself obliged
.‘00 quit that on which he rests in pleasure ' V
- r something new, which again engages
"his attention, and which also he'forsakes
Jar other novelties. -

We had scarcely visited the various
. lakes of Cumberland and Westmor-
E1 land, and conceived an affection for
ﬂeome of the inhabitants, when the pe-
' riod of our appointment with our Scotch
friend approached, and we left them to
travel on. For my own part I was not
sorry. I had now neglected my promise
for some time, and I feared the effects
of the daemon’s disappointment. He
might remain in Switzerland, and wreak
his vengeance on my relatives. This
idea pursued me, and tormented me at
every moment from which I might other-
wise have snatched repose and peace. I
waited for my letters with feverish im-

f

   
  
   
  

190 FIANIENGTEI'N 5 on,

patience: if they were delayed, I rm
miserable, and overcome by a thousand
(fears; and when they arrived, and I saw
the superscription of Elizabeth or my
father, I hardly dared to read and ascer-
tain my fate. Sometimes I thought till!
the ﬁend followed me, and might ex-
pedite my remissness by murdering my
companion. When these thoughts pos-
sessed me, I would not quit Henry for a
moment, but followed him as his shadow,
to protect him from the fancied rage of
his destroyer. I felt as if I had com-
mitted some great crime, the conscious-
ness of which haunted me. I was guilt-
less, but I had indeed drawn down a
horrible curse upon my head, as mortal
as that of crime.

I visited Edinburgh with languid
eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have interested the most. unfortunate
being. Clerval did not like it so well

 

was MODERN rsouz’rnsus. 121

an Oxford ;' for the antiquity of the lat-
‘ter 'city was more pleasing to him. But
:the beauty and regularity of the new
Itown of Edinburgh, its romantic castle,
find its environs, the most delightful
"in the world, Arthur’s Seat, St. Ber-
nard’s Well, and the Pentlund Hills,
‘compenssted him for the change, and
ﬁlled him with cheerfulness and ad-
miration. But I was impatient to arrive
; at the termination of my journey.
, '- We left Edinburgh in a week, ‘pass-
ing through'Coupsr, St. Andrews, and
along the banks of the ’I‘ay, to Perth,
where our friend expected us. But I
- was in no mood to laugh and talk with
strangers, or enter into their feelings or
plans with the good humour expected
from a guest; and accordingly I told
Clerval that I wished to make the tour
of‘Scotlsnd alone. “ Do you," said I,
VOL. 11. , a

122 IRAHKBNETIIN; on,

“ enjoy yourself, and let this be our ren-
dezvous. I may be absent a month or
two; but do not interfere with my
motions, I entreat you: leave me to
peace and solitude for a short time; and
when I return, I hope it will be with I
lighter heart, more congenial to your
own temper.”

Henry wished to dissuade me; but,
seeing the bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate. He entreated me to write
often. “I had rather be with you,"
he said, “ in your solitary rambles, than
with these Scotch people, whom [do not
know: hasten then, my dear friend, to
return, that I may again feel myself
somewhat at home, which I cannot do in
your absence.”

Having parted from my friend, 1
determined to visit some remote spot
of Scotland, and ﬁnish my work in soli-

— - V—WEW. ‘ wwmr - I

was loans non-rams. 128

tude. I did not doubt but that the
monster followed me, and would discover
himself to me when Ishould haveﬁnished,
that he might receive his companion.
With this resolution I traversed the
northern highlands, and ﬁxed on one of

"the remotest of the Orkneys as the

scene labours. It was a place ﬁtted for
such a work, being hardly more than a
rock, whose high sides’were continually

r beaten upon by the waves. The soil

was barren, scarcely affording pasture

' for s few miserable cows, and oatmeal
.tbr its inhabitants, which consisted of

ﬁve persons, whose gaunt and scraggy
limbs gave tokens of their miserable
fore. Vegetables and bread, when they
indulged in such luxuries, and even
fresh voter, was to be procured from
the main land, which was about ﬁve

- miles distant.

0n the whole island there were but
02

124- mttxmsmu ; '01,

three miserable huts, and one d’ thee
was vacant when I arrived. This I
hired. It contained but two-rooms, and
these exhibited all 'the squalidness of
the most miserable penury. The thatch
had fallen in, the walls were unplastered,
and the door was off its' hinges. .I
ordered it to be repaired, bought some
furniture, and took’ possessidn; an in-
cident which would, doubtless, have '0:-
V casioned some‘surprise, had not all the
senses of the‘cottagers been benumbed
by want and squalid poverty. As it
was, I lived ungazed at and unmoles‘ted,
hardly thanked for the pittance ‘of food
and clothes which I gave; so much
does suffering blunt even the coarsest
sensations of men. '

In this retreat I devoted the morning
to labour; but in the evening, when the
weather permitted, I walked 'on the
stony beach of the 'sea, to listen to the

i .

THE noun}: mount-rims. 125

waves .Ks they roared, and dﬂhEd at my

D, changing scene.

.‘ feet. It was a monotonous,» yet ever-

I thought ofSwitzer-
. land; itwas far dilt'erent from this deso-

late and appalling landscape. Its hills

' are scattered thickly in the, plains.

are covered with, vines, and its cottages
Its

, fair lakes reﬂect a blue and, gentle sky i

and, when troubled by the winds, their
tumult is but as the play of a lively in-
fant", when compared to the roarings’ of
the giant ocean.

In this manner It distributed, rny oc-
cupations when I ﬁrst arrived; but, as
I proceeded in my labour,» it became

«every day more horrible and irksome
to me‘ Sometimes I could not prevail
onmyself to enter my laboratory for se-
veral; days; and at other times I toiled
day and night'in order to complete my
work. It was indeed a ﬁlthy process in

126 ramxzﬁsmmn ; on,

which I was engaged. During my ﬁrst
experiment, a kind of enthusiastic frenzy
had blinded me to the honor of my em
ployment; my mind was intently'ﬁxed
on the consummation of my labour, and
my eyes were shut to the horror of my
proceedings. But now I went to it in
cold blood, and my heart often sickened
at the work of my hands.. '

Thus situated, employed in the most
detestable occupation, immersed in I
solitude where nothing could for an in-
stant call my attention from the actual
scene in which I was engaged, my spirits
became unequal; I grew restless and
nervous. Every moment I feared to
meet my persecutor. Sometimes Isa!
with my eyes ﬁxed on the ground,
fearing to raise them lest they should
encounter the object which I so much
dreaded to behold. I feared to wander

'ri-n: uonmm rnounrnlus. 127

from the sight of my fellow-creatures,
lest when alone he should come to claim
;, his companion.
In the mean time I worked on, and
1 my labour was already considerably ad-
" vanced. I looked toward. its com-
pletion with a tremulous and eager hope,
‘,which I dared not trust myself to ques-
- tion, but which was intermixed with ob-
; scare forebodings of evil, that made my
heart sicken in my bosom.

 

128 runnnsunt; 03,

CHAPTER- Vlll.

I SAT one evening in my laboratory;
the sun had set, and the moon wasjust
rising from the sea; I had not sufﬁcith
light for my employment, and I remained
idle, in a pause of consideration of whe-
ther I should leave my labour for the
night, or hasten its conclusion by an
unremitting attention to it. As I sat, a
train of reﬂection occurred to me,
which led me to consider the eﬂ'ects of
what I was now doing. Three years
before I was engaged in the same man-
ner, and had created a ﬁend whose un-
paralleled barbarity had desolated my

THE nouns ‘rnoun'meus. 129

Wart, and. ﬁlled it for ever with the bit-
E'terest remorse. I'was now about to
{ form another being, of whose disposi-
tions I was alike ignorant; she might be:
;.,come ten thousand times, more malig-
. nant than her mate, and delight, for its
‘ own sake,- in murder and wretchedness.
He had worn to quit the neighbourhood
of man, and hide himself in deserts ; but
"she had not; and she, who in all proba-
bility was to become a thinking and
reasoning animal, might refuse to com-
ply with a compact made before her
creation. They might even hate each
.ozher; the creature who already lived
loathed his own deformity, and might
be not conceive a greater abhorrence for
it when it came before his eyes in the
female form? She also might turn with
disgust from him to the superior beauty
of man; she might quit him, and he he 
again alone, exasperated by the fresh
G 5

180 rnnuxnmzm; on,

provocation of being deserted by oneof V

his own species.

Even if they were to leave Europe,
and inhabit the deserts of the new
world, yet one of the ﬁrst results of
those sympathies for which the daemon
thirsted would be children, and a race
of devils would be propagated upon the
earth, who might make the very ex-
istence of the species of man a condi-
tion precarious and full of terror. Had
I a right, for my own beneﬁt, to in-
ﬂict this curse upon everlasting gene-
rations? I had before been moved
by the sophisms of the being I had
created; I had been struck senseless
by his ﬁendish threats: but now, for
the ﬁrst time, the wickedness of my
promise burst upon me; I shuddered
to think that future ages might curse
me as their pest, whose selﬁshness had
not hesitated to buy its own peace at

THE KDDIIN ruxnrnus. 131

the price perhaps of the existence of the
'whole human race. .

I trembled, and my heart failed with- 
1. in me; when, on looking up, 1 saw, by
; the light of the moon, the daemon at
the casement. A ghastly grin wrinkled
- his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat
'rulslling the task which he had allotted
: to me. Yes, he had followed me in my
3~ travels; he had loitered in forests, hid
H himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to
mark my prbgress, and claim the fulﬁl-
ment of my promise. ,

As I looked on him, his countenance
expressed the utmost extent of malice
and treachery. I thought with a sen.
sation of madness on my promise of
creating another like to him, and trem-
bling with passion, tore- to pieces the
thing on which I was engaged. The
wretch saw me destroy-the creature on

 

132 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and, with'a bowl of devilish
despair and revenge, withdrew.

I left the roam, and, locking the
door, made a solemn vow in myown
heart never to resume my labours ;-and
then, with. trembling steps, I sought my
own apartment. I was alone; none
were near me to dissipate the gloom,
and relieve me from the sickening op-
pression of the most terrible reveries.

Several honrs past, and ‘I remained
near my window gazing on the sea; it
was almost motionless, for the winds
were hushed, and all nature reposed
under the eye of the quiet moon. A
few ﬁshing vessels alone specked the
water, and now and then the gentle
breeze wafted the sound of voices, as
the ﬁshermen called to one another.
I felt the silence, although I was hardly
conscious of its extreme profundity,

 

THE MODERN rnons'rneus. 188

‘rnntil my ear was suddenly arrested by
r the paddling of ours near the shore, and
a. person landed close to my house.
:. In 'a few minutes after, I heard the
creaking of my door, as if some one en-
, deavoured to open it softly. I trembled
‘V from head to foot; I felt a presentiment

of who it was, and wished to rouse one
. of the peanut who dwelt in a cottage
I not far from mine; but I was overcome
I by the sensation of helplessness, so often
17 felt in frightful dreams, when you in
vain endeavour to ﬂy from an impending
danger, and was rooted to the spot. .
= Presently I heard the sound of foot-
steps along the passage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom] dreaded
appeared. Shutting the door, he ap-
proached me, and said, in a smothered
voice—

“ You have destroyed the work which

you began; what is it that you intend?

134 rusxxuxsrzm; on,

Do you dare to break your promise? I
have endured toil and misery : I leﬁ
Switzerland with you; I crept along the
shores of the Rhine, among its willow
islands, and over the summits of its hills.
I have dwelt many months in the heath-
of England, and among the deserts of
Scotland. I have endured incalculable
fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you
dare destroy my hopes?”

“ Begone! I do break my promise;
never will I create another like yourself,
equal in deformity and wickedness."

“ Slave, I before reasoned with you,
but you have proved yourself unworthy
of my condescension. Remember that
l have power; you believe yourself mi.
serahle, but I can make you so wretched
that the light of day will be hateful to
you. You are my creator, but I- am
your master ;—obey !”

“ The hour of my irresolution is past,

rue nonnnu moms-runs. 135

and the period of your power is arrived.
C Your threats cannot move me to do an
’ act of wickedness; but they conﬁrm me
V. in a determination of not creating you
; a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool
5" blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon,
- whose delight is in death and wretched-
ness? Begone! I am ﬁrm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage.”
The monster saw my determination
in my face, and smashed his teeth in the
impotence of anger. “ Shall each man,”
cried he, “ﬁnd a wife for his bosom,
and each beast have his mate, and I be
alone? I had feelings of affection, and
they were requited by detestation and
scorn. Man! you may hate: but be-
ware! Your hours will pass in dread
and misery, and soon the bolt will fall
which must ravish from you your hap-
piness for ever. Are you to be happy,

   

136 nmnnsnm; on,

while I gravel in the intensity of my.
wretchedness? You can blast my other
passions ; but revenge remains—revenge,
henceforth dearer than light or food! I ‘
may die; but ﬁrst you, my tyrant and
tormentor, shall curse the sun that
gazes on your misery. Beware; for I’
am fearlas, and. therefore powerful. I
will watch with the wiliness of a snake,
that I may sting with its venom. Man,
you shall repent of the injuries you
inﬂict.”

“ Devil, cease; and do not poison the
air with these sounds of malice. I have
declared my resolution to you, and I
am no coward to bend beneath words.
Leave me; I am inexorable.”

“ It is well. I go; but remember,
I shall be with you on your wedding-
night.” ’ ' -.

I started forward, and exclaimed,

 

ms uonsan PROMETHIUS. 187

' “ Villain! before you sign my death-
watrant, be sure that you are yourself
i safe.” ‘
’. I would have seized him; but he
- eluded me, and quitted the, house with
1 precipitation: in a few moments I saw
’ ‘him in his boat, which shot across the
I waters with an arrowy swiftness, and
 'wassoon lost amidst the waves.

All was again silent; but his, words
, rung in my, ears; I burned with rage
to pursue themurderer of my peace,
and precipitate him into the ocean. I
‘ walked. up and down my room hastin
and. perturbed, while my imagination
, conjured up a- thousand images to tor-
ment and sting me. Why had 1 not
followed him, and closed with him in
mortal strife? But I had suffered him
to depart, and he had directed his course
towards the main land. I shuddered to

138 snwxnnsnm; on,

think who might be the next victim sac
criﬁced to his insatiate revenge. And
then I thought again of his words—“1
will be with you on your wedding-night.”
‘ That then was the period ﬁxed for the
fulﬁlment of my destiny. In that hour
I should die, and at once satisfy and
extinguish his malice. The prospect
did not move me to fear; yet when!
thought of my beloved Elizabeth,—of
her tears and endless'sorrow, when she
should ﬁnd her lover so barbaroust
snatched from her,-—tears, the ﬁrst I had
shed for many months, streamed from
my eyes, and I resolved not to fall before
my enemy without a bitter struggle.
The night passed away, and the sun
rose-from the ocean; my feelings he.
came calmer, if it may be called calm-
nes, when the violence of rage sink!
into the depths of despair. I left the

'rm: nonmu Pnoun'meus. 139

‘ use, the horrid scene of the last night’s
tention; and walked on the beach of
a e sea, which I almost regarded as an
‘ upemble barrier between me and my

low-creatures; nay, a wish that such
ould prove the fact stole across me.
'desired that I might pass my life on
barren rock, wearin it is true, but ‘
 interrupted by any sudden shock of
fmisery. If I returned, it was to be sa-
‘eriﬁced, or to see those whom I most
IOVed die under the grasp of a demon
V'ho'm I had myself created.

I walked about the isle like a restless
spectre, separated from all it loved, and
'miserable in the separation. When it
Mme 'noon, and the sun rose higher,
‘I'l'ay down on the gras, and was over-
powered by a deep sleep. I had been
awake the whole of the preceding night,
my nerves were agitated, and my eyes

   
  
  
  
   
 

140 rnAxnnsrxm ;. on,

inﬂamed by watching and misery. The
sleep into which I,now sunk refreshed
me; and when I awoke, ,I'ag-ain felt a
if I belonged to a raceiof human being!
like myself, and I began toreﬂect upon
what had passed ‘with greater com-
posure; yet still the words of the ﬁend
rung in my ears like a death-knell, they
appeared like a dream, yet distinct and
oppressive as a reality. '
The sun had far descended, am” i
still sat on the shore, satisfying my ap-
petite, which had become ravenous,
with an oaten cake, when I saw a ﬁshing-
boat land close to me, and one of the
men brought me a packet ;7 it contained
letters from Geneva, and one ﬁ'oln
Clerval, entreating me to join him. ‘
He said that nearly a year had elapsed
since we had quitted Switzerland; and
France was yet unvisited.‘ He. en-

THE MODERN ruouernsus. 141

  
   

ated me, therefore, to leave my soli-
isle, and meet him in Perth, in
l week from that time, when we might
rrange the plan of our future pro-
ceedings. This letter in a degree re-
"called me to life, and 1 determined to
Iﬁuit my island at the expiration of two
.days. '

- Yet, before I departed, there was a
task to'perform, on which I shuddered
to reﬂect: I must pack up my chemical
instruments; and for that purpose I
must enter the room which had been
. the scene of my odious work, and I
must handle those utensils, the sight of
- which 'was sickening to me. The next
' morning, at day-break, I summoned suf-
ﬁcient courage, and unlocked the door
of my laboratory. The remains of the
half-ﬁnished creature, whom I had de-
‘ltroyed, lay scattered on the ﬂoor, and
I almost felt as if I had mangled the

14:2 "amount; on,

living ﬂesh of a human being. I paqu
to collect myself, and then entered the
chamber. With trembling hand I eon-
veyed the instruments out of the room;
but I reﬂected that I ought not to leave
the relics of my worklto excite the =
horror and suspicion of the peasants, -
and I accordingly put them into I
basket, with a great quantity of stones,
and, laying them up, determined to
throw them into the sea that very night;
and in the mean time I sat upon the
beach, employed in cleaning and ar-
ranging my chemical apparatus.
Nothing could be more complete than
the alteration that had taken place in
my feelings since the night of the ap-
pearance of the daemon. I had-before
regarded my promise with a gloomy
despair, as a thing that, with whatever
consequences, must be fulﬁlled; but]
now felt as if a ﬁlm had been taken

  

run noon“ PMIETHEUS. 143

.{rom before my eyes, and that I, for

.‘the ﬁrst time, paw clearly. The idea
1 of renewing my labours did not for one

instant occqr to me; the threat I had

’heard weighed on my thoughts, but I

did not reﬂect that a voluntary act of
mine could avert it. I had resolved

in my own mind, that to create another

like the ﬁend I had ﬁrst made would
be an act of the basest and- most atro-
cious selﬁshness; and I banished from
my mind every thought that could lead

t. to a diﬂ'erent conclusion.

Between two and three in the morn-
ing the moon rose; and I then, putting
my basket aboard a little skiﬂ', sailed
out about four miles from the shore.
The scene was perfectly solitary: a few
boats were returning towards land, but
I sailed away from them. I felt as if
I was about the commission of a dread.
ful crime, and avoided with shuddering‘

144 FRANKENSTEIN; or,

anxiety any encounter with my fellow-
creatures. At one time the moon, which
had before been clear, was suddenly
overspread by a thick cloud, and!
took advantage of the moment of darlii
ness, and cast my basket into the sea:
I listened to the gurgling sound as it
sunk, and then sailed away from the r
spot. The sky became clouded; but
the air was pure, although chilled by u
the north-east breeze that was then
rising. But it refreshed me, and ﬁlled
me with such agreeable sensations, that
I resolved to prolong my stay on the
water, and, ﬁxing the rudder in a direct
position, stretched myself at the bottom
of the boat. Clouds‘ hid the moon.
every thing was obscure, and I heard
only the sound of the boat, as its keel
cut through the waves; the murmur
lulled me, and in a short time I slept

soundly.

m: uommu raon'msus. M5

3-. I do not know how long I remained
this'situatiop‘, but When I awoke I
und that the sun had already mounted
Insiderably. The wind was high, and
e‘ waves continually threatened the
Pfety of my little skiff. I found that
{the .wind was north-east, and must have
Eddven’ me far-froin the coast from which
7‘1. had embarked. I endeavoured to
Cbhange my course, but quickly~found
that, if I again made the attempt, the
~boat.would be instantly ﬁlled ‘with 'wa-
ter. Thus situated, my only'resource
was to drive before the wind. ‘I confess
’that I felt a few~sen'sations of terror. I
.had no compass with me, and was so
’alenderly acquainted with the geography
[of this part of the World that the sun
was .of little beneﬁt to me. I might
bejdriven into the wide. Atlantic, and
feel all the tortures of starvation; or
'be swallowed up in the immeasurable
Von. n. n

  
   

146 thalamus; on,

waters that roared and huﬂ'eted around
me. I had already been out many
hours, and felt the torment of a. burning
thirst, a prelude to my other suﬁ'erings.
I looked on the heavens, which were
covered by clouds that ﬂew before the
wind only to be replaced by others: I
looked upon the sea, it was to be my
grave. “ Fiend,” Iexclaimed, “ your
task is already fulﬁlled !” I thoughtof
Elizabeth, of my father, and of Clervnl:
and sunk into a reverie, so despairing
and frightful, that even now, when the
scene is on the point of closing before
me for ever, I shudder to reﬂect on it.
Some hours passed thus; but by de-
grees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into I
gentle breeze, and the sea beeame free
from breakers. But these gave place
to a heavy swell: I felt sick, and. hardly
able to hold the rudder, when suddenly

in: MODEM! vacuums. 157

.I saw a line of high land towards the
’iouth.

'Almost spent, as l was, by fatigue,
.Ind the dreadful suspense I endured
:‘ﬁr several hours, this sudden certainty
of life rushed like a ﬂood of warm joy
to my heart, and tears gushed from my
by“.

How mntahle are cur feelings, and
how strange is that clinging love we
have of life even in the excess of mi-
sery! I constructed another sail with a
put of my dress, and eagerly steered
my 'course towards the land. It had a
wild and rocky appearance; but, as I
npprcached nearer, I easily perceived
the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels
neon-the shore, and found myself sud.-
d‘enly transported back to the neigh-
bourhood of civilized man. I‘ carefully
trl'ced the windings of the land, and
hiled a- steeple which I at length saw

11 2

I

148 - tumns'rnm ;. on,

issuing from. behind a small. promon-
tory. As I was in a state ‘of extreme
debility, I resolved toJail‘directly to-
wards the town, as a place. where.I ,
could most easily procure nourishment. ;
Fortunately I had money with me; .As i
I turned the promontory, Iperceiyed A
small neat town and a good harbour,
which I entered, my heart bounding
with joy at my unexpected-escape.

As I was occupied in ﬁxing the boat-
and arranging the sails, several people
crowded towards the spot. They seemed
much surprised at my appearance; but,
instead ofvoﬂ'ering me any assistance,
whispered together with gestures that
at any other time might have produced E
in me a slight sensation of alarm. . As
it was,‘ It merely remarked that they
spoke English; and I therefore all-
dressed them in that language: “ My
good ﬁ'iends,”.said I, “ will you. be so

ms no!)an moms-ms“. M9

hind as‘ to tell me the name of this
ﬂown, and inform me where 1 am ?" ‘
3-” “ You will know that soon enough,”
heplied a man with a hoarse voice.
"‘ May lie you are come to a place that
“will not prove much to your taste; but
'you'will not be consulted us to your
"quarters, I promise you.”

9" l'wa's exceedingly surprised on'ire#
oeiving so rude ’an answer from a
"Itrangér; and l was-also dis‘concerted
" mi perceiving the frowning and angry
: countenances of his companions. “ Why
do you answer me so roughly?” lre-
“plied; “ surely it is not the custom of
'Eng‘lishmen to receive'strangers so in-
' hospitabl y .”

“I‘do not know.” said the man,
“‘what the custom of the English may
'be; but it is the custom of the Irish to
hate villains.” '

While' this strange dialogue‘conti-

Zl60 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

nued, l perceived the crowd rapidly
increase. Their faces expressed a mix-
ture of curiosity and anger, which all-
noyed, and in some degree alarmed
me. I inquired the way to the inn;
but no one replied. I then-movedffor-
ward, and a mnrmuring sound arose
from the crowd as they followed and
surrounded me; when an ill-looking
man approaching, tapped me on the
shoulder, and said, “Come,;Sir, you
must follow me to Mr. Kirwin’s, to-give
an account of yourself.” 

“ Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am!
to give an account of myself? Is not
,this a free country P”

“ Ay, Sir, free enough for honest
folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate;
and you are to give an account of the
death of a gentleman who was found
murdered here last night.”

This answer startled me; but [ pre-

In none“ mousmeus. 151

' ntly recovered myself. I was inno-
' m; that could easily be proved: ac-
rdingly I followed my conductor in
ncé, and was led to one of the best
ghouses in the town. »I was ready to
link from fatigue and hunger; but,
f‘heipg‘ surrounded by a crowd, I thought
Fit politic to rouse all my strength, that
hophy‘sical debility might be construed
into apprehension or conscious guilt.
Little did I then expect the salsmity
that was in a few moments to over-
’whelm me, and extinguish in horror
and despair all fear of iguominy or
death.

1 must pause here ; for it requires all
my fortitude to recall the memory of
the frightful events which I am about

to relate, in proper detail, to my recol-
lection.

 
 
  

152 . nauxznsrem; 6.,

CHAPTER IXV.

I WAS soon introduced into the pre-
sence of the magistrate, an old benevo-
lent man, with calm and mild manners.
He looked upon me, however, with
some degree of severity: and then,
turning towards my conductors, he
asked who appeared 'as witnesses on
this occasion.

About half a dozen men came for-
ward; and, one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed, that he had
been out ﬁshing the night before with
his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nu-
gent, when, about ten o’clock, they ob-

'rus nonanN rmnaruxus. 158

served a strong northerly blast rising;
ind they accordingly put in for 'port.
It was a very dark night, as the moon
had not yet risen ; they did not land at
ithe harbour, 'but,‘ as they had been‘ac-
Lcustomed, at a creek about two miles
below. ‘ He walked on ﬁrst, carrying
‘a part of the ﬁshing tackle, and his
dompanions followed him at some di-
stance. As he was proceeding along the
sands, he struck' his foot against sOme—
thing, and fell at his length on the
ground. His companions came up to
assist'him; and, by the light of their
15mm, they found that he had fallen
on the‘hbdy of a man, who was to all
appearance dead. Their ﬁrst suppo-
sition Was, that it was the corpse of
gome person who had been drowned,
and was thrown on shore by the waves;
but, on examination, they found that
the clothes were not wet, and even that
H 5

154 remnants"; on,

the:body Ines-not .then eold. .They.in-
stantly -carried it to :the wattage of .all
old woman near the spot, 7and endea-
voured, but in vain, to restore itnto life.
It.appeared to be a handsome young
man, about ﬁve and twenty years cine.
He had apparently been strangled; for
there was 'no sign of any violence, ex-
cept the black mark .of ﬁngers -on his
neck.

The ﬁrst part of this deposition did
not in theleast interest me; but when
the mark of the ﬁngers was mentioned,
I remembered the murder of my bro-
ther, and 'felt myself extremely agitated;
my limbs trembled, and a mist came
over my eyes, which obliged meta lean
on a chair for support. The magi-
strate observed me with a keen eye,
and of course drew an unfavourable
augury from my manner.

The son conﬁrmed his father’s ac-

'rns IODIIIN nous'rnvs. '155

count: but when Daniel N-ugent mu
polled, he swore positively that, just
Hora the fall of his companion. he
: new a boat, with a single man in it, at
3 short distance from the shore; and,
llzfar as he could judge\by the light of
o ;few stars, it was the same boat in
which I had just landed.
-- A-wornan deposed, that she lived
neu- the beach, and was standing at
thedoor of her cottage, waiting for the
return of the ﬁshermen, about an hour
before she heard of the discovery of the
body, when she saw a boat, with only
one man in it, push off from that
port of the shore where the corpse was
sﬂerwards found. ,
Another woman conﬁrmed the ac-
count of‘the ﬁshermen having brought
the body into her house; it was not
oold. They put it into a bed, and
it; and Daniel went to the

.-

156 “maxim-mt ; 1n,

town for an apothecary, but-life was
quite gone. ~- -
,Several other men were examined
concerning my landing; » and Ithey
agreed, that, with ‘the strong -north-
wind that had arisen during the night,
it was very probable that I had beaten
about for many hours, and.» had :been
obliged to return nearly‘to‘ the'same
spot from which I had; departed. Ben
sides, they observed that it appeared
that I had brought the body from an-
other‘ place, and it was likely, that as
I did not appear to know the shore,I
might have put into the harbour igno-
rant of the distance of the town of
from the place where I had de-
poited the corpse.

- Mr. Kirwin, -on hearing this evi-
dence, desired that I should be taken
into the room where the body lay for
interment, thatvit might be observed

 

run uonnnn rsounnlus. 157

,what‘eﬁ'ect the sight of it would pro-
duce upon me. This idea was proba-
bly suggested by the extreme agitation
'- -I. had exhibited when the mode of the
:murder had been described. I was ac-
cordingly conducted, by the magistrate
and several other persons, to the inn.
I could not help being struck by the
strange coincidences that had taken
,' place during this eventful night; but.
knowing that I had been conversing
withseveral persons in the island I
had inhabited about the time that the
body had been found, I was perfectly

tranquil .as to the consequences of the
aﬁ'nir..

I entered the town where the corpse
lay, and was led up to the coﬂin. How
can I describe my sensations on he-
 hoiding it? I feel yet parched with
horror, nor can I reﬂect on that terrible

158 Inﬁllﬂ'm; on,

moment without shuddering sndngony;
The examination, the presence of the
magistrate and witnesses, passed like I
dream from my memory, when I sow
the lifeless form of Henry Clonal
stretched before me. I gasped for
breath; and, (throwing myself on the
body, I exclaimed, “ Have'my murde-
rons machinations deprived you also, my
dearest Henry, of life? Two I have
already destroyed; other victims await
their destiny: but you, Clerval, my
friend, my benefactor”—

The human frame could no longer
support the agonies that I endured, and
I was carried out of the room in strong
convulsions.

A fever succeeded to this. I lay for
two months on the point of death:
my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were
frightful; I called myself the murderer

‘ 'ri-is Iron-ax. non-rams. 159

of William, of Justine, and of. Clerval.
Sometimes I entreated my attendants
tomssist me in the destruction of the
ﬁend by whom I was tormented; and
.st others, I felt the ﬁngers of the mon-
ster already grasping my neck, and
acreamed aloud with agony and terror.
Fortunately, as I spoke my native lan-
guage, Mr. Kirwiu alone understood
me; but my gestures and bitter cries
were sufﬁcient to nﬂ‘right the other
- witnesses.

'Why did I not (lie? More miserable
than man ever was before, why did I
not sink into forgetfulnes and rest?
Death snatches away many blooming
children, the only hopes of their dost.
ing parents: how many brides and
youthful lovers have been. one day in
the bloom of health and hope, and the
next a. prey for worms and the decay
of-the tomb! Of what materials was

160 IMNKENI‘I‘III ; on,

I made, that I could thus resist so many
shocks, which, like the turning of the
wheel, continually reneived the tor-
ture.

But I was doomed to live; and, in
two months, found myself as awaking
from a dream, in a prison, stretchedon
a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolerl,
turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable
apparatus of a dungeon. It was mom-
ing, I remember, when I thus awoke to
understanding: I had forgotten the
particulars of what had happened, and
only felt as if some great misfortune
had snddenly overwhelmed me; but
when I looked around, and saw the
barred windows, and the .squalidn'esr
of the room in which I was, all ﬂashed
across my memory, and I groaned bit-
terly.

, This sound disturbed an old woman
who w'as sleeping in a chair beside me.

ma nouns Pnonrnlvs. 161

3: She was a hired nurse, the wife'of one
, of the turnkeys, and her countenance
i expressed all those bad qualities which
;- often characterize that class. The lines"
of her face were hard and rude, like
thht oi‘ persons accustomed to see with-
out sylnpathizing in sights of misery.
Her tone expressed her entire'indiﬂ‘e-
rence; she addressed the in English;
arid the voice struck me as one that I
had heard during my sufferings :
' 4‘ Are you better now, Sir ?” said
she. '

' I replied in the same language, with
a feeble voice, “ I believe I am; but if
it be all true, if indeed I did not dream,
I am sorry that I am still alive to feel
this misery and horror."

.“ For that matter," replied the old
woman, “ if you mean about the gen-
tlemen you murdered, I believe that

162 FRANKENSTEIN ; on,

it were better for you if you were dad,
for I fancy it will go hard with youl
However, that ’s none of ' my business,1
yam sent to nurse you, and get you well; I
do my duty with a safe-conscience; it
were well if every body did the same.”

I turned with loathing from the wo-
man who could utter so unfeeling a
speech to a person just saved, on the
very edge of death; but I felt languid,
and unable to'reﬂect on all that had
passed. The whole series of my life
appeared to me as a dream; I some-
times doubted if indeed it were all true,
for it never presented itself to my mind
with the force of reality.

As the images that ﬂoated before me
became more distinct, I grew feverish;
a darkness pressed around me: no one
was near me who soothed me with the
gentle voice of love ; no dear hand sup

ms noun“ reouzrlsvs. 168

ported me. The physician came and
prescribed medicines, and the old wo-
man prepared them for me; but utter
.mlessness was visible in the ﬁrst,.nnd
the expression of brutality was strongly
marked in the visage of the second.
Who could be interested in the fate of
I'murderer, but the hangman who would
gainhis fee P

~ .These were my ﬁrst reﬂections; but
i soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had
shown me extreme kindness. He had
caused the best room in the prison to
be prepared for me (wretched indeed
was the- best); and it was he who had
provided a physician and a nurse. It
is true, he seldom came to see me; for,
although he ardently desired to relieve
the-suﬁ'erings of every human creature,
he did-not wih to be present at the
agonies and miserable ravings of a
murderer. He came, therefore, some-

\

164‘ “murmurs ; on,

tunes to see that I was not neglected:
but his visits 'were short, and'with long
intervals; i i
' One day, while-I was gradually reco-
vering, I was seated ',in a chair, my
eyes half open, and my cheeks livid
like those' in death. I Was biércome‘by
gloom and misery,‘ and oﬂen reﬂected
I had better seek death than "desire‘to
remain in a world which tome was re-
plete with wretchedness. » At ‘one time
I considered whether I should not de-
clare myself guilty, and suﬂ‘er the pe-
nalty of the law, less innocent than
poor Justine had been. Such were my
thoughts, when the door of my apart-
ment was opened, and Mr. Kirwin
entered. His countenance expressed
sympathy and compassion; he 'drew a
chair close to mine, and addressed me
in French-—

“ I fear that this place is very shook-

Tﬂl- nouns rmul'ruuus. 186

ing to you; can I do any thing to make
you more comfortable P" '
‘ “I thank'you; but all that you mention
.is nothing to me: on the. whole earth
'there is no comfort which lam capable
,of-receiving.” '1
c: “ I know that the sympathy of. a
[stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so
strange a misfortune. But you will, I
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode;
'for, doubtless, evidence can easily be
brought to free‘yon from the criminal
charge.” f
“ That is my least concern: I am, by
a courseof strange events, become the
most miserable of mortals. Persecuted
and tortured as I am and have been, can
deathbe any evil to me 2” '
- f‘ Nothing indeed could be more un-
fortunate and agonizing than'the strange
chances that. have lately occurred. You

166 rusunsrsnt; 03,.

were thrown, by some surprising-acci-
dent, on this shore, renowned for its
hospitality; seized immediately, and
charged with murder. The ﬁrst sight-
that was presented to your eyes was the
body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner, and placed.
as it were, by some ﬁend moss your
path.” I

As Mr. Kin-win said this, notwith-
standing the agitation l endured on
this retrospect of my suﬂ'erings, I also
felt considerable surprise at the know‘
ledge he seemed to possess concerning
me. I suppOSe some astonishment was
exhibited in my countenance; for Mr.
Kirwin hastened to say—

“ It was not until a day or two after
your illness that I thought of examining
your dress, that I might discover some
um by which I could send to your rc-
lations an account of your misfortune

ms nouns snoumsvs. ‘ 16'!

and illness. Ifound several letters, and,

lemong others, one which I discovered
from its commencement to be from your
,fether. I instantly wrote to Geneva:
v nearly two months have elapsed since
'.the departure of my 1etter.—-But you
'are ill; even now you tremble: you
are unﬁt for agitation of any kind.”

“ This suspense is a thousand times
worse than the most horrible event:

'tell me what new scene of death has
been acted, and whose murderl am now
to lament.” V

“ Your family is perfectly well,"
said Mr. Kirwin, with gentleness; “ and
some one, a friend, is come to visit
you."

I know not by what chain of thought
the idea presented itself, but it instantly
darted into my mind that the murderer
had come to mock at my misery, and
team me with the death of Clerval, as

168 maximum»: ; on,

a new incitement for me to comply with
his hellish desires. lpu; my handhe-
fore my eyes, and cried out in agony—‘

“ Oh! take him away! I cannot see
him; for God’s sake, do not let him i
enter!” I

Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a '
troubled countenance. ' He could not
help regarding my exclamation as a pre-
sumption of my guilt, and said, in rather V
a severe tone— ‘ I

“ I should have thought, young man,
that the presence of your father would
have been welcome, instead of inspiring
such violent repugnance.”

“ My father!” cried I, while every
feature and every muscle was relaxed
from anguish to pleasure. “ Is my father,
indeed, come? How kind, how very
’ kind. But where is be, why does he
not hasten to me 2”

My change of manner surprised ,and

i

rm: uonsaN Pnoua'mzvs. 169

lpleased' the magistrate;' perhaps he
Ethought that my former exclamation was
a momentary return of delirium, and
Enow be. instantly resumed his former
; 'benevo‘len‘ce. He rose, and quitted the
groom with my nurse, and in a moment
{3 my father entered it. ‘
i. Nothing, at this momenthcould have
- given me greater pleasure than the ar-
rival of my father. I stretched out my
hand to him, and cried— , '
V“ Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—
and Ernest?" ~
My father 'calnied me with assurances
of their welfare, and endeavoured, by
dwelling on these subjects so interest,-
ing to'my heart, to raise my desponding
spirits; but he soon felt that a prison
cannot be the 'abode of cheerfulness.
“ What a place ‘is this that you inhabit,
my son l”? said he, looking mournfully
at the barred windows, and wretched
VOL. 11. 1

I70 summers"; on,

appearance of the room. !' You travelled
to seek happiness, but a fatality seemst
pursue you. And poor Clerval—”

The name of my unfortnmte and
murdered friend was an agitation too
great to he endured in my weal: state;
I shed tears. . . '

“ Alas! yes, my father,” replied];
“ some destiny of the most horrible
kind hangs over me, and I must live to
fulﬁl it, or surely I should have died on
the coﬂin of Henry.” '

We were not allowed to converse for
any length of time, for the precarious
state of my health rendered. every pre-
caution necessary that could insure
tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin search, and
insisted that my strength should not be
exhausted by too much exertion. But
the appearance of my father was tome
like that of my good angel, and Ign-
dually recovered my health.

THE no!)an PROMETHEUS. 171

f‘ As my sickness quitted me, I was ali-
K"sorbed by a gloomy and black melan-
choly, that nothing could dissipate.
'1 The image of Clerval was for ever
.'~'4 before me, ghastly and murdered.
'- More than once the agitation into
, which these reﬂections threw me made
' my friends dread a dangerous relapse.
Alas! why did they preserve so miser-
" able and detested a life? It was surely
that I might fulﬁl my destiny, which is
now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very
, soon, will death extinguish these‘throb-
' hinge, and relieve me from the mighty
weight of anguish thatbears me to the
dust; and, in executing the award of
justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then
'the sppearance of death wasvdistant,
although the wish was ever present to
my thoughts; and I often sat for hours

motionless and speechless, wishing for
some mighty revolution that might
12

172 rmxxensrnm ; on,

bury me and my destroyer in its
ruins. '

The season of the assizes approached.
I had already been three months in
prison; and although I was still weak,
and in continual danger of a relapse,I
was obliged to travel nearly a hundred
miles to the county-town, where the
court was held. ' Mr. Kit-win» charged
himself with every care of collecting
witnesses, and arranging my.» defence.
I was spared the disgrace of appearing
publicly as a criminal, as the case was
not brought before the court that decides
on life and death. The grand jury re-
jected the bill, on its being proved that
I was on the Orkney Islands at the hour
the body of my friend was found, and a
fortnightafter my removal I was liberated
from prison.

My father was enraptured on ﬁnding
me freed from the vexations of a cri-

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 173

:minal charge, that I was again allowed
- to breathe the fresh atmosphere, and
allowed to return to my native country.
I did ,not participate in these feelings;
. for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
- palace were alike hateful. The cup of
. life was poisoned for ever; and al-
’ though the sun shone upon me, as upon
the happy and gay of heart, I saw
‘around me nothing but a dense and
frightful darkness, penetrated by no
light but the glimmer of two eyes that
glared upon me. Sometimes they were
the expressive eyes of Henry, languish-
ing in death, the dark orbs nearly
covered by the lids, and 'the long black
lashes that fringed .them; sometimes it
was the watery, clouded eyes of the mon-
ster, as I ﬁrst saw them in my chamber
at Ingolstadt.
My father tried to awaken in me the
feelings of affection. He talked of

I’M FRANKENSTEIN; on,

Geneva, which I should soon visit—of
Elizabeth, and Ernest; but these words
only drew deep groans from me. some-
times, indeed, I felt a wish forhappi-
ness; and thought, with melancholy de-
light, of my belovedcousin; or' longed,
with a devouring maladie du pays, to
see once more the blue lake and rapid
Rhone, that had been so dear to me in
early childhood: but my general state
of feeling was a torpor, in which a
prison was as welcome a residence as
the divinest scene in nature; and these
tits were seldom interrupted, but by
paroxysms of anguish and despair. At
these moments I often endeavoured to
put an end to the existence I loathed;
and it required unceasi-ng attendance
and vigilance to restrain ‘me from
committing some dreadful act of vio-
lence.

I remember, as l quitted the prison,

 
   
 

THE nouns noun-mums. 175

1' I heard one of the men say, “He may
-' be innocent of the murder, but he has
,' catainly a bad conscience,” These
{: words struck me. A bad conscience!
L yes, surely I had one. William, Jus-
tine, and Clerval, had died through my
f infernal machinations. “ And whose
1 death," cried I, “is to ﬁnish the tra-
gedy? Ah! my father, do not remain
in this wretched country; take me
where I may forget myself, my exist-
ence, and all the world.” ~ .

My father easily acceded to my d -
sire; and, after having taken leave of
Mr. Kirwin, we hastened to Dublin. I
felt as if I was relieved from a heavy
weight, when the packet sailed with a
fair wind from Ireland, and I had
quitted for ever the country which had
been; to me the scene of so much
misery.

It was midnight. My father slept in

176 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

the cabin; and I lay on the deck, look-
ing at the starsrand listening to the
dashing of the waves. I hailed the
darkness that shut Ireland from my
sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish
' joy, when I reﬂected that I should soon
see 'Geneva. The past appeared to
me in the light of a frightful dream;
yet the Vessel in which I was, the wind
that blew me from the detested shore of
Ireland, and the sea which surrounded
me, told me too forcibly that I was de- .
ceived by no vision, and that Clerval,
my friend and dearest companion, had
fallen a victim to me and the monster
of my creation. I repassed, in my
memory, my whole life; my quiet hap-
piness while residing with my family'in
Geneva, the death of my mother, and
my departure for Ingolstadt. I remem-
bered shuddering at the mad enthu-

siasm that hurried me on to the crea-
I

a ~7-

5
5,
i

   

THE novaim rnouxrunus. 177

i-tion of my hideous enemy, and I called
'ao'mind the night in which he ﬁrst lived.
"I was unable to pursue the train of
thought;‘a thousand feelings pressed
upon me, and I wept bitterly.
' Ever since my recovery from the fever,
f I had been in the custom of taking every
1' night a. small quantity of laudanum;
I for it was by means of this drug only
that I was enabled to gain the rest
necessary for the preservation of life.
Oppressed by the recollection .of my
various misfortunes, I now took a
double dose, and soon slept profoundly.
But sleep did not aﬂ‘ord me respite
'from thought and misery; my dreams
presented a thousand objects that scared
me. Towards morning I was possessed
by a kind of night-mare; I felt the
ﬁend’s grasp in my neck, and could not
free myself from it; groans and cries
rung in my ears. My father, who was
I 5

178 nuxusmu; on,

watching oVer me, perceiving my rut

lessneas, awoke me, and pointed tothe I
port of Ilolyhead, which we were now

entering.

='- 9 W. amt-WE murmur 7 .~ .

179

THE MODERN PIOHETHEUS.

CHAPTER X.

. We had resolved not to go to London,
but to cross the country to Portsmouth,

' and thence to embark for Hevre. l
- preferred this plan principally because

I dreaded to see again those places in -
which I had enjoyed a few moments of
tranquillity with my beloved Clerml.
I thought with horror of seeing again
“lose persons whom we had been ac-
cultomed to visit together. and who
might mkae inquiries concerning an
event, the very remembrance of (which
node me again feel the pang- I endured

rh

1'80 runxexsmm; on, .

when I gazed on his lifeless form in the
inn at 

As for my father, his desires and ex-
ertions were bounded to the again see-
ing me restored to health and peace of
mind. His tenderness and attentions ‘
were unremitting; my grief and gloom
was obstinate, but he ‘would not despair.
Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply
the degradation of being obliged to an-
siyer a charge of murder, and be en;
deavoured to prove to me the futility of
pride. - '
“Alas! my father,” said I, “ how
little do you know me. Human beings,
their feelings and passions, Would in-
deed be degraded, if such a wretch as
I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy
Justine, was as innocent as I, and she
suffered the same charge; she died
forit; and I am the cause 'of this-
I murdered her. William, Justine,

urn;

ms Monnnu rnous'rnnus. 181

{and Henry—they all died by my
hands.” I . 
‘ My father had often, during my im-
prisonment, heard 'me make the same
assertion ; when I thus accused myself,
he sometimes seemed to desire an ex-

' planatiou, and at others he appeared to

: consider it as the offspring of delirium, I
and that, during my illness, some idea
' of this kind had presented itself to my

imagination, the remembrance of which
I preserved in my convalescence. I
avoided explanation, and maintained-a.
continual silence concerning the wretch
Ihad created. I had a feeling that I
should be supposed mad, and this for
ever chained my tongue, when Iwould
have given the whole world to haVe con-
ﬁded‘ the fatai secret.

- Upon this occasion my father said,
with an expression of unbounded won.
der, “ What do you mean,‘ Victor ?.

"'

182 BANKINI'I'III; on,

are you mad? My deal-son, I entreat
you never to make such an assertion
again.”

“ I am not mad,” I cried energeti-
cally; “ the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my operations, an best
witness ofmy truth. I am the main
of those most innocent victims; they
died by my machinations. A thousand
times would I have shed my own blood,
drop by drop, to have saved their lives;
but I could not, my ﬁsther, indeed I
could not sacriﬁce the whole human
race.”

The conclusion of this speech con-
vinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the
subject of our conversation, and en-
deavoured to alter the course of my
thoughts. He wished as much as pos-
sible to obliterate the memory of the
scenes that had taken place in Ireland.

run uonuu Hummus. 188

' and never alluded to them, or suffered
i  me to speak of my misfortunes.
As time passed away I became‘more
5' calm: misery had her dwelling in my
heart, but I no longer talked in the
'- some incoherent manner of my own
" crimes; suﬁicient for me was the con-
' sciousness of them. By the utmost
self-violence, I curbed the imperious
voice of wretchedness, which sometimes
desired to declare itself to the whole
world; and my manners were calmer
and more composed than they had ever
'been since my journey to the sea of ice.
We arrived at Havre on the 8th of
' May, and instantly proceeded to Paris,
where my father had some business,
which detained us a few weeks. In this
city I received the following letter from
Elinbeth:—-

184 ‘ FRANKENSTEIN; on;

“ To VICTOR FRANKENSTEIN.

“ MY DEAR FRIEND, .

“ It gave me thegreatest pleasure
receive a letter from my uncle dated at
Paris; you are no longef at a formidable
distance, and I may hope to see you in
less than a fortnight. My poor cousin,
how much you must have suﬁ‘ered! I
expect to see you looking even more
ill than when you qhitted Geneva.
This winter has been passed most mi-
serably, tortured as I have been by
anxious suspense; yet I hope to see
peace in your countenance, and to ﬁnd
that your heart is not totally void of
comfort and tranquillity. '

“Yet I fear that the same feelings
now exist that made you so miserable a

year ago, even perhaps augmented by

THE MODEEN Pnomz'rnsus. 185

time. I would not disturb you at this
 period, when so many'misfortunes weigh
upon you; but a conversation that I had
.with my uncle previous to his departure
Irenders some explanation necessary be-
‘fore we meet. . .

“ Explanation! you may possibly
say; what can Eliz’abeth have to ex— .
plain P If you really say this, my ques-
tions are answered, and I have no more
to do than to sign myself your affec-
tionate cousin. But you are distant
, from me, and it is possible that. you

may dread, and yet be pleased with this

explanation; and, in a probability of

this being the case, I dare not any longer

postpone writing what, during your ab-
, sence, I have often wished to express to
you, but have never had the courage to
begin. ‘

“You well know, Victor, that our
union had been the favourite plan of

.r

"' Ham-rm-.. ,"n‘ V .

186 nAxnxs'rmx; on, 3

your parents ever since our intinncy.
We were told this when young, and
taught to look forward to it as an event
that would certainly take place. We
were aﬁ‘ectionate playfellovvs during
childhood, and, I believe, dear and
valued friends to one another as we
grew older. But as brother and sister
often entertain a. lively aﬂ'ection to-
wards each. other, without desiring a
more intimate union, may not such‘also
be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor.
Answer me, I conjure you, by our mu-
tual happiness, with simple truth—Do
you not love another?

“ Yen have travelled; you have
spent several years of your life at In-
golstadt; and I confess to you, my
friend, that when I saw you last an-
tumn so unhappy, ﬂying to solitude,
from the society of every creature,I
could not help supposing that you

l THE uonsnn rsonn'rmws. l8?

 
   
   
  
 

ight regret our connexion, and be-
'eve yourself bound in honour to fulﬁl
-e.w'ishes of your parents, although
ey opposed themselves to your incli-
‘ ions. But this is fsle reasoning.
ibonfess to you, my cousin, that I love
' u, and that in my airy dreams of
futurity you have been my constant
v 'e‘nd 'and companion. But it is your
ghappiness I desire as well as my 'own,
'Viheu I declare to you, that our marriage
'ivould render me eternally miserable,
iunless it were the dictate of your own
free choice. Even now I weep to think,
that, home down as you are by the
ii'rdehest misfortunes, you may stiﬂe, by
’ihe word honour, all hope of that love
happiness which would alone re-
store you to yourself. I, who have so
interested an affection for you, may in-
crease your miseries tenfbld, 'by being
smobsmnle to your wishes. Ah, Vic.

188 - maxnusrmu; on,

tor, be assured that your cousin‘and
playmate has too sincere a love for you
not to be made miserable by this sup-
position. Be happy, my friend; audit
you obey me in this one request,lreniain
satisﬁed that nothing on earth will
have the power to interrupt my tran-
quillity. - '

“ Do not let this letter disturb you;
do not answer it to-morrow; or the
next day, or even until you come, . if it
will give you pain. My uncle will send
me news of your health; and if I see
but one smile on your lips when we
meet, occasioned by this or any other
exertionof mine, I shall need no other
happiness.

“ ELIZABETH LAVENZA.
“ Geneva, May 18th, 17—."

This letter revived in my memory
what I had before forgotten, the threat

Till MODERN PEOMETHEUL

Eot‘ the ﬁend—“I will be with you on
yaw weddingmight!” Such was my
sentence, and on that night would the
daemon employ every art to destroy me,
and tear me from the glimpse of happi-
;nes's which promised partly to console
'my sufferings. On that night he had
determined to consummate his crimes
by my death. Well, be it so; a deadly
 struggle would then assuredly take
I place, in which if he were victorious, I
. should be at peace, and his power over
me be at an end. If he were van-
quished, I should be a free man. Alas!
what freedom? such as the peasant
enjoys. when his family have been mas-
sacred before his eyes, his cottage
burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is
turned adrift, homeless, pennyless, and
alone, but free. Such would be my
liberty, except that in .my Elizabeth I
possessed a treasure; alas! balanced '

190 nuxuumm;' on, '

by those horrors of remorse and guilt,
which would'pursue me until death.
Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! 1
read and re-read her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my halt,
and dared to whisper paradisaical
dreams of love and joy; but the apple
was already eaten, and the angel’s arm
hated to drive me from all hope. Yet
I would die to make her happy. If the
monster executed his threat, death was
inevitable ; yet, again, I considered whe-
ther my marriage would hasten my
fate. My destruction might indeed
arrive in few months sooner; but if my
torturer should  suspect that I‘ post-
poned it, inﬂuenced by his menaces,
he would surely ﬁnd other, and per-
haps more dreadful means of revenge.
He had vowed to be with me on my
wedding-night, yet he did not consider
that threat. as binding him to peace in

was noun non-rams. 191

the meantime; for, as if to show, me
-that he was not yet satiated with blood,
:he had murdered Clerval immediately
faﬂer the euuuciation of his threats. I
‘resolved, therefore, that if my imme-
gadiate union with my cousin would con-
*- duce either to hers or my father’s hap-
;,..piness, my adversary's designs against
9'my life should not retard it a single
‘ hour. -
In this state of mind I wrote to Eliza-
beth. My letter was calm and aﬁ'ec-
tiouate. " I fear, my beloved girl,” .I

' said, “little happiness remains for us
on earth; yet all that I may one day
enjoy is centred in you. Chase away
your idle fears; to you alone do I con?
Iecrate my life, and my endeavours
for ,contentment. I have one secret,
Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when re-
vealed to you, it will chill your frame
with honor, and then, far from being

192 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that I urvive'lwhat l have en-
dured. I will conﬁde this tale of misery
and terror to you the day after our mar-
riage shall take place; for, ‘my sweet
cousin, there must be perfect conﬁdence
between us. But until then, I conjure
you, do not mention or allude tolit,
This I most ‘earnestly entreat, and!
know you will comply.” .

In about a week'after the arrival of
Elizabeth’s letter, we returned to Ge-
neva. My cousin welcomed me with
warm aﬂ‘ection; yet tears were ‘in her
eyes, as she beheld my emaciated frame
and feverish cheeks. I saw a change
in her also. She was thinner, and had
lost much of that heavenly vivacity that
had before charmed me; but her gem.
tleness, and soft looks of compassion,
made her a more ﬁt companion for one
blasted and miserable as I was,

In nouns PBOHETKIDI. 193 '

The tranquillity which I now enjoyed
did not endure. Memory brought mad-
ness with it; and when I thought of
what had passed, a real insanity pos-
sessed me; sometimes I was furious,
and burnt with rage, sometimes low
and despondent.’ I neither spoke, nor
‘looked at any one, but sat motionless,
bewildered by the multitude of miseries
that overcame me.

Elizabeth alone had the power to
draw me from these ﬁts; her gentle
voice would soothe me when trans-
ported by passion, and inspire me with
human feelings when sunk in torpor.
She wept with me, and for me. When
reason returned, she would remonstrate,
and endeavour to inspire me with re-
signation. Ah! it is well for the un-
ﬁrrtunate to he resigned, but for the
guilty there is no peace. The agonies
of remorse poison the luxury there is

wot. n. K

194- runumsnm; on, ‘

otherwise sometimes found in indulging
the excess of grief.

Soon after my‘a’rriyal, -my father
spoke of my immediate marriage with
my cousin. Ilremained silent.

“ Have you, then, some other attach:
ment .3” 

‘ “ None on earth. I'love Elizabeth,
and look forward to our union with de-
light. Let the day therefore be ﬁxed;
and on it I -will consecrate myself, in
life or death, to the happiness of my
eousin.”  e

> “ My dear Victor, do not speak thus.
Heavy misfortunes have befallen us;
but let us only cling closer. to what re-
mains, and transfer our love for those
whom we have lost to those who yet
live.) Our circle will-be small, but
bound close by the ties of aﬂ‘ection and
mutual misfortune. And when time
shall have softened your despair, new

in: loans rsonsrnsus. 195

and dear objects of care will be born
to replace those of whom we have been
sovcruelly deprived.” ,
Such were the lessons of my father.
Putt!) me the remembrance of the
threat returned: nor can you wonder,
that, Omnipotent as the ﬁend had yet
been in his deeds of blood, I should ul-
lpost regard him as invincible; and, that
when he had pronounced the words,
‘f Leila” be with you .on your wedding-
night,” I should regard the threatened
fate as unavoidable. But death was no
V evil. to me, if the loss of Elizabeth were
balanced with it; and I therefore, with
a contented and even cheerful counte-
nance, agreed with my father, that if
my cousin‘ would consent, the ceremony
shquld take place in ten days, and thus
put, as l‘imagiued, the seal to my
fate. ‘
I Great God! if for one instant I
x 2

196 FRANKENSTEIN; on,

liad thought what might be the hellish
intention of my ﬁendish adversary,l
would rather have banished myself {or
ever from my native country, and wan-
dered a friendless outéast over the earth.
than have consented to this miserable
marriage. But, ’ as if possessed of
magic powers, the monster had blinded
me to his real intentions; and whenI
thought that I prepared only my own
death, I hastened that of a far dearer
victim. -

As the period ﬁxed for'our marriage
drew nearer, whether from cowardice
or a prophetic feeling, I felt my hem
sink within me. But I concealed my
feelings by an appearance of hilarity,
that brought smiles and joy to the coun-
tenance of my father, but hardly de-
ceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye
of Elizabeth. She looked forward to
our union with placid contentment, not

rm; amour! raoun'rnsus. "197

ifunmingled with a little fear, which past
55-misfortunes had impressed, that what

‘-*now appeared certain and tangible

~ :happiness, might soon dissipate into

ﬁlm airy dream, and leave no trace but
deep and everlasting regret.

Preparations were made for the event;

“congratulatory visits were received;

and all women. smiling appearance. I

V -'shut up, as well as I could, in 'my own

heart the anxiety that preyed there, and

 .entered with seeming earnestness into

.the plans of my father, although they
might onlyserve as the decorations of
.my tragedy. A house was purchased
for us near Cologny, by which we
should enjoy the pleasures of the
country, and yet be so near Geneva 3
to see my father every day; who would
still reside within the walls, for the
beneﬁt of Ernest, that he might follow
his studies at the schools. '

198 PEA-NKENI‘I'BXN; on, , '

In, the mean time I took: every
precaution to defend my person, -in case
the ﬁend should openly attack me. I
carried pistolsand- a dagger constantly
about me, and was ever" on the watch
to prevent artiﬁce; and by these meanl
gained a greater degree of tranquillity.
Indeed, 'as the period approached, the
threat appeared more as a delusion, not
to be regarded as worthy to disturb my
peace, while the happiness I- hoped for
in-my marriage wore a greater appear-
ance of certainty, as the day ﬁxed for
its solemnization drew nearer, and I
heard it continually spoken of as an
occurrence which no accident could
possiblyprevent. ' ‘ - -

Elizabeth Seemed happy; my tran-
quil demeanour contributed greatly
to calm her mind. But on the day
that was to fulﬁl my wishes and
my destiny, she was melancholy, and

meio'nnﬁ rnoiili'rn'ms. 1%

n' presentiment of evil' pervaded~ her;
and perhaps also she thdught of the
dreadful secret, which I had promised 3-
to reveal to her the following day. My‘
father was in the mean time overjoyed,
and, in the bustle of preparation, only‘
recOgnised in the melancholyof his niece
the diﬂidence of a bride. 5
" After the ceremony was performed;
a large party assembled at my father’s;
but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I
should pass the'aﬂernoon and night at
Evian, and return to ‘Cologny the next
morning. As the day was fair, and the
wind favourable, we resolved to go by
water. ' I ' ' -'
Those were the last moments of my
life during- which I enjoyed; the feeling
of happiness; We passed rapidly along:
the sun was hot, .but we were sheltered '
from’its rays by a kind of canopy, while
we enjoyed the beauty of the scene,

£90 . IBAFKINBTIIN; on,

sometimes on one. side of the lake,
where we saw Mont Saléve, the plea-
. sant banks of Montalégre, and at adi-
stance, surmounting all, the- beautiful
Mont Blanc, and the assemblage of
snowy mountains that in vain endea-
vour to emulate her; sometimes coast-
ing the opposite banks, we saw the
mighty Jura opposing its dark .sideto
the ambition that would quit its native
country, and an almost insurmountable
barrier. to the invader who should wish
to enslave it. ' . . - .

I took the hand of Elizabeth : “ You
are sorrowful, my love. Ah! if you knew
what I have suffered, and what I may
yet endure, you would endeavour to let
me taste the quiet and freedom from
despair, that this one day at least per-
mits me to enjoy.”

“ Be happy, my dear Victor,” re-
plied Elizabeth; “ there, is, I hope,

mt nonnnrt rnournnus. so}

,cothing to distress you ; and be assured
“that ifn lively joy is‘not painted in my
,face, my heart is contented. Something
. whispers to me not to depend too much
Jon the prospect that is opened before
“us; but I will not listen to such a si-
‘nister voice. Observe how fast we
I. move along, and how the clouds which
sometimes obscure, and sometimes rise
above the dome of Mont Blanc, render
this Scene of beauty still more interest-
.‘ing. Look also at the innumerable
ﬁsh that are swimming in the clear
waters, where we can distinguish every
pebble that lies at the bottom. What a
divine day! how happy and serene all
nature appears l” .
Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to di-
vert her thoughts and mine from all re-
ﬂection upon melancholy subjects. But
her temper was ﬂuctuating; joy for a
few instants shone in her eyes, but it

‘x5
:-

394- mmuns'rzm; on, ,

otherwise sometimes found in indulging
the excess of grief.

Soon after my. arriyal, ~my father
spoke of my immediate marriage with
my'cousin. I‘remained silent. V
. “ Have you, then, some other attach-
ment 2”  . I‘
I “ None on earth. I ‘love Elizabeth,
end look forward to our union with de-
light. Let the day therefore be ﬁxed;
and on it I -will consecrate myself, in
life or death, to the happiness of my
cousin.”  -

 “ My dear Victor, do not speak thus.
Heavy misfortunes hove befallen us;
but let us only cling closer'to what re-
mains, and transfer our love for those
whom we have lost to those who yet
live. Our circle will:be small, but
bound close by the ties of aﬂ'ection and
mutuel misfortune. And when time
shall have softened your despair, new

mVuobnx nonunion. ’08

HI: the horizon as we landed; and
PI touched the shore, I felt those
be! and fears revive, which soon
he to clasp me, and cling to me
hover.

5‘.

Ir '
1'5

1
,—

204 maximum ; 03,

CHAPTER XI.

11' was eight o'clock when we landed;
we walked for a short time on the shore,
enjoying the transitory light, and then
retired to the inn, and contemplated
the lovely scene of waters, woods, and
mountains, obscured in darkness, yet
still displaying their black outlines.

,The wind, which had fallen in the
south, now rose with great violence in
the west. The moon had reached her
summit in the heavens, and was begin-
ning to descend; the clouds swept
across it swiﬂer than the ﬂight of the
vulture, and dimmed her rays, while

m: nonmx Plonmus. 205'

V the lake reﬂected the scene of the busy
heavens, rendered still busier by the
restless waves that were beginning to

a rise.- Suddenly a-heavy storm of rain
descended. ~ .

I had been calm during. the day ; but ‘
so soon as night .obscured the shapes
of objects, a thousand fears arose in my
mind. , l was anxious and watchful,- A
while my right hand grasped a pistol

-which was hidden in my bosom;,every
sound terriﬁed me; but [resolved that
I would sell‘my life dearly, and not
shrink from the conﬂict until my own
life, or that of my adversary, was extin-
guished. ' v I -

Elizabeth observed my— agitationlfor

isometime in timid ‘and fearfulsilence; ,
at length she- said, “ What is it that
agitates you; my dear Victor? What is
it you fear E’.’ - z -
5’~‘-‘ 011! pence, peacepmy love,” ~re-

nos running-rim; ox,‘ ' :

plied 1, “this night, and all win-lie
safe: but this night is dreadful, very
dreadful.”

I passed an hour in this state of
mind, when suddenly I reﬂected how
dreadful the eombait which I moment-
erin expected would he to my wife, and
I'eayhestly entreated her to retire, -re-
solving not to join her until I had ob
tained someknowledge as to the situaé
titm of my enemy. I v' i
‘ She left me, and I continued some
time walking up and ddwn the passages
ofvthe house, and inspecting every cor-
ner that might aﬂ‘orde retreat to my
adversary. But I discovered no trace
of him, and was beginning to conjec-
ture that some fortunate chance had
intervened to prevent the execution of
his menaces; when suddenly I heard:
shrill and dreadful scream. It came
from the room into which. Elizabeth

run lemme .reournlus. 30E:

had retired. As I heard it, the whole
truth rushedinto my mind, my arms
dropped; the motion of every muscle
and ﬁbre was suspended; I could feel.
the blood trickling in my veins, and
tingling in the extremities of my limbs, 
This state lasted but for an instant; the
scream was repeated, and I rushed:intq
the room.

Great God! why did I not then ex,
pire! Why am I here to relate the
destruction of the best hope, andythe
purest. creature of earth. She was
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown
across the bed, her head hanging down, -
and her pale and distorted features half
covered by her hair'. Every where I
turnI see the same ﬁgurhher blood-
less arms and relaxed form ﬂung by
the murderer on its bridal bier. Could
I behold this, and live? Alas! life is
. obstinate, and 'clings closest where it

m i hammnm; on,

is most hated. For a moment only did
I lose recollection; I fainted.

When I recovered, I found myself
surrounded by the people of the in;
their countenances expressed a breath-
less terror: but the horror of others
appeared only as a mockery, a shadow
of the feelings that/oppressed me. .I
escaped from them to the room when
lay the body of Elizabeth, my love,
my wife, so lately living, so dear, so
Worthy. She had been moved from
the posture in which I had ﬁrst beheld
her; and now, as she lay, her head upon
her arm, and a-handkerchief thrown
across her face and neck, I might have
supposed her asleep. I rushed towards
her, and embraced her with ardour; but
the deadly languor and coldness of the
limbs told me, that what I now held-in
my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth
whom I had loved and cherished. The

was, noun}: nonmnns. £09

murderous jmark of- the ﬁend’s grasp
’ was on her. neck, and the breath had
7 peasedto issue from her lips. .
, While I still hung over her in the
jugony of despair, I happened to look
up.. The windows of the room had
before been jdarkened, and I felt a
kind-of panic on seeing the‘pale yellow
\light of the moon illuminate the cham-
bei‘. The shutters hadbeen thrown
hack; and, with a' Sensation of horror
not to be described, I saw at the open
window; ﬁgure the most hideous and
- nbhoned. A grin was on the face of
the monster; he seemedto jeer, as with
his ﬁendish. finger he pointed towards
the corpse of my,wife. I rushed towards
the window,~ and drawing a pistol from
my bosom, shot; huthe eluded me,
' leaped from his station, and, running
with the swiftness of lightning, plunged
into the lake. .

310 -' inﬁnity-em; for,

" The report of the pistol brought‘s
crowd into the room. I pointed tothe
spot where he had disappeared,'and we
followed the track with boats ; nets were
cast, but in'vain. Afterpassing seve-
re] hours, we returned hopeless, most
of my companions believing it to have
been-a form conjured up by my fancy.
After having landed, they proceeded to
search the country, parties going in
different directions among the woods
and vines. I l

I did not accompany them; I was
exhausted: a. ﬁlm covered my eyes,
and my skin was parched with the heat
of feVEr. In this state I lay on a bed,-
hardly conscious of lwhat had hap-
pened; my eyes wandered round the
room, as if to seek something that! had
lost.

At length I remembered that my fa-
ther would anxiously expect the return

u ‘ V . . " ' ’3
THE MODERN PMKE'I‘HIUS. 2ft

of Elizabeth and myseu; land-that '1
must return alone. I This reﬂection '
brought tears into my eyes, andJ wept
for along time; but my thoughts ramA v
hled to various subjects, reﬂecting on
my misfortunes, and their cause. I
Was bewildered in' a cloud of - wonder
and horror; The death *of Willis‘un;
thé- execution of Justine, the murdet‘
of filer-val, and lastly of my wife; leven‘
at that moment I knew' not that- my‘
only" remaining friends Were safe Proni
the malignity of the ﬁend; my father
even now might be writhing under his'
grab, and Ernest might be dead at his
feet.1 'T his idea. made me shudder, and
recalled me medium» I started up,
and resolved to returnlto Geneva with
all possible speed. ~-
There, were no horses to be pro-r
cured, and I must return by the lake;
but the wind was unfavourable, and'

31$ . ‘ mnxens'rmu; on,

the rain fell in torrents. However, it
was hardly. morning, and Imight ren-
sonably hope to arrive by night. I
hired men to row, and took an oar
myself, for I had always experienced
relief from mental torment in bodily
exercise. But the overﬂowing misery
I now felt, and the excess of agitation
that I endured, rendered me incapable
of any exertion. I threw down the our;
. and,;leaning my head upon my hands,
gave way to every gloomy 'idea that
arose. If I looked up, I saw the scene
which were familiar to me in my hap-
pier time, and which I had contem-
plated but the day before in the com-
pany of her who was now but a hadow
and a recollection. Tears streamed
from my eyes. The rain had ceased for
a moment, and I saw the ﬁsh play in
the waters as they had done a few hours
before; they had then been observed

THE nonsnx noun-runs. 213;

by Elizabeth. Nothing is so painful
to the human mind as a great and‘sud-
den change. The sun might shine, or
the clouds might lour; but nothing“
Could appear to me as it had done the~
days before. ﬁend had snatched from
me every hope of future happiness: no
creature had ever been so miserable as
1‘ was;so frightful an event is single
in the history of man. ‘ ‘ ' '

. But why should I dwell upon the in-
cidents that followed this last over-
whelming event. Mine has been a"
tale of horrors; I have're'ached their
am; and what I must now relate can
but be tedious to you. Know that,-
one by one, my friends were snatched'
away; "I was left desolate. My own
strength is exhausted ;' and I must tell,‘
in a few words, what remains of my‘
hideous narration. V '
1 I arrived at Geneva. Mi father and"

214 ‘ mxxxxsnm; on,

Ernest yet lived; but the former sunk -
under the tidings that I bore. I see
him now, excellent and» venerable old
man! his eyes wandered in'vacancy, for
they had lost their charmnnd theiijde-
light—his niece, his more than daugh-
ter, whom he doated on with all that af-
fection which a man feels, who, in the de-
cline of life, havinglfew affections, .clings
more earnestly to. those that remain.
Cursed, cursed be. the ﬁend that brought
misery on his grey hairs, and doomed
him to waste in wretchedness! He
could not live under the horrors that
were accumulated around him ;' an
apoplectic ﬁt was brought on, and in
a few days he died in my arms.

What then became of me? I know
not; I lost sensation, and chains and
darkness were the onlynbjects that
pressed wen me. -Sometimes, indeed,

: I dreamt ﬁlm 1 WWW~ ill “9F?!

ran. uonnmi monsrueus. 315

meadows and pleasant vales with the
friends of my youth; but I awoke, and
found myself .in a dungeon. Melan-
oholy followed, but bydegrees I gained
3} clear conception of .my miseries: and
 situation, and. wasthen released from
~rny~prison. For they had called me
thud; and. during many months, as .I
understood, a solitary cell had been my
habitation.

, Liberty, however, had been an useless
gift to me, had I not, as [awakened to
reason, at the same time aw'akeued to
revenge- As the memory of past mis-
fortunes pressed upon me, I- began to“
reﬂect on their cause—the monster
whom I had created, the miserable dae-
mon whom I had sent abroad into-the
world. for my destruction. I .was. pos-
sessed by a maddening rage when .l~
thought of him, and desired Bﬂdxﬁl'a’é-
dently prayed that .I might have; him.-

I

:16 mmx's'rm; as;

within my grasp to wréak a great and
signal revenge on his cursed head. '

Nor did my hate long conﬁneitself
to useless wishes; I began to reﬂect on
the best means of securing him; and
for this-purpose, about'a month after
’ my release, I repaired to a criminal
judge in the town,‘ and told him that I
had an accusation to make ; that I knew
the destroyer of my family; and‘that
I required him to exert‘his whole au-
thority for the apprehension of the
murderer. > -5 '

The magistrate listened to me with
attention and kindness: “ Be assured,
sir," said he, “ no pains -or exertions
on my part shall be spared to discover
the villain.” .

“ I thank you," replied I; “listen,
therefore; to the deposition that l have
to make. It is indeed a tale so strange,
that I should fear you would .not credit

'rna noun: mounmns. 217

it, were there not something in truth

which, however wonderful, forces con.

. ﬁction. The story is too connected-to
'be mistaken for. adream, and I have no

motive for falsehood.” My manner, as

'1 thus addressed him, was impressive,

but calm; I had formed in my own ,

daeart a resolution, to pursue my de-

stroyer to death; and this purpose

’quieted my agony, and for an interval

reconciled me to life. I now'related

any history brieﬂy, -but with ﬁrmness
«and precision, marking the dates with

accuracy, and neverdeviating into in-

ivective or exclamation.  . ..

The magistrate appeared at ﬁrst per;-

- fectly incredulous, but as I continued
'he became more attentive and inte-
'rested; I saw him'sometimesv shudder
with horror, .at others a lively surprise,
unmingled with disbelief, was painted

-on his‘eou'ntenance. - . V t ,
VOL. II. I.

218 . rmms’um pan,

When I had concluded my narration,
I said, ‘.‘ This is the being whom I so
cuse, and for .whose detection and pu-
nishment I call upon you to exert your
whole power. It is your duty as'a ma-
gistrate, and I believe and hope that
your feelings as a man will not revolt
from the execution of those functions
on this occasion.”

This address caused a considerable
change in the physioguomy of. .my
auditor. .He had heardomy story with
that half kind of belief that is givento
stale of spirits and supernatural events:
but when he was called upon to act
oﬂicially in consequence, ’ the- whole
:tide'of his incredulity returned. He.
however, answered mildly, “ I would
willingly afford you every aid in your
pursuit; but the creature of whom you
speak appears to have poWers which
would put all my exertions to deﬁance.

ms nanny rnommns. I 219

Who can follo'w'nn' animal which can
traverse the sea of ice, and inhabit
c'aves and dens, where no man would
venture' to intrude? Besides, some
months. have elapsed since the epin-
mislipn of his crimes, and no on‘e'can '
conjedure to what place he has wan-
amd; or what region he. may now
inhabit." ‘ ' > '

“ I do not doubt that he‘ “hovers
neur’the spot which 'I inhabit; ﬁnd if
he has indeed takenirefnge 'in the
Alps; he may ~he hunted like the
ehamois, and destroyed as a beast of
prey. But I perceive your thoughts:
you do no! credit my narrative; and
do' novi'ntend to 'pursue my enemy"
with the punishment which is his
amen.” ‘ 

As-I spoke, rage sparkled in my -
eyes; the :magistrnte was intimidatedzx
“ You are mistaken,”.sa.id hey.“ I will

L 2

no . .rmussumgos, .-

exert myself; and if it is in mypower
to seize-the monster; be assured that
he shall suﬁ‘er punishment proportion-
ate to his crimes. But I fear, from
what you-have yourself described to
be his properties, that this will prove
impracticable; and thus, while every
proper measure is pursued, you. should
make up your mind to disappoint»
ment." — ‘ - --

“ That'cannot be; but all that}
can say will be of little avail. My
revenge is of no moment to you; yet,
while I allow it to be a vice, I confess
that it is the devouring and only pas.
sion of my soul. ‘My rage is unspeak-
able, when I reﬂect that the murderer,
whom I have turned loose .upon, so-
ciety, still exists. You refuse my just
demand: I have but one resource; and -
I devote myself, either in my life or
death, to his destruction.”

was uonuw noun-nus. ‘ 321

I

I trembled with excess of agitation as
:1 said this; there was a. phrenzy in my
manner, and something, I doubt not,
of that haughty ﬁerceness, which the
martyrs of old are said to have possessed.
But to a Genevan magistrate, whose
mind was occupied by far other ideas
than‘those of devotion and heroism, th'm
elevation-of mind had much the appear-
ance of madness. He endeavoured .to '
.eoothe me as a nurse does a child, and
reverted to my tale as the eﬂ‘ects of de-
lirium. - 1 = x
“Man,” I cried, “ how ignorant art
thou'in thy pride of wisdom! Cease;
you know notwhatit is you say.” . .

I broke from the house angry and
disturbed, and retired to meditate on
than other mode of action. --

m . cunnnnm; on,

CHAPTER XII.

- My presentsituation was one in which
in voluntary thought was swallowed up
and lost. I was hurried away by fury:
revenge alone endowed me with strength
and composure; it moulded my feel-t
ings, and allowed me to be calculating
and calm, at periods when otherwise
delirium'or death would have been my
portion.

My ﬁrst resolution was to quit
Geneva for ever; my country, which,
when I was happy and beloved, was
dear to me, now, in my adversity, be-
came hateful. I provided myself with

was noun maximum. 233-

a sum of money, together 'with a few
jewels . which had belonged to my
mother, and departed.

. And now my wanderings began,
which are to cease but 'with life. I
have traversed a. vast portion of the
earth, and have endured all the hard‘
ships .which- travellers,.1in deserts and
barbarous countries,,are wont to meet.
How I have lived I hardly know; many
: timeshavg I stretched my. failing limbs '

uponxthe sandy plain, and prayed for;
, death. ,But revenge kept me alive; I
dared not die, and leave my adversary
in being. '  . ,
«When I» quitted Geneva», my ﬁrst
labour was to gain some clue by which
I might trace- the steps of my ﬁendish
enemy“ But my plan was unsettled;

.aud‘ I wandered many hours round

the conﬁnes of the town, uncertain
“{hat path I should pursue. As night

254» « :sunnxsmn; on, ‘

.approached, 1 found myself-at them-
trance ‘ot‘ the cemetery’ﬁwhere Wil-
liam, Elizabeth, and my -ﬂsther,‘re—
'posed. I- entered it, and approached
the tomb which marked theirva
Every thing was silent, except 'the
leaves of the trees, which were gehtlyv
agitated by the wind; thenight was-
nearly dark; and the Scene would have
been solemn and affecting even to an
uninterested observer. -The spirits of
the departed seemed to ﬂit around, and”
to cast a shadow, which was felt but
not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

The deep grief which this scene had
at ﬁrst excited quickly gave way to
rage and despair. They were dead,
and I lived ; their 'mnrderer also lived,
and to destroy him I must drag out my
weary existence. ‘I knelt on the grass,
and kissed the earth, and with quiver

TH]: MODERN - PROWEUS- 2”

ing Tlips exclaimed,“ By the ' sacred
earth on which I kneel, by the shades ’
, that wander near me, bylthe deep and
eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and
by thee, 0 Night, and the spirits that
preside over thee, 'to pursue the due-
mon, who caused this misery, until he
..or I shall perish in mortal conﬂict.
For this purpose I will preserve my
life: to execute this dear revenge, will
I again behold the sun, and tread the
green herbage of earth, which other-
wise should vanish from my eyes for
ever. And I call on you,\spirits of the
dead; and on you, wandering ministers
of vengeance, to aid and‘conduct me
in 'my work. Let the cursed and hell-
ish monster drink deep of .agony; let
him feel the despair that now torments
Inc-,1 . v ‘

V- I had begunA my adjuration with
.lolemnity, ,‘and an awe which almost

L 5

296 .- IRANIINS‘I‘IIN; ' on,

assured me I that the shades - of my
murdered friends heartland approved
- my devotion; but the furies possessed
me as I concluded, and rage echoaked
my utterance. I . v .- I.
. I was answered through the stillness
of night by a loud and ﬁendish laugh.
It rung on my ears long and heavily;
the mountains re-echoed. it, and I felt
as if all hell surrounded 'me with
mockery and laughter. Surely in that
moment I should have been possessed
by phrenzy, and have destroyed my
miserable existence, but that my vow
was heard, and that I was reserved for
vengeance.» The laughter died away;
.when a well-known and abhorred voice,
apparently close to my ear, addressed
me in an audible whisper—~“ I am
satisﬁed: miserable wretch! you have

determined to live, and I am satis-
ﬁed.” '

ran .xonzml - nonunizus. 227

7 -I darted towards the spot from which

the: sound proceeded; but ’the devil

eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad

disk of- the moon arose, and shone full

upon his ghastly and distorted:shape,

as he ﬂed with more than mortal

speed. V

- I pursued him; and for many months

this has been my task. Guided by a

slight clue, I fol-lowed the windings of

the Rhone, but vainly. The blueMe-

ditermnean appeared; and, by a strange ‘
chance, I saw the ﬁend enter by night,

and hide himself in avessel bound for

the Black Sea.. I took my passage in

the same ship; but he escaped, I- know ‘

- not how.

{Amidst the wilds of Tartary and
Russia, although he still evaded me,
-I .have ever followed in his track».
Sometimes the peasants, scared by this
horrid apparition,- informed me of his

2883' -‘- manual-sin; on, : '

path; sometimes he himselﬁ‘who {eased
that if‘ I lost all trace of him, I should
despair and die, left some mark to guide
me. ‘ The snows descended on my
head, and I saw the print of his huge
step on the white plain. To you ﬁrst
entering on life, to whom care isnew,
* and agony unknown, how can you un-
derstand what I have felt, and still feel?
Cold, want; and fatigue, were the least
pains which I was destined to endure;
I was cursed by some devil, and carried
about with me my eternal hell; yet
still a spirit of good followed and
directed my steps, and, when I most
murmured, would suddenly extricate
me from seemingly insurmountable
difﬁculties. Sometimes, when nature,
overcome by hunger, sunk under the
exhaustion, a repast was prepared for
me in the desert, that‘restored and
inspiritegl me. .The. fare was indeed

ran napalm non-nuns. m9

coarse, such as the peasants ‘of the
countrylate; but I will not doubt that
.it was set there by the spirits that I had
invoked to' aid me. Often, when all was
dry,'the heavens cloudless, and I was
parched by thirst, a slight cloud would
hedim the sky, shed the few drops that
revived me, and vanish. - r .‘

I followed, when I could, the courses
of the rivers; but the daemon generally
avoided these, as it was here that the

population of the country chieﬂy col-
‘lected. . In other places human beings '
were seldom seen; and I generally sub-
;Iisted on'the wild- animals that crossed
my path. I had money with me, and
gained the friendship of the villagers
by distributing it; orI brought with me
some food thatI had killed, which, after
taking a small part, I always presented
to those who had provided me with ﬁre
.and utensils for. cooking.

350 manna-1m; on,

' My life, as'it passed thus, was indeed
' hateful to me, and it was during sleep
alone that I could taste joy. 0 blessed
sleep! often, when most miserable, .I
sank to repose, and my dreams lulled
are even to rapture; . The spirits that
guarded me had. provided these mo-
ments, or rather hours, of happiness.
that I mightretain strength tofulﬁl my
pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite,-I
should have sunk under my hardships.
During the day I was sustained and in-
spirited by the hope of night: for in
sleep I saw my friends, my. wife, and
my beloved country; again I saw the
benevolent countenance of my father,
heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth’s
voice, and beheld Clerval enjoying health
and youth. Often; when wearied by a
toilsome march, I persuaded myself that
Iwas dreaming until night should come,
and that I should then enjoy reality in,

run roman neutrinos. 28!

the arms'of- my dearest friends. What
agonizing fondness did I feel for them!
how did-I cling to their dear forms, as
sometimes they haunted even my waking
hours, and persuade myself that they '
still lived! At such moments vengeance,
that - burned within me, died in my
heart, and I pursued my path towards
the destruction of the daemon, more as a

task- enjoined by heaven, as the me- . .

chanical impulse of some power of which

I was unconscious, than as the ardent
' desire of mynsoul. '

- What his feelings were vwhomI pur-
- sued, I cannot know. Sometimes, in-
deed, he left marks in writing on the
barks of the trees, or cut in stone, that
guided me, and instigated my - fury.
. “My reign is not yet over,” (these words
were legible in one of these inscrip-
. tiona); “. you live, and mypower. is
complete. Follow me; .I seek the ever-

an mumsrzxx ; an,

lasting ices of the north, where you will
feel the misery of cold and frost, to
which I am impassive. You will ﬁnd
near this place, if you follow‘not too tar-
' dily, a dead hare; eat, and be refreshed;
Come on, my enemy; we have yet to
wrestle for our lives; but many hard and
miserable hours must you endure, until
that period shall arrive.” '

Scoﬂing devil ! Again do I vow ven-
geance; again do I devote thee, mise
rahle ﬁend, to torture and. death. Never
will I give up my search, until he orl
perish ; and then with what ecstacy shall
I join my Elizabeth, and my departed
friends, who even now prepare for me
the reward of my tedious toil and hor-
rible pilgrimage.

As l still pursued my journey to the
northward, the snows thickened, and
the cold increased in a degree almost
too severe to support. The peasants

rna nouns muran as

were shut up in'their hovels, and only a
few of the 'most hardy ventured forth'to
seize the animals Whom starvation had
forced from their hiding-places to se‘ék’
for prey. The rivers were covered with
ice, and no ﬁsh could be procured; and
thus I' was cut 011' from my chief article
of 'n'iairitenance. ’

' The triumph of my enemy increased
with the difficulty of my lahOurs. 'One
inséription that‘ he left was in theSe
words: “ Prepare! your toils only he"
gin: wrap yourself in furs, and provide
food, for we shall' soon- enter upon ‘a
journey where your sufferings will satisfy
my' everlasting hatred.” ‘

‘My courage and perseverance were
invigorated by these scoﬂ‘rng words; I
resolved not to fail in my purpose; and,
calling on Helven’to support me, 1 con-
tinued with unabated fervour to traverse
immenée deserts, until the ocean ap-

m IlAmnN; on.

peered at a distance, and formed the
utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh!
how unlike it was to the blue seas of
the south! Covered with ,ice, it was
only to be distinguished from ,land by
its superior wildness and ruggedneu.
The Greeks wept for joy when they be-
held the Mediterranean from the hills
of Asiarand hailed‘ with rapture the '
boundary of their toils. I did not weep;
. but I knelt down, and, with a full heart, '
thanked my guiding spirit for conduct-
ing me in safety to the place where I
hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s
gib‘e, to meet and grapple with him.
Some weeks before this period I had
procured a sledge and dogs, and thus
traversed the snows with» inconceivable
speed. a I know not whether the ﬁend
posesed the same advantages; but I
found that, as before I had daily lost
ground in the pursuit, I now gained on

rm: uonnxvrnonn'mxus.‘ ‘ 235;

\ him; so” much so, that when I ﬁrst saw
the ocean, he was but one day’s journey .
in'advance, and I hoped to intercept
him before he should‘reach the health
With new courage, therefore, I pressed
on, and in two days arrived at a wretched

. hamlet—on the sea-shore. 1 inquired of

- the-inhabitants concerning the ﬁend,
» and gained accurate information, ,A
gigantic monster; they saidrhad arrived ‘
t the night before, armed with a gun and
many ‘ pistols ; splitting“. to ﬂight the , in—.
habitants of a. solitary cottage, through
fear. of hi .terriﬁc appearance. He had
carried oﬁ' their store of winter food,
and, placing it in aisledge, to draw
which he. had seized on a numerous
drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed -
them, and the same night, to the joy of
the horror-struck villagers, had pursued -
his journey across the sea in a direction

296 ruumsnnv; on,

that led to no land ; and they conjectured
that he must speedily be destroyed by
the breaking of the ice, or frozen by the
eternal frosts.

. On hearing this information, I suf-
fered a temporary access of despair. He
had escaped me; and I must commence
a destructive and almost endless journey
across the mountainous ices of the ocean,
*amidst cold that few of the inhabitants
could long endure, and which I, the
native of a genial and sunny climate.
could not hope-to survive. Yet at the
idea that the ﬁend should live and be
triumphant, my rage and vengeancere-
turned, and, like a mighty tide, over.-
whelmed every other feeling. 'Aﬁer a
slight repose, during which the spirits
of the dead hovered round, and insti-
gated me to toil and revenge,I prepared
for my journey:

ﬁll Ionian ems-runs. . 837.

‘I- exchanged m‘y-iand siedge for one
fashioned for the inequalities of- the
frozen ocean; and, purchasing a plenti-
ful stock of provisions, I departed from
land. ' '
‘ I cannot‘gue'ss how many ’days have
passed since then ;‘ but I ha've endured
i inisery, which nothing but the eternal
sentiment of a just retribution burning
within my heart could have enahled
. me to Support. Immense and rugged
«mountains of ice often barred up my
passage, and I often heard the thunder
of the ground sea, which threatened my
destruction. But again the frost came,
V and made the paths of the sea secure. ‘
: I By the quantity of provision which
1 had consumed, I should guess that I
had passed thi'ee weeks in this journey;
amid the continual protrhction 'of hope,
returning back upon the heart, oﬁeﬁ

288 ruminant; on, ~

yrnng bitter dmpséoi‘ desponde'ncy and
grief from my eyes. Despair had indeed
almost secured her prey, and I should
soon have sunk beneath this misery.
Once, after the poor animals that convey.-
ed me had with incredible toil gained the
summit of a sloping ice-mountain, and
one, sinking under his, ﬁtigiie,.died', l
viewed-the expanse before‘me with an-
guish, 'when suddenly my eye cough! 1
dark speck upon the dusky‘plainp I
strained my sight .to\ discover-'what it
could he; and uttered a wild cry of
eesmcy when l distinguished a sledge,
and the distorted proportions of a well.
known form within. Oh! with whats
burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
warm tears ﬁlled my eyes, which I
hastily wiped away, that they might not
intencept the view I had of the dmmon;
but-still my sight was dimmed 'by the

m: Ionian PBO‘METBEUS. «289

burning drops,"until,-giving waylo the
emotions that oppressed me,~ I wept
aloud. . ‘ ~

But this was not the time for delay:
I disencumbered the dogs of their dead
companion, gave them a- plentiful por-
-tion of food ;.and, after an hour’s rest,
which was absolutely necessary, and yet
which was bitterly irksome tome, I con-
tinued my route. The sledge was still
.visible; nor did I again losesight of it,
except atthe moments when. fora sheet
time some ice-rock concealed it with. its
intervening orags.- »I indeed (perceptiny '
gained on it; and when; after nearly
two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy
atrno more than -a mile distant, my
heart bounded-within me. ‘ . .
7 But now, when I appealed, utmost
within grasp of my enemy, my-‘hopqs
were suddenly extinguished, andll‘lost
all trace of him more utterly than I had

2‘0 , runxsnsum; on; .

eVer done before.. A ground sea was
heard; the thunder of its progress, In
the waters rolled and swelled beneath
:me, became every moment more ominous
and terriﬁc. I pressed on, but in vain.
.The wind arose; the sea roared; and.
as .with the mighty shock-of an earth»
quake, it split, and cracked with a tre-
mendous and overwhelming sound. The
work was soon ﬁnished: in afew minuta
a tumultuous sea rolled between me and
my enemy, and l was left drifting on a
scattered piece of ice, that was con-
tinually lessening, and thus preparing
for me a hideons death.

In this manner many appalling hours
passed; several of my dogs died; and
I myself was. about to sink under the
accumulation of distress, when l saw
.your vessel riding at anchor, and hold-
‘ing forth to me hopes of succour and
life. I had no conception. that vessels

THE MODERN PBDMETHEUS. 2"}

ever came so far north,and was astounded
at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of
my sledge to construct oars; and by
these means was enabled, with inﬁnite
fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the dig
recition of your ship. I had determined;
if you were going southward, still to
trust myself to the mercy of the seas
rather than abandon my purpose. I
hoped to induce you to grant me a boat
With‘whichl could'pursue my enemy.
But your direction was northward, You
took me on board when. my vigour was
exhaustedﬁmd I should soon have sunk
under my multiplied hardships’into a.
‘death which I still dread—for my task
is unfulﬁlled.  ‘

Oh! when will my guiding spirit, in
oonducting me to the daemon, allow me ‘
the rest I so much desire; or must I
die, and be yet live?  If I I do, swear to
me, Walton, that he ,shall not escape;

von. 11. M

242 - Imam-mm; on,

that you willku him, and satisfy my
vengeance in his death. And do dare l
mask of you to undertake my pilgrim-
age, to endure the hardships that I have
undergone? 'No; I am not so selﬁsh.
Yet, when I am dead, if he should
appear;. if the ministers of vengeance
should conduct himvto you, swear that
he shall not live—swear that he shall
not triumph over my accumulated woes,
and survive to make another such wretch
as I am. He is eloquent and persuasive;
and once his words had even power over
my heart: but trust him not.  His soul
is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
and ﬁend-like malice. Hear him not;
call on the manes of William, Justine,
Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of
the wretched Victor, and thrust your
sword into his heart.- I will hover near,
and direct the steel aright.

THE noun): rnounmnus. I 243

WALTON, in continuation.

August 26th, 17—.

You have read this strange and ter-
riﬁc story, Margaret; and! do you not
feel your blood congeal with horror,
.like that which even now curdles mine?
Sometimes, seized with sudden agony,
he could- not continue his tale; at
others, his voice broken, yet piercing,
uttered with diﬂiculty the words so re-
plete with agony. His ﬁne and lovely
eyes were now lighted up with indig-
nation, now subdued to downcast sor-
7 row, and quenched in inﬁnite wretched-
ness. Sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tone, and related the
most horrible incidents with a tranquil
Ivoice, suopressing'cvery mark of agi-

‘ u 2

m rnsnuss'rnxx; on,

‘ tation; then, like a volcano bursting
forth, his face would suddenly change
to an expression of the wildest rage, as
he ~shrielzed out imprecations on his
persecutor.

His tale is connected, and told with
an appearance of the simplest truth;
yet I own to you that the letters of Felii
and Saﬁe, which he showed pie, and the
apparition of the monster seen from our
ship, brought to me a greater conviction
of the truth of his narrative than his as-
severations, however earnest and con-
nected. Such a monster has then really
existence! I cannot doubt it; yet I am

" lost in surprise and admiration. Some-

times I endeavoured to gain from Frank-

enstein the particulars of his creature's

formation : hat on this point he was im-

netrable.

N L youmad, my friend P” said he:

ther‘does your senseless curio-

   
 

THE MODERN PROMETHEUS. 245

sity lead you? Would you also create
for yourself and the world a demoniacal
enemy? Peace, peace! learn my mi-
series, and do not seek to increase
your own,” ’
Frankenstein discovered that I made
notes concerning his history : he asked
to see them, and then himself corrected
and augmented them in many places;
but principally in giving the life and
spirit to the conversations he held with
his enemy. “ Since you have pre-
served my narration,” said he, “I would
not that a mutilated one should go
dowu to posterity.”  ,
Thus has a week passed away, while
-I have listened to the strangest tale
that ever imagination formed. My
thoughts, and every :feeling of my soul, 7
have been drunk up by the interest for.
my guest, which this tale, and his own

246 FRANKENSTEHI ; an,

elevated and gentle manners have cre-
ated. [wish to soothe him; yet can]
counsel one so inﬁnitely miserable, so
r destitute of every hope of consolation,
to live? Oh, no! the only - joy that
he can now know will be when‘he
composes his shattered spirit to peace
and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort,
the offspring of solitude and delirium:
he believes, that, when .in dreams he
holds converse with his friends, and
derives from that communion consola-
tion for his miseries, or exoiteméntsto
his vengeance, that they are not the
creations of his fancy, but the beings
themselves who visit him from the re-
gions of a remote world. This faith
gives a solemnity to'his reveries that
render them to me almost as imposing
and interesting as truth.
Our conversations are not always
conﬁned to hi own history and mis-

‘

THE KODEEN PROMETHEUE.

fortunes. On every poin't'of general
literature he displays unbounded know—
ledge, and a. quick and piercing appre-
hension. Hi eloquence is forcible and
touching; nor can I hear :him, when
he relates a' psthetic'incident! or 'en-
deavours to move the passions of pity
or love, without tears. What a glo-
rious mature must he have been in
the days of his prosperity, when he is
thus noble and 'godlik‘e in ruin." He
seems to feel his own worth, and the
greatness of his fall.

“When younger,” said he, “ I be;
lieved myself destined for some great
enterprise. My feelings are profound;
’but I possessed aeoolness of judgment
that ﬁtted me for illustrious achieve-
ments. This sentiment of the worth
of my nature supported me, when others
would have been oppressed; for I deem:
ed it criminal to throw away in useless

2-18 “mum's-ram ; on,

grief those talents that might be useful
to my fellow-creatures. When I re-
ﬂected on the work I had completed,
no less a one than the creation of a sen-
sitive and rational animal, I could not
rank myself with the'herd of common
projectors. But this thought, which sup-
ported me in the commencement of my
career, now serves only to plunge m'e
lower in the dust. All my speculations
and hopes are as nothing: and, like the
archangel who aspired to omnipotence,
lam chained in an eternal hell. My
imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
analysis and application were intense ; by
the union of these qualities 1. conceived
the idea, and executed the creation of
a man. Even now I cannot recollect,
without passion, my reveries while the
work was incomplete. I trod heaven
in my thoughts, now exulting in my
powers, now burning with the idea of

nu: ~=Monlmz raouzrnnus. ‘24-!)

their eﬁ'eCts.‘ From my infancy I was
imbued with high hopes and a lofty
ambition; but how am I sunk! Oh!
my friend, if you had known me asl
once was, you would not recognize me
'in this state of degradation. Despond-
ency rarely visited my heart; a high
destiny seemed to hear me on, until I
fell, never, never again to rise.”

Must I then lose this admirable
being? I have longed for a friend; I
have sought one who would sympathize
with and love me. Behold, on theée
desert seas I have found such a one;
but, I fear, I have gained him only to
know his value, and lose him. I would
reconcile him to life, but he repulses
the idea.

“I thank you, Walton,” he said;
“for your kind intentions towards so
miserable a wretch; but when you
speak of new ties, and fresh affections;

M 5

250 rssxunsrzm ; 03,

think you that any can replace those
who are gone? Can any man be to
me as‘Clerval was; or any woman
another Elizabeth? Even where the
affection are not strongly moved by any
Vsuperior excellence, the companions of
our childhood always possess a certain
power over our minds, which hardly
any later friend can obtain. They
know our infantine dispositions, which,
however they may be afterwards mo-
diﬁed, are never eradicated: and they
.Can judge of our actions with more
certain conclusions as to the integrity
of our motives. A sister or a brother
can never, unless indeed such symp-
toms have been shown early, suspect
the other of fraud or false dealing,
when another friend, however strongly
he may be attached, may, in spite of
himself, he contemplated with suspicion.
But I enjoyed friends, dear not only

‘

was momma mousruus. 251

through habit and association, but from
their own merits; and wherever I am,
the soothing voice of my Elizabeth,
and the conversation of Clerval, will
be ever whispered in my ear. They
are dead; and but one feeling in such
.a solitude can persuade me to preserve
my life. If I were engaged in any
high undertaking or design, fraught
with extensive utility to my fellow-
creatures, then could I live to fulﬁl it.
But such is not my destiny ; I must pur-
sue and destroy the being to whom I
gave existence; then my lot on earth
will be fulﬁlled, and I may die.”

September 2d.

MY BELOVED SISTER,

I write v to you, encompassed .by
peril, and ignorant whether I am ever
doomed to see again dear England, and
the dearer friends that. inhabit it. ‘I

\

252 FRANKENSTEIN; '01,

am surrounded by mountains of ice,
which admit of no escape; and threaten
every moment to crash my vessel. The
brave'fellows, whom I have persuaded
to be my companions, look towards me
for aid; but I have none to bestow.
There is something terriny appalling
in our situation, yet my courage and'
hopes do not desert me. We may
survive ; and if we do not,‘l will repeat
the lessons of my Seneca, and die with
a good heart.

Yet what, Margaret, will be the
state of your mind? You will not hear
of my destruction, and you win anx-
iously await my return. Years wiﬂ
pass, and you will have visitings of
despair, and yet be tortured by hope.
Oh! my beloved sister, the sickening
failing of your heart-felt expectations
is, in prospect, more terrible to me
than my own death. But you. have a

x

N

THE"IQDEIN rnousrmzus. £53

husband, and lovely children; you may
bevhappy :‘ heaven bless you, and make
you so ! -
~ My unfortunate guest regards me
with the tenderest compassion. He
endeavours to ﬁll me with hope; and
talks as 'if life were a possession which
hevalued. He reminds me how often
the same accidents have happened to
other navigators, who have attempted
this sea, and, in spite of myself, he ﬁlls
me with cheerful auguries. Even the
sailors feel the powe‘rof' his eloquence:
when he speaks, they no longer despair;
he muses their energies, and, while
they hear his voice, they believe these
vast mountains of ice are mole-hills,
which will vanish before the resolutions
‘ ofman. These feelings are transitory;
each day of expectation delayed ﬁlls
:them with fear, and I almost dread a
mutiny caused by this despair.

254- mnuxnnsrsm; on,
Sepia-bum

A scene has just passed of such
uncommon interest, that although it is
highly probable that these papers may
never reach you, yet I cannot forbear
recording it.

We are still surrounded by moun-
tains of ice, still in imminent danger
of being crushed in their conﬂict.
The cold is excessive, and many of
my unfortunate comrades have already
found a grave amidst this scene of
desolation. Frankenstein has daily
declined in health: a feverish ﬁre still
glimmers in his eyes; ‘but he is ex-
hausted, and, when suddenly roused to
any exertion, he speedily sinks again
into apparent lifelessness.

I mentioned in my last letter the
fearsI entertained of a mutiny. This
morning, as I sat watching' the wan
countenance of my friend—his eyes

\  \

was MODERN PROMET‘HEUS. 265

half cloed, and his limbs hanging
listlessly,—I was roused by half a dozen
of the sailors, who demanded admission
into the cabin. They entered,and their
leader addressed me. He told me that
he and his companions had been chosen
by the other sailors to come in depu-
tation to me, to make me a requisition,
which, in justice, I could} not refuse..
We were immured in ice, and should
probably never escape; but they feared
.that if, as was possible, the ice should
dissipate, and a free passage be opened,
I should be rash enough to continue
my voyage, and lead them into fresh
dangers, after they might happily have
surmounted this. They insisted, there-
fore, that I hould engage with a so-
lemn promise, that if the vessel should
be freed I would instantly direct my
course southward. ‘
This speech troubled me. - I had

966 msnxsusrmu; on, '

not despaired; nor had I yet conceived
the idea of returning, if set free. Yet
could I, in justice, or even in possi-
bility, refuse this demand? I hesitated
before I answered ; when Frankenstein,
wbohad at ﬁrst been silent, .and, in-
deed, appeared hardly to have forte
enough to attend, now mused himself ;
his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks .
ﬂushed with momentary vigour. Turn-
ing towards the men, he said-—

“ What do you mean? What do
you demand of your captain? Are
you then so easily turned from your
design? Did you not call this a 310-
rious expedition? and wherefore was it
glorious? Not because the way was
smooth and placid as a southern sea.
but because it was full of dangers and
terror; because, at every new incident,
your fortitude was to be called forth,
and your courage exhibited; because

"\

THE MODERN PROMETHEL’S . 25‘?

danger ’and death surrounded, ﬁnd
these you Were to brave and over-
come.~ For this was it a glorious, for
this was it an honourable undertaking.
You were hereafter to be hailed as
the benefactors of your species; 'your
names adored, as belonging to brave
men who encountered death for honour
and the beneﬁt of mankind. And
now, "behold, 'with the ﬁrst imagination
of danger, or, if you Will, the ﬁrst
mighty and terriﬁc trial 'of your cou-
rage, you shrink away, and are content
to be handed down as men who had
not strength enough to endure cold
and peril; and so, poor souls, they
were chilly, and returned to their warm
. ﬁre-sides. Why, that requires not this
preparation; ye’need not have come
thus far, and dragged your‘captain to
the shame of a defeat, merely to prove
yourselves cowards. 0h! be men, or‘

258 nsuxnusnm; on,

he more than men. Be‘ steady to your
purposes, and ﬁrm as a rock. This ice
is not made of such stuff as your hearts
may be; it is mutable, scannot with-
stand you', if you say that it shall not.
Do not return to your families with the
stigma of disgrace marked on your
brows. Return, as heroes who have
fought and conquered, and who know
not what it i to turn their backs on
the foe.” ‘ '

He spoke this with a voice so modu-
lated to the‘diﬂ'ereut feelings expressed
in his speech, with an eye so full of
lofty design and heroism, that can you
wonder that these men were moved.
They looked at one another, and were
unable to reply. I spoke; I told them
to retire, and consider of what had been
said: that I would not lead them
further north, if they strenuously de-
sired the contrary; but that I hoped

was woman! PROMETHEUS. 259

that, with reﬂection, their courage would
return.

They retired, and I turned towards
my friend ; but he was sunk in languor,
and almost deprived of life. V
'. How allrthis will terminate, I know.
not; but I had rather die, than return
shamefully,—-my purpose unfulﬁlled.
Yet I fear such will be my fate; the
men, unsupported by ideas of glory
and honour, ‘can never willingly con-
tinue to endure their present hard-
ships.

September 7th.

The die is cast; I have consented to
return, if we are not destroyed. Thus
are my hopes blasted by cowardice end
indecision; I come back ignorant and
disappointed. It requires more philo.
sophy than I possess, to hear this in-.
justice with patience.

960 ' rnsuxsusrmx ; on,“

September 12th

It is past; I am returning to Eng-
lsnd. I have lost my hopes of utility
and glory ;—I have lost my friend.
But I will endeavour to detail these
bitter circumstances to you, my dear
sister; and, while I am wafted towards
England, and towards you, I will not
despond. '

September 9th, the ice, began to
move, and rparings like thunder were
heard at a distance, as the islands
split and cracked in every direction-
We were inthe most imminent peril;
but, as we could only remain passive,
my chief attention was occupied by my
iinﬁortunate guest,‘ whose illness in-
creased in such a degree, that he was
entirely conﬁned to his bed. The ice
cracked behind us, and was driven with
force towards the north; a breeze
sprung from the west, and on the 11th

‘

THE IODEEN PEOMETHEUS.

the passage towards the south became
perfectly free. When the sailors saw
this, and that their return to their native
country was apparently assured, a shout
of tumultuous joy broke from them,
loud and long-continued. Frankenstein;
who was dozing, awoke, and asked the
cause of the tumult. “ They shout,” I
said, “ because they will soon return to"
England.”

“ Do you then really return P"

“ Alas! yes; I cannot withstand their
demands. '1 cannot lead them unwillg
ingly to danger, and I must return.” ‘

Do so, if you will; but I will not.
You may give up your purpose; but
mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and
I dare not. I am weak; but surely the
spirits who assist my vengeance will
endow me with suﬁicieut strength.”
Saying‘this, he endeavoured to spring
from' the bed, but the exertion was

.
26a runxnusum; on,

too great for him; he fell back, and
fainted. ' ‘
It was long before he was restored;
and I often thought that life was entirely
extinct. At length he opened his eyes;
he breathed with diﬂiculty, and was un-
able to speak. The surgeon gave hiin
a composing draught, and ordered us to
leave him undisturbed; In the mean
time he told me, that my friend had’cer-
tainly not many hours to live. 
His sentence was pronounced; and I
could only grieve, and be patient; I sat
by his bed, watching him; his eyes were
closed, and I thought he slept; but pre-
sently he called to me in a feeble voice,
and, bidding me come near, said—~—
“ Alas! the strength I relied on is gone;
I feel that I shall soon die, and he, my
enemy and persecutor,'may still-he in
being. Think not, \l'alton,'that in the
last moments of my existence I feel that

ran KODERN nous-runs. 263

burning hatred, and ardent desire 'of
revenge, I once expressed; but I feel ‘
myself justiﬁed in desiring the death of
my adversary. During these'last‘ days
I have been occupied indexaminin‘g my
past conduct; nor do I ﬁnd it blame-
able. In a ﬁt of enthusiastic madness
I created a rational creature, and we
bound towards him, to assure, as‘far as
was in my power, hi happiness and
well-being. This was my duty; but
there was-another still paramount to
that. My duties towards the beings of
my own-species had greater claims to
my attention, because they included a
greater proportion of happiness or mi-
sery. Urged by this view, I refused,
and I did right in refusing, to create a
companion for the ﬁrst creature. He
showed unparalleled malignity and self.
ishness, in evil : be destroyed my friends;

)9

264 rsmuusrsm ; on,

.he devoted to destruction beings who
possessed exquisite sensations, happi.
ness, and wisdom; nor do I know where
this thirst for vengeance may end. Mi'
serable himself, that he may render no
other wretched, he ought to die. The
task of his destruction was mine, but.
I have failed. When actuated by selﬁsh.
and vicious motives, I asked you to un-
dertake my unﬁnished work; and I re.
new this request now, when I am only
induced by reason and virtue.

“Yet I cannot ask you to renounce
your country and friends, to fulﬁl this
task; and now, that you are returning
to England, you will have little chance
of meeting with him. But the con-
sideration ,of these points, and the well-
balancing of what you may esteem your
duties, I leave to you; my judgment and
ideas are already disturbed by the near

ms MODERN PROMETHEUS. 265

approach of death. I dare not ask you.
to do what I think right, for I may still'
be misled by passion. ‘

“ That he should‘live to be an instrn-'
ment of mischief disturbs me; in other:
respects this hour, when I momentarily:
expect my release, is the only happy
one which I have enjoyed for several'
years. The forms of the beloved dead'
ﬂit before me, and I- hasten to their
arms. Farewell, Walton! Seek hap~
piness in tranquillity, and avoid am-
bition, even if it be only the apparently
innocent one of distinguishing your-
self in science and discoveries. Yet
why do I say this? I have myself been
blasted in these hopes, yet another may
succeed.”

His Voice became fainter as he
. spoke; and at length, exhausted by
his effort, be sunk into silence. About

von. 11. N

266 . FRANKENSTEIN; on,

half an hour afterwards he attempted
again to speak, but was unable; he
pressed my hand feebly, and'his eyes
closed for ever, while the irradiation
of a gentle smile passed away from his
lips.

Margaret, what comment can I make
on the untimely extinction of this-glo-
rious spirit! What can I say, that will
enable you'to understand the depth of
my sorrow? All that I should express
would be inadequate and feeble. My
tears ﬂow; my" mind is overshadowed
by a cloud of disappointment. Butl
journey towards England, and I may
there ﬁnd consolation.

I am interrupted. What do these
sounds portend? It is midnight; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on
deck scarcely stir. Again; there is
a sound as of a human voice, but

ms IODERN moun'rnaus. 267-

hoarser; it comes from the cabin where
the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I
must arise, and examine. Good night,
my sister. '
Great God! what a scene has just >
 taken place! I am yet dizzy with the
remembrance of it.‘ I hardly know
whether I shall have the power to de-
tail it; yet the tale which I have re:
corded would be incomplete without
this ﬁnal and wonderful catastrophe.
I entered the cabin,‘where‘ lay the
remains of my ill-fated and admirable.
friend. Over him hung a form which
[cannot ﬁnd words to describe; gigantic
in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in
its proportion; Ashe hung over the
cofﬁn, his face was concealed by lt‘mg
locks'of ragged hair; but one vast hand
was extended, in colour and apparent
texture like that of a mummy. When
he heard the sound of my approach, he‘
N 2

£68 tumsnm; on,

ceased to utter 'exclamations of grief
and horror, and sprung towards the
window. Never did I behold a vision
so horrible as his face, of such loath-
some, yet appalling hideousness. [shut
my eyes involuntarily, and endeavoured
to recollect what were my duties with
rtegard to this destroyer. I called on
him to stay; . -

He paused, looking on me with won-
der; and, again turning towards the
lifeless form of his creator, he seemed
to forget my presence, and every fea-
ture and gesture seemed instigated by
the wildest rage of some uncontrolahle
passion. ' ‘

“ That is also my victim!” be ex»
claimed: “in his murder my crimes are
consummated; the- miserable series of
my being is wound to- its close! 0h.
Frankenstein ! generous and self-devoted
being! what does it avail that I-now ask

ms icons nousmsus. 2&9

thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably
destroyed theeby‘ destroying all thou
lovedst. Alas! he is cold; he cannot
answer me.”

i His voice seemed suffocated; and my
ﬁrst. impulses, which had suggested to
me the duty of obeying the dying re-
quest of my friend, in destroying his
enemy, were now suspended by a mix-
ture of curiosity and compassion. I
approached this tremendous being; I
dared not again raise my eyes to his
1310;, there was something so seating
and unearthly in his ugliness. I ate
tempted to speak, but the words died
away on‘my lips. The monster tron.
tinned to utter wild and incoherent 'sqlf-
reproaches. At length I gathered reso-
lution to address him in a pause oﬁ-the
tempest of his passion : “ Your- repent.
Nice," 'I said, “ is haw superﬂuous. If
you had listened to the voice of con~

2‘70 rnmxmnm; on,

science, and heeded the' stings of re-
morse, before you had urged your dias
bolical vengeance to this extremity.
Frankenstein would yet have lived.”
“ And do you dream?” said the due-
mon; “ do you think that l was then
dead to agony and remorse ?—-H'e,” he
continued, pointing to the corpse, “he
suffered not in the consummation of the
deed—oh! not the ten-thousandth por-
tion of the anguish that was mine during
the lingering detail of its execution. A
frightful selﬁshness hurried me on, while
my heart was poisoned with remorse.
Think ye that the groans of Cleml
were music to my ears? My heart was
fashioned to be susceptible of love and
‘ sympathy; and, vrhen wrenched by mi-
sery to vice and hatred, it did not en-
dure the violence of the change without
torture such as you cannot even ima-

gine.

‘

run nouns mournsus. 271

“ After the murder of Cle'rval, I
returned to Switzerland, heart-broken
and overcome. .I pitied Frankenstein:
my pity amounted to horror: I ah-
horred myself. But when I discovered
that he, the author at once of my exist-
ence and of its unspeakable torments,
dared to hope for happiness; that, while
he accumulated wretchedness and de-
spair upon me, he sought his own en-
joyment in feelings and passions from
the indulgence of which I was for ever
barred, then impotent. envy and bitter
indignation‘ ﬁlled me with an insatiable
thirst for vengeance. I recollected my
threat, and resolved that it should be
accomplished. I knew that I was pre-
paring for myself a deadly torture; but
I was the slave, not the master, of an
impulse which I detested, yet could not
disobey. Yet' when she died !‘—nay,
then I was not miserable. I had cast

y-

272 unrmsnm; on,

03' all feeling, subdued» all anguish, to
riot in the excess of my despair. Evil
thenceforth became my good. Urged
thus far,l had no choice but to adapt
my nature to an element which I had
willingly chosen. The completion of
inydemonia’cal design became an in-
satiable. passion. And now it is ended;
there is my last 'victim I"

I was at ﬁrst touched by the expres-
sions of his misery; yet, when I called
to mind what Frankenstein had said of
his powers of eloquence and persuasion,
and when I again cast my eyes on the
lifeless form of my friend, indignation
was rekindled Within me. “ Wretch !”
I said, “ it is well that you come here
to whine over the desolation that you
have made. You throw a torch into
a pile of buildings; and, when they are
consumed, you sit among the ruins and
lament the fall. Hypocritical ﬁend! if.

mm many ' monanmus. 278

he whom you mourn still lived, 'still
would -he beithe object, again would
he- become the prey, of your “cursed
vengeance. It is not pity that you feel;
you lament only because the victim of
your malignity is withdrawn from your
power.” ' ’
~ “ Oh, it is not thus—not thus,” he
~terrupted the being; “ yet such must
be the impression conveyed to you by
what appears to be the purport of my
actions.‘ Yet I seek not a fellow-.‘
feeling in my misery. No sympathy
may I ever ﬁnd. When» I ﬁrst sought
itrxit was the love of virtue, the'feeh
ings of happiness and affection with
which my whole 'being' overﬂowed, that
I‘vished to he participated. But now,
thatvirtue has become to me a sha-
dow, and that happiness and ‘aﬂ'ection
are turned into bitter and loathing ‘de’
'spair, ing-whnt ‘sholﬂd I seek for sym.

274 rmxmsmx; on, -

pathy P .1 amlcoutent to suffer alone,
while my sufferings shall endure: when
ldie, lam well satisﬁed that abhor-
rence and opprobrium should load my
memory. Once my fancy-was soothed
with dreams of virtne,.of fame, and of
enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to
meetwith beings, 'who, pardoning my
outward form, wouldrlove me for the
excellent qualities which I was capable
of‘unfolding. I was nourished with
high thoughts of honour and devotion.
But now vice has degraded me beneath
the meanest animal. No crime, no
mischief, no' malignity, no ~mjsery, can
be found comparable to mine. - When
I run over the frightful catalogue of my
deeds, I cannot believe that I am the
same creature whose thoughtswere once
ﬁlled with sublime and transcendant
visions of, the beauty. and the majesty
of goodness, But‘it is even so; the

l

THE ‘ momma rmgnmns. 275

fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
Yet even that enemy of God and man
had friendsand associates in his desola-
tion ; I am alone.

“You, who call Frankenstein your
friend, seem to have a knowledge of
my crimes and his misfortunes. But,
in'the detail which he gave you of
them, he could not sum up the hours
and months of misery which I endured;
wasting in impotent passions. For
while I destroyed his bones, I did not
satisfy my own desires. The were for
ever ardent and craving; still'l desired
love and fellowship, and I was still
spurned. Was’ their no injustice in
this? An: I to be thought the only
criminal, when all human kind sinned
against me? Why do you not hate
Felix, who drove his friend from his
door with contumely? Why do'yon'
not execrate the rustic who sought to

2'16 FMNKINITIIN; on,

destroy the saviour of his child? Nay,
these are virtuous and immaculate be-
ings! I, the miserable and the aban-
doned, am an abortion, to be spurned
at, and kicked, and trampled on. Even
now' my blood boils at the recollection
of this injustice.-

 . “ But. it is true that I am a wretch.
'1‘ have murdered the lovely and the
helpless; l' have strangled the inno.
cent as they slept, and grasped to death
his throat who never injured me or
any otherliving thing. I have devoted
my creator, the select specimen of all
that is worthy of love and admiration
among men, to misery; I have pursued
him even to that irremediable ruin.
There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me; but your abhorrence
cannot equal that with which I regard
myself, I look on the bands which
executed the deed ; Ithink on the heart

‘

- me wanna noxzmvs. 27‘?

in which the imagination of it was com '
ceiVed, and long for the moment when
these bands will meet my eyes, when
that imagination will haunt‘mythoughts,‘
no more. ‘ v 3 i

“ Fear not that I shall be the inﬁrm
ment of fhture mischief. M-y werk is
nearly complete. Neither yours nor
any man’s death is needed m cousumi
mate the series of my being, and ac;
complish that which must be done;
but it requires my own. Do not think:
that I shall be slow to perform this as: y
criﬁce. I shall quit your vessel on the,
ice-raft which brought me hither, and:
shall seek the most northernlextremity:
of the globe; lshsll collect my funeral"
pile, and consume to ashes this mi?
serahle frame, that its remains may
afford no light to any curious and uh:-
hallowed wretch, who would create;

such another as I have been. In shall

278 - Hummus; an,

die. llhall no longer feel the agouies
which now consume me, or be the
prey. of feelings unsatisﬁed, yet un-
quenched. He is dead who called me
into being; and when I shall be no
more, the very remembrance of us
both will speedin vanish. I shall no
longer see the sun or stars, or feel the
winds play-on my cheeks. Light, feel-
ing, and sense, will pass away; and in
this condition must I ﬁnd my happi-
ness. Some years ago, when theimages
which this world aﬂ'ords ﬁrst open-
ed upon me, when I felt the cheer-
ing warmth of summer, and heard the
rustling of the leaves and the warbling
of the birds, and these were all to me,
I should have wept to die; now it
is my only consolation. Polluted by
crimes, and torn by the bitterest re-
morse, where can I ﬁnd rest but in

death .>

ma stanzas rnous'rasus. 279

“ Farewell ! I leave you, and in you
the last of human kind whom these
eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frank-
enstein I If thou wert yet alive, and
yet cherished a desire of revenge against
me, it would be better satiated in my
life than in my destruction. But it was
not so; thou didst seek my extinction,
that I might not cause greater wretch-
edness; and if yet, in some mode un-
known to me, thou hadst not ceased to
think and feel, thou wouldst not desire
against me a vengeance greater than-
that which I feel. Blasted as thou wet-t,
my agony was still superior to thine ; for
the bitter sting of remorse will not
cease to rankle in my wounds until
death shall close them for ever.

“ But soon," he cried, with sad and
solemn enthusiasm, “1 shall die, and
what I now feel be no longer felt.
Soon these burning miseries will: be

280 FMNKENITEIN.

extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile
triumphantly, and exult in the agony of
the torturing ﬂames. The light-of that
conﬂagration will fade away; my ashes
will be swept into the sea by the Winds.
My spirit will sleep in peace; or if it
thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell.”

He sprung from the cabin-window,
as he said this, upon the ice-raft which
lay close to the vessel. He was soon
borne away by the waves, and lost in
darkness and distance.

THE END-

IDNDON:
mum I! 130)“: mvnor, WHITIFIMBS.

 

 

 

   

 

 

