PHASE THE FIRST

THE UAIDEN

I

OH an evening in the latter part of May a middle-
agedmanwaswalh'nghomewardfromShastontothe
village of Marlott, in the adjoining Vale of Blakemore
or Blachnoor. The pair of legs that carried him were
rickety, and there was a. bias in his gait which inclined
him somewhat to the left of a straight line. He
occasionally gave a smart nod, as if in conﬁrmation of
some opinion, though he was not thinking of anything
in particular. An empty egg-basket was slung upon his
arm, the nap of his hat was rufﬂed, a patch being quite
worn away at its brim where his thumb came in taking
it OK. Presently he was met by an elderly
astride on a gray mare, who, as he rode, bummed a
wandering time.

‘Good night t’ee,’ said the man with the basket.

‘Good night, Sir John,’ said the parson.

The pedestrian, after another pace or two, halted,
and turned round.

"Now, sir, begging your pardon; we met last
market-day on this road about this time, and I zaid
“Good night," and you made reply “Good night, Sir
John," as now.’

‘I did,’ said the person.

‘And once before that—near a month ago.’

'I may have.’

‘Then what might your meaning be in calling me
3

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

“Sir John" these different times, when I be plain Jack
Durbeyﬁeld, the haggler?’

The parson rode a step or two nearer.

‘It was only my whim,’ he said; and, after a mo-
ment’s hesitation: ‘It was on account of a discovery
I made some little time ago, whilst I was hunting up
pedigrees for the new county history. I am Parson
Tringham, the antiquary, of Stagfoot Lane. Don't
you really know, Durbeyﬁeld, that you are the lineal
representative of the ancient and knightly family of
the d'Urbervilles, who derive their descent from Sir
Pagan d'Urberville, that renowned knight who came
from Normandy with William the Conqueror, as
appears by Battle Abbey Roll?’

‘Never heard it before, sir!’

‘Well it’s true. Throw up your chin a moment, so
that I may catch the proﬁle of your face better. Yes,
that's the d'Urberville nose and chin-a little debased.
Your ancestor was one of the twelve knights who
assisted the Lord of Estremavilla in Normandy in
his conquest of Glamorganshire. Branches of your
family held manors over all this part of England;
their names appear in the Pipe Rolls in the time of
King Stephen. In the reign of King John one of
them was rich enough to give a manor to the Knights
Hospitallers; and in Edward the Second’s time your
forefather Brian was summoned to Westminster to
attend the great Council there. You declined a. little
in Oliver Cromwell’s time, but to no serious extent,
and in Charles the Seoond’s reign you were made
Knights of the Royal Oak for your loyalty. Aye,
there have been generations of Sir Johns among you,
and if knighthood were hereditary, like a baronetcy,
as it practicallywas in old times, when men were knight-
ed from father to son, you would be Sir John now.’

‘Ye don’t say so!’

‘In short.’ concluded the parson, decisively smack-
ing his leg with his switch, ‘there's hardly such an-
other family in England.’

4

THE MAIDEN

‘Daze my eyes, and isn't there?’ said Durbeyﬁeld.
‘And here havereenknocking about,yearafteryear,
hompillartcpost,asif1wasnomoxethanthe
commonest feller in the parish. . . . And how long hev
this news about me been knowed, Pa'son Tringham?‘

The clergyman explained that, as far as he was
aware, it had quite died out of knowledge, and could
hardly be said to be known at all. His own investiga-
tionshad begunonadayintheprecedingspring
when, having been engaged in tracing the vicissitudes
of the d’Urberville family, he had obmed Durbey-
ﬁeld’s name on his wagon, and had thereupon been
led to make inquiries about his father and grandfather-
till he had no doubt on the subject.

‘At ﬁrst I resolved not to disturb you with such a
useless piece of infomiation,’ said he. ‘However, our
impulses are too strong for our judgment sometimes.
I thought you might perhaps know something of it all
the while.’

‘Well, I have heard once or twice, ’tis true, that my
family had seen better days afore they came to Black-
moor. But I took no notice o't, thinking it to mean
that we had once kept two horses where we now keep
only one. I’ve got a wold silver spoon, and a wold
graven seal at home, too; but, Lord, what's a spoon
andsea1?...AndtothinkthatIandthesenoble
d'Urbervilles were one ﬂesh all the time. ’Twas said
that my gr't—graudfer had secrets, and didn't care to
talkofwherehecamefrom. . . .Andwhetedowe
raise our smoke, now, parson, if I may make so bold;
I mean, where do we d’Urbervilles live?’

‘You don’t live anywhere. You are extinct—as a
county family.’

‘That’s bad.’

‘Yes——what the mendacious family chronicles call
ﬁnd: in‘the male line—that is, gone dowm-gme

er.’

‘Then where do we lie?'

‘At Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill: rows and rows of

5

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

you in your vaults, with your eﬁgies under Purbeck-
marble canopies.’ .

‘And where be our family mansions and estates?’

‘You haven't any.’

‘Oh? No lands nm'ther?’

‘None; though you once had ' in abundance,
as I said, for your family consisted of numerous
branches. In this county there was a seat of yours
at Kingsbere, and another at Sherton, and another at
Millpond, and another at Luilstead, and another at
Wellbridge.’

.‘Andshallweeveroomeintoourownagain?’

‘Ah—that I can't tell!‘

‘And what had I better do about it, sir?’ mired
Durbeyﬁeld, after a. pause. I

‘Oh—nothing, nothing; except chasten yourself
with the thought of “how are the mighty fallen.” It
isafactofsomeinteresttothelocalhistorianand
genealogist, nothing more. There are several families
among the cottagers of this county of almost equal
lustre. Good night.’

‘But you’ll turn back and have a quart of beer wi’
me on the strength o’t, Pa’son Tringham? There’s a
very pretty brew in tap at The Pure Drop—though,
to be sure, not so good as at Rolliver’s.’

‘No, thank you—not this evening, Durbeyﬁeld.
You've had enough already.’ Concluding thus the
parsonrodeonhisway,withdoubtsastohisdis-
cretion in retailing this curious bit of lore.

When he was gone Durbeyﬁeld walked a few steps
in a profound reverie, and then sat down upon the
grassy bank by the roadside, depositing his basket
before him. In a few minutes a youth appeared in
the distance, walldng in the same direction as that
which had been pursued by Durbeyﬁeld. The latter,
on seeing him, held up his hand, and the lad quick-
ened his pace and came near.

‘Boy, takeupthatbasket! Iwant'eetogoonan
errand for me.’ 6

"m ,.

THE MAIDEN

The lath-like stripling frowned. ‘W'ho be you
then, John Durbeyﬁeld, to order me about and call
me “boy”? You know my name as well as I know

P

yours.

‘Do you, do you? That’s the secret—that's the
secret! Now obey my orders, and take the message
I’mgoingtocharge ’eewi’. . . .Well,Fred,Idon’t
mindtellingyouthatthesecretisthatI’moneofa
noble race—it has been just found out by me this
present afternoon, P.M.' And as he made the announce-
ment, Durbeyﬁeld, declining from his sitting position,
luxuriously stretched himself out upon the bank among
the daisies.

The lad stood before Durbeyﬁeld, and contemplated
his length from crown to toe.

‘ Sir John d’Urberville—that’s who I am,’ continued
the prostrate man. "Phat is if knights were baronets
—which they be. ’Tis recorded in history all about
me. Dost know of such a place, lad, as Kingsbere-
sub-Greenhill?’ -

‘Ees. I’ve been there to Greenhill Fair.’

‘Well, under the church of that city there lie—’

‘ ’Tisn’t a city, the place I h1ean;leastwise 'twaddn'
when I was there—'twas a. little~one-eyed, blinking
sort 0’ place.’

‘Never you mind the place, boy, that’s not the
question before us. Under the church of that there
parish lie my ancestors—hundreds of 'em—in coats of
mailandjewels,ingr’tleadcoﬂinsweighingtonsand
tons. There’s not a man in the county 0' South
Wessex that's got grander and nobler skillentons in
his family than I.’

‘0h?’

‘Now take up that basket, and goo on to Marlott,
and when you've come to The Pure Drop Inn, tell 'em
to send a horse and carriage to me immed'ately, to
carry me hwome. And in the bottom 0’ themrriage
theybetoputanoggino’ruminasmallbottle, and
chalk it up to my account. And when you've done

1

TESS OF THE ' D'URBERVILLES

thatgooontomyhousewiththebasket, andtellmy
wife to put away that washing, because she needn’t
ﬁnish it, and wait till I come hwome, as I've news to
tell her.’

As the lad stood in a dubious attitude, Durbeyﬁeld
puthishandinhispocket,andproducedashilling,one
of the chronically few that he pom.

‘Here's for your labour, lad.’

This made a diﬂerenCe in the. young man's estimate
of the

‘Yes, Sir John. Thank ’ee. Anything else I can
do for ’ee, Sir John?’

‘ Tell ’em at hwome that I should like for supper——
well. lamb's fry it they can get it; and if they can't,
black-pot; and if they can’t get that, well, chitterlings
will do.’ .

‘Yes, Sir John.’

Theboy tookup thebasket, andashesetoutthe
notes of a brass band were heard from the direction of
the village. ‘ .

‘IW? hat’s that? said Durbeyﬁeld. ‘Not on acemmt
of 1

"Tis the women’s club-walking, Sir John. Why,
your da’ter is one o’ the members.‘

‘To be sure—I'd quite forgot it in my thoughts of
greater things! Well, vamp on to Marlott, will ye,
and order that carriage, and maybe I’ll drive round
and inspect the club.’

The lad departed, and Durbeyﬁeld lay waiting on
the grass and daisies in the evening sun. Not a soul
passed that way for a long while, and the faint notes
of the band were the only human sounds audible
within the rim of blue hills.

II

THE village of Marlott lay amid the north-eastern
undulations of the beautiful Vale of Blakemore or
Blaclnnoor aforesaid, an engirdled and secluded region
for the most part untrodden as yet by tourist or land-
scape-painter, though within a four hours' journey
from London.

It is a. vale whose acquaintance is best made by
viewing it item the summits of the hills that surround
it—exeept perhaps during the droughts of summer.
An unguided ramble into its recesses in bad weather
is apt to engender with its narrow,
tortuous, and inin ways.

This fertile and sheltered tract of country, in which
the ﬁelds are never brown and the springs never dry,
is bounded on the south by the bold chalk ridge that
embraces the prominences of Hambledon Hill, Bul-
barrow, Nettlecombe Tout, Dogbury, High-Stay, and
Bubb Down. The traveller from the coast, who, after
plodding northward for a score of miles over calcareous
downs and corn-lands, suddenly reaches the verge of
one of these escarpments, is surprised and delighted
to behold, extended like a. map beneath him, a country
differing absolutely from that which he has passed
through. Behind him the hills are open, the sun blazes
down upon ﬁelds so large as to give an unenclosed
character to the landscape, the lanes are white, the
hedges low and plashed, the atmosphere colourless.
Here, in the valley, the world seems to be constructed
upon a. smaller and more delicate scale; the ﬁelds are
mere paddocks, so reduced that from this height their
hedgerows appear a network of dark green threads

9

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

overspreading the paler green of the grass. The atmos-
phere beneath is languorous, and is so tinged with
azure that what artists call the middle distance par-
takes also of that hue, while the horizon beyond is of
the deepest ultramarine. Arable lands are few and
limited; with but slight exceptions the prospect is a
broad rich mass of grass and trees, mantling minor
hills and dales within the major. Such is the Vale of
Blackmoor.

The district is of historic, no less than of topo-
graphical interest. The Vale was known in former
times as the Forest of White Hart, from a curious
legend of King Henry III.’s reign, in which the killing
by a certain Thomas de la Lynd of a beautiful white
hart which the king had run down and spared, was
made the occasion of a heavy ﬁne. In those days, and
till comparatively recent times, the country was dense-
ly wooded. Even now traces of its earlier condition
are to be found in the old oak copses and irregular
belts of timber that yet survive upon its slopes, and
the hollow-trunked trees that shade so many of its
pastures.

The forests have departed, but some old customs of
their shades remain. Many, however, linger only in a
metamorphosed or disguised form. The May-Day
dance, for instance, was to be discerned on the after-
noon under notice, in the guise of the club revel, or
‘club-walking,’ as it was there called.

It was an interesting event to the younger in-
habitants of Marlott, though its real interest was not
observed by the participators in the ceremony. Its
singularity lay less in the retention of a custom of
walking in procession and dancing on each anniversary
than in the members being solely women. In men’s
clubs such celebrations were, though expiring, less
uncommon; but either the natural shyness of the
softer sex, or a sarcastic attitude on the part of male
relatives had denuded such women's clubs as re-
mained (if any other did) of this their glory and con-

30

THE MAIDEN

summation. The club of Marlott alone lived to up-
hold the local Cerealia. It had walked for hundreds of
years, if not as beneﬁtpclub, as votive sisterhood of
some sort; and it walked still.

The banded ones were all dressed in white gowns
—-a gay survival from Old Style days, when cheerful-
ness and May-time were synonyms—days before the
habit of taking long views had reduced emotions to
a monotonous average. Their ﬁrst exhibition of
themselveswasinaprocessionalmarchoftwoand
two round the parish. Ideal and real clashed slightly
as the sun lit up their ﬁgures against the green hedges
and creeper-laced house-fronts; for, though the whole
troop wore white garments, no two whites were alike
among them. Some approached pure blanching;
some had a. bluish pallor; some worn by the older
characters (which had possibly lain by folded for many
ayiear) inclinedtoacadaveroustint,andtoaGeorgian
sty e.

In addition to the distinction of a white frock.
every woman and girl carried in her right hand a
peeled willow wand, and in her left a bunch of white
ﬂowers. The peeling of the former, and the selection
of the latter, had been an operation of personal cane.

There were a few middle-aged and even elderly
women in the train, their silver-wiry hair and wrinkled
faces, soourged by time and trouble, having almost a
grotesque, certainly a pathetic, appearance in such a.
jaunty situation. In a true view, perhaps, there was
moretobegatheredandtoldofeaohanxiousand
experienced one, to whom the years were drawing nigh
when she should say, ‘I have no pleasure in them,’
than of her juvenile comrades. But let the elder be

over here for those under whose bodices the
life throbbed quick and warm.

The young girls formed, indeed, the majority of
the band, and their heads of luxuriant hair reﬂected
in the sunshine every tone of gold, and black, and
brown. Some had beautiful eyes, others a beautiful

I! .

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

nose, others a beautiful mouth and ﬁgure: few, if any,
hadall. Adiﬂicultyofarrangingtheirlipsinthis
crude exposure to public scrutiny, an inability to
balance their heads, and to dissociate self—conscious-
ness from their features, was apparent in them, and
showed that they were genuine country girls, unaccus-
tomed to many eyes.

And as each and all of them were warmed without
by the sun, so each had a private little sun for her soul
to bask in; some dream, some aﬁection, some hobby,
at least some remote and distant hope which, though
perhaps starving to nothing, still lived on, as hopes
will. Thus they were all cheerful, and many of them
merry.

They came round by The Pure Drop Inn, and
wereturningoutofthehighroadtopassthrougha
wicdket-gate into the meadows, when one of the women
sad 

‘The Lord-a-Lord! Why, Tess Durbeyﬁeld, if
there isn't thy father riding hwome in a carriage?

A young member of the band turned her head at
the exclamation. She was a ﬁne and handsome girl
—not handsomer than some others, possibly—but her
mobile peony mouth and large innocent eyes added
eloquence to colour and shape. She wore a red
ribbon in her hair, and was the only one of the white
company who could boast of such a pronounced adorn-
ment. As she looked round Durbeyﬁeld was seen
moving along the road in a. chaise belonging to The
Pure Drop, driven by a frizzle-headed brawny damsel
with her gown-sleeves rolled above her elbows. This
was the cheerful servant of that establishment, who,
in her part of factotum, turned groom and ostlet at
times. Durbeyﬁeld, leaning back, and with his eyes
closed luxuriously, was waving his hand above his
head, and singing in a. slow recitative—

‘I’ve-got—a-gr't-family-vault—at-Kingsbere—and
highted~forefathers—in—lead-cofﬁns—therel'

The clubbists tittered, except the girl called Tess

12

THE MAIDEN

-—in whom a slow heat seemed to rise at the sense
that her father was making himself foolish in their

eyes.

‘He's tired, that’s all,’ she said hastily, ‘and he
hasgotalifthome,becauseourownhorsehastorest
to—day.’

‘Bless thy simplicity, Tess,’ said her companions.
‘He's got his market-nitch. Haw-haw!’

‘Look here; I won’t walk another inch with you,
if you say any jokes about him!’ Tess cried, and the
colour upon her cheeks spread over her face and neck.
In a moment her eyes grew moist, and her glance
drooped to the ground. Perceiving that they had
really pained her, they said no more, and order again
prevailed. Tess’s pride would not allow her to turn
her head again, to learn what her father's meaning
was, if he had any; and thus she moved on with the
whole body to the enclosure where there was to be
dancing on the green. By the time the spot was
reached she had recovered her equanimity, and tapped
her neighbour with her wand and talked as usual.

Tess Durbeyﬁeld at this time of her life was a
mere vessel of emotion untinctured by experience.
The dialect was on her tongue to some extent, despite
the village school: the characteristic intonation of that
dialect for this district being the voicing approximate-
ly rendered by the syllable UR, probably as rich an
utterance as any to be found in human speech. The
pouted-up deep red mouth to which this syllable was
native had hardly as yet settled into its deﬁnite shape,
and her lower lip had a way of thrusting the middle of
her g one upward, when they closed together after
a w .

Phases of her childhood lurked in her aspect still.
As she walked along to-day, for all her bouncing hand-
some womanliness, you could sometimes see her twelfth
year in her cheeks, or her ninth sparkling from her
eyes; and even her ﬁfth would ﬂit over the curves of
her mouth now and then.

‘3

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Yet few knew, and still fewer considered this. A
small minority, mainly strangers, would look long at
her in casually passing by, and grow momentarily
fascinated by her freshnes, and wonder if they would
ever see her again: but to almost everybody she was
a ﬁne and picturesque country girl, and no more.

Nothing was seen or heard further of Durbeyﬁeld
in his triumphal chariot under the conduct of the
ostleress, and the club having entered the allotted
space, dancing began. As there were no men in the
company the girls danced at ﬁrst with each other, but
when the hour for the close of labour drew on, the
masculine inhabitants of the village, together with
other idlers and pedestrians, gathered round the spot,
and appeared inclined to negotiate for a partner.

Among these on-lookers were three young men of
a. superior class, carrying small knapsacks strapped to
their shoulders, and stout sticks in their hands. Their
general likeness to each other, and their consecutive
ages, would almost have suggested that they might be,
what in fact they were, brothers. The eldest wore the
white tie, high waistcoat, and thin-brimmed hat of the
regulation curate; the second was the normal under-
graduate; the appearance of the third and youngest
would hardly have been sufﬁcient to characterize him;
there was an uncribbed, uncabined aspect in his eyes
and attire, implying that he had hardly as yet found
the entrance to his professional groove. That he was
a desultory tentative student of something and every-
thing might only have been predicted of him.

These three brethren told casual acquaintance that
they were spending their Whitsun holidays in a walk-
ing tour through the Vale of Blackmoor, their course
being south-westerly from the town of Shaston on
the north-east.

They leant over the gate by the highway, and
inquired as to the meaning of the dance and the white-
frocked maids. The two elder of the brothers were

plainly not intending to linger more than a moment
:4

THE MAIDEN

but the spectacle of a bevy of girls dancing without

male partners seemed to amuse the third, and make

him in no hurry to move on. He unstrapped his

knapsack, put it, with his stick, on the hedge-bank,

and opened the gate.

eléWhat are you going to do, Angel?’ asked the
est.

‘1 am inclined to go and have a. ﬂing with them.
Why not all of us-just for a minute or two—it will
not detain us long?’

‘No—no; nonsense!‘ said the ﬁrst. ‘Dancing in
public with a. troop of country hoydens—suppose we
should be seen! Come along, or it will be dark before
we get to Stourcastle, and there’s no place we can
sleep at nearer than that; besides, we must get through
another chapter of A Cwnterblast to Agnosticism before
{Satyr-n in, now I have taken the trouble to bring the

‘All right-I'll overtake you and Cuthbert in ﬁve
minutes; don’t stop; I give my word that I will,
Felix.’

The two elder reluctantly left him and walked on,.
taking their brother's knapsack to relieve him in fol-
lowing, and the youngest entered the ﬁeld.

‘This is a thousand pities,’ he said gallantly, to two
orthreeofthegirlsnearesthim,assoonastherewas
a pause in the dance. ‘Where are your partners, my
dears?’

‘They’ve not left oﬂ work yet,’ answered one of the
boldest. ‘They’ll be here by and by. Till then, will
you be one, sir?’

‘Certainly. But what’s one among so many!’

‘ Better than none. 'Tis melancholy work facing
and footing it to one of your own sort, and no clipsing
and calling at all. Now, pick and choose.’

"Ssh—don’t be so for’ard!’ said a shyer girl.

The young man, thus invited, glanced them over,
and attempted some discrimination: but, as the group
wereallsonewtohim hecouldnotverywellexercise

I5

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

it. Hetookalmosttheﬁistthatcametohand, which
was not the speaker, as she had expected; nor did it
happen to be Tess Durbeyﬁeld. Pedigree, ancestral
skeletons, monumental record, the d'UrberviIle linea-
ments, did not help Tess in her life’s battle as yet,
even to the extent of attracting to her a dancing-
partner over the heads of the commonest peasantry.
lSo much for Norman blood unaided by Victorian
ucre.

The name of the eclipsing girl, whatever it was, has
not been handed down; but she was envied by all as
the ﬁrst who enjoyed the luxury of a masculine partner
that evening. Yet such was the force of example that
the village young men, who had not hastened to enter
the gate while no intruder was in the way, now dropped
in quickly, and soon the couples became leavened
with rustic youth to a marked extent, till at length the
plainest woman in the club was no longer compelled to
foot it on the masculine side of the ﬁgure.

The church clock struck, when suddenly the student
said that he must leave—he had been forgetting him-
self—he had to join his companions. As he fell out of
the dance his eyes lighted on Tess Durbeyﬁeld, whose
own large orbs wore, to tell the truth, the faintest
aspect of reproach that-he had not chosen her. He,
too. was sorry then that, owing to her hackwardness,
he had not observed her; and with that in his mind
he left the pasture.

On account of his long delay he started in a ﬂying-
run down the lane westward, and had soon passed the
hollow and mounted the next rise. He had not yet
overtaken his brothers, but he paused to get breath.
and looked back. He could see the white ﬁgures of
the girls in the green enclosure whirling about as they
had whirled when he was among them. They seemed
to have quite forgotten him already.

All of them, except, perhaps, one. This white
shape stood apart by the hedge alone. From her
position he knew it to be the pretty maiden with whom

r6

THE MAIDEN

he had not danced. Triﬂing as the matter was, he yet
instinctively felt that she was hurt by his oversight.
He wished that he had asked her; he wished that he
had inquired her name. She was so modest, so ex-
pressive, she had looked so soft in her thin white gown
that he felt he had acted stupidly.

However, it could not be helped, and turning, and
bending himself to a. rapid walk, he dismissed the
subject from his mind.

III

As for Tess Durbeyﬁeld, she did not so easily dislodge
the incident from her consideration. She had no spirit
to dance again for along time, though she might have
had plenty of partners; but, ah! they did not speak so
nicely as the strange young man had done. It was
not till the rays of the sun had absorbed the young
stranger's retreating ﬁgure on the hill that she shook
oﬂ her temporary sadness and answered her would-be
partner in the aﬂirmative.

She remained with her comrades till dusk, and
participated with a certain zest in the dancing; though
being heart-whole as yet, she enjoyed treading a
measure purely for its own sake; little divining when
she saw ‘the soft torments, the bitter sweets, the
pleasing pains, and the agreeable distresses’ of those
girls who had been wooed and won, what she herself
was capable of in that kind. The struggles and
wrangles oftheladsforherhandinajigwerean
amusement to her—no more; and when they became
ﬁerce she rebuked them.

She might have stayed even later, but the incident
of her father’s odd appearance and manner returned
upon the girl's mind to make her anxious, and wonder-
ing what had become of him, she dropped away from
the dancers and bent her steps towards the end of the
village at which the parental cottage lay.

While yet many score yards 03, other rhythmic
sounds than those she had quitted became audible to
her; sounds that she knew well—so well. They were
a regular series of thumpings from the interior of the

house, occasioned by the violent rocking of a. cradle
r8

THE MAIDEN

upon a stone ﬂoor, to which movement a faninine
voice kept time by singing, in a vigorous gallopade,
the favorite ditty of ‘The Spotted Cow'——

I saw her lie mid—own in ’-—der green gm’-—ove-
Come, love!’ and I mu’ you where!’ '

The cradle-meldng and the song would cease simul-
taneously for a. moment, and an exclamation at high-
est vocal pitch would take the place of the melody.

‘God bless thy diment eyes! And thy waxen
cheeks! And thy cheery mouth! And thy Cubit’s
thighs! And every bit 0' thy bleﬁed body!’

After this invocation the rocking and the singing
would recommence, and ‘The Spotted Cow’ proceed
as before. So matters stood when Tess opened the
door, and paused upon the mat within it surveying the
scene.

The interior, in spite of the melody, struck upon
the girl’s senses with an unspeakable dreariness.
From the holiday gaieties of the ﬁeld—the white
gowns, the nosegays, the willow wands, the whirling
movements on the green, the ﬂash of gentle sentiment
towards the stranger—to the yellow melancholy of this
one-candied spectacle, what a step! Besides the jar
of contrast there came to her a chill self-reproach that
she had not returned sooner, to help her mother in
these domesticities, instead of indulging herself out-
of-doors.

There stood her mother amid the group of children,
as Tess had left her, hanging over the Monday
washing-tub, which had now, as always, lingered on to
the end of the week. Out of that tub had come the
day before—Tess felt it with a dreadful sting of
remorse—the very white frock upon her back which
she had so carelessly greened about the skirt on the
damping grass—which had been wrung up and ironed
by her mother’s own hands.

As usual, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld was balanced on one
foot beside the tub, the other being engaged in the

I9

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

aforesaid business of rocking her youngest child. The
cradle-rockers had done hard duty for so many years,
under the weight of so many children, on that ﬂagstone
ﬂoor, that they were worn nearly ﬂat, in consequence
of which a huge jerk accompanied each swing of the
cot, ﬂinging the baby from side to side like a weaver’s
shuttle, as Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, excited by her song. trod
the rocker with all the spring that was left in her after
a long day's seething in the suds.

Nick-knock, nick—knock, went the cradle; the
candle-ﬂame stretched itself tall, and began jigging
up and down; the water dribbled from the matron’s
elbows. and the song galloped on to the end of the
verse, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld regarding her daughter the
while. Even now, when burdened with a. young
family, Joan Durbeyﬁeld was a passionate lover of
tune. No ditty ﬂoated into Blackmoor Vale from the
outer world but Tess’s mother caught up its notation
in a week.

There still faintly beamed from the woman's
features something of the freshness, and even the
prettiness, of her youth; rendering it probable that
the personal charms which Tess could boast of were
in main part her mother’s gift, and therefore un-
knightly, unhistorical.

‘I'll rock the cradle for ’ee, mother,’ said the
daughter gently. ‘Or I’ll take oﬁ my best frock and
help, you wring up? I thought you had ﬁnished long

ago.

Her mother bore Tess no ill-will for leaving the
house-work to her single-handed eﬁorts for so long;
indeed, Joan seldom upbraided her thereon at any
time, feeling but slightly the lack of Tess's assistance
whilst her instinctive plan for relieving herself of her
labours lay in postponing them. To-night, however,
she was even in a. blither mood than usual. There
was a dreaminess, a preoccupation, an exaltation, in
the maternal look which the girl could not under—
stand.

20

THE MAIDEN

‘Well, I’m glad you've come,’ her mother said, as
soon as the last note had passed out of her. ‘I want
to go and fetch your father; but what's more'n that,
I want to tell ’ee what have happened. Y’ll be fess
enough, my poppet, when th'st know!’ (Mrs. Durbey-
ﬁeld habitually spoke the dialect; her daughter, who
had passed the Sixth Standard in the National School
under a London-trained mistress, spoke two languages;
the dialect at home, more or less; ordinary English
abroad and to persons of quality.)

‘Since I’ve been away?’ Tess asked.

I

‘Had it anything to do with father's making such
a mommet of himself in thik carriage this afternoon?
Why did 'er? I felt inclined to sink into the ground
with shame!’

‘That wer all a part of the larry! We've beenfound '
to be the greatest gentlefolk in the whole county
—reaching all back long before Oliver Grumble's
time—to the days of the Pagan Turks—with monu-
ments, and vaults, and crests, and ’scutcheons, and the
Lord knows what all. In Saint Charles’s days we was
made Knights 0’ the Royal Oak, our real name bein
d'Urberville! . . . Don’t that make your bosom plimg
'Twas on this account that your father rode home in
the vlee; not because he’d been drinking, as people
supposed.’

‘I'm glad of that. Will it do us any good, mother?’

‘0 yes! 'Tis thoughted that great things may
come o’t. No doubt a mampus of volk of our own
rank will be down here in their carriages as soon as
’tis known. Your father learnt it on his way hwome
from Shaston, and he has been telling me the whole
pedigree of the matter.’

‘Where is father now?’ asked Tess suddenly.

Her mother gave irrelevant information by way of
answer: ‘He called to see the doctor to-day in Shaston.
It is not consumption at all, it seems. It is fat
round his heart, 'a says. There, it is like this.’

21

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Joan Durbeyﬁeld, as she spoke, curved a sodden
thumb and foreﬁnger to the shape of the letter C, and
used the other foreﬁnger as a pointer. “‘At the
present moment," he says to your father, “your heart
is enclosed all round there, and all round there; this
space is still open," ’3. says. “As soon as it do meet,
so,”'—Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld closed her ﬁngers into a
circle complete—‘ “off you will go like a shadder, Mr.
Durbeyﬁeld," ’a says. “You mid last ten years; you
mid go oﬁ in ten months, or ten days."'

Tess looked alarmed. Her father possibly to go
behind the eternal cloud so soon. notwithstanding this
sudden greatness!

‘But where is father?’ she asked again.

Her mother put on a deprecating look. ‘Now
don’t you be bursting out angry! The poor mam—he
felt so rafted after his uplifting by the pa'son’s news——
that he went up to Rolliver’s half an hour ago. He
do want to get up his strength for his journey to-
morrow with that load of beehives, which must be
delivered, family or no. He'll have to start shortly
after twelve to-night, as the distance is so long.’

‘Get up his strength!’ said Tess impetuously, the
tearswellingtohereyes. 'OrnyGod! Gotoa
public house to get up his strength! And you as well

as he, mother!’

Her rebuke and her mood seemed to ﬁll the whole
room, and to impart a cowed look to the furniture,
and candle, and children playing about, and to her
mother’s face.

‘No,’ said the latter touchily, ‘I be not agreed. I
have been waiting for 'ee to bide and keep house while
I go to fetch him.’

‘I’ll go.’

‘0 no, Tess. You see, it would be no use.‘

Tess did not expostulate. She lcnew what her ‘-
mother’s objection meant. Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld’s jacket '
and bonnet were already hanging slily upon a chair by
her side, in readiness for this contemplated jaunt, the

THE MAIDEN

reason for which the matron deplored more than its
necessity.

'And take the Compleat Fortune-Teller to the out-
house,‘ Joan continued, rapidly wiping her hands, and
donning the garments.

The Compleat Fortune-Teller was an old thick
volume, which lay on a table at her elbow, so worn
by pocketing that the margins had reached the edge
 of the type. Tess took it up, and her mother started.

This going to hunt up her shiftless husband at the
inn was one of Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld’s still extant enjoy-
ments in the muck and muddle of nearing children.
To discover him at Rolliver’s, to sit there for an hour
ortwobyhissideanddismissallthoughtandcare
of the children during the interval, made her happy.
A sort of halo, an occidental glow, came over life
then. Troubles and other realities took on them-
selves a metaphysical impalpability, sinking to mere
mental phenomena for serene contemplation, and no
longer stood as pressing eoncretions whida chafed
body and soul. The youngsters, not immediately
within sight, seemed rather bright and desirable
appurtenances than otherwise; the incidents of daily
life were not without humorousness and jollity in their
aspect there. She felt a little as she had used to‘feel
when she sat by her now wedded husband in the same
spot during his wooing, shutting her eyes to his
defects ofcharacter,andregardinghhnonlyinhis
ideal presentation as lover.

Tess, being left alone with the younger children, went
ﬁrst to the outhouse with the fortune—telling book, and
stuﬁed it into the thatch. A curious fetichistic
fear of this grimy volume on the part of her mother
prevented her ever allowing it to stay in the house
all night, and hither it was brought back whenever it
had been consulted. Between the mother, with her
fast-perishing lumber of superstitions, folk-lore, dialect
and orally transmitted ballads, and the daughter, with
her trained National teachings and Standard know]-

33

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

edge under an inﬁnitely Revised Code. there was a
gap of two hundred years as ordinarily understood.
When they were together the Jacobean and the
Victorian ages were juxtaposed.

Returning along the garden path, Tess mused on
what her mother could have wished to ascertain from
the book on this particular day. She guessed the
recent ancestral discovery to bear upon it, but did not
divine that it solely concerned herself.
this, however, she busied herself with sprinkling the
linen dried during the daytime, in company with her
nine-year-old brother Abraham, and her sister Eliza-
Louisa of twelve and a. half, called "Liza-Lu,’ the
youngest ones being put to bed. There was an
interval of four years and more between Tess and the
next of the family, the two who had ﬁlled the gap
having diedintheir infancy, andthislent heradeputy-
maternal attitude when she was alone with her juniors.
Next in juvenility to Abraham came two more girls,
Hope and Modesty; then a boy of three, and then
the baby, who had just completed his ﬁrst year. ~

All these young souls were passengers in the Dur-
beyﬁeld ship—entirely dependent on the judgment
of the two Durbeyﬁeld adults for their pleasures,
their necessities, their health, even their existence.
If the heads of the Durbeyﬁeld household chose to
sail into difﬁculty, disaster, starvation, disease, deg-
radation, death, thither were these half-dozen little
captives under hatches compelled to sail with them—
six helpless creatures, who had never been asked if they
wished for life on any terms, much less if they wished
for it on such hard conditions as were involved in
being of the shiftless house of Durbeyﬁeld. Some
people would like to know whence the poet whose
philosophy is in these days deemed as profound and
trustworthy as his song is breezy and pure gets his
authority for speaking of ‘Nature’s holy plan.’

It grew later, and neither father nor mother re-
appeared. Tess looked out of the door, and took

u

THE MAIDEN

a mental journey through Marlott. The village was,
shutting its eyes. Candles and lamps were being
put out everywhere: she could inwardly behold'the
extinguisher and the extended hand.

Her‘mother’s fetching simply meant one more to
fetch. Tess began to perceive that a man in in-
different health, who proposed to start on a journey
before one in the morning, ought not to be at an inn
at this late hour celebrating his ancient blood.

‘Abraham,’ she said to her little brother, ‘do you
put on your hat—you bain't afraidi—and go up to
Rolliver’s, and see what has gone wi’ father and
mother.’

The boy jumped promptly from his seat, and opened
the door, and the night swallowed him up. Half an
hour passed yet again; neither man, woman, not child
returned. Abraham, like his parents, seemedto have
been limed and caught by the ensnaring inn.

‘I must go myself,’ she said.

'Liza-Lu then went to bed, and Tess, locking
them all in, started on her way up the dark and
cooked lane or street not made for hasty progress;
a. street laid out before inches of land had value,
aind dzhm one-handed clocks suﬂ'iciently subdivided
t e y.

IV

Roma's inn, the single alehouse at this end of
the long and broken village, could only boast of an off-
lioense; hence, as nobody could legally drink on the
premises, the amount of overt accommodation for con-
sumers was strictly limited to a little board about six
inches wide and two yards long, ﬁxed to the garden
palings by pieces of wire, so as to form a ledge. On
this board thirsty strangers deposited their cups as
theystoodintheroadanddrank, andthrewthedregs
on the dusty ground to the pattern of Polynesia, and
wished they could have a restful seat inside.

Thus the strangers. But there were also local
customers who felt the same wish; and where there's
a will there’s a way. '

In a large bedroom upstairs, the window of which
was thickly curtained with a. great woollen shawl lately
discarded by the landlady, Mrs. Rolliver, were gathered
on this evening nearly a dozen persons, all seeldng
beatitude; all old inhabitants of the nearer end of
Marlott, and frequenters of this retreat. Not only did
the distance to The Pure Drop, the fully licensed
tavern at the further part of the dispersed village, ren-
der its accommodation practically unavailable for
dwellers at this end; but the far more serious question,
the quality of the liquor, conﬁrmed the prevalent
opinion that it was better to drink with Rolliver in a.
corner of the housetop than with the other landlord
in a wide house.

A gaunt four-post bedstead which stood in the room
aﬂorded sitting-space for several persons gathered

round three of its sides; a couole more men had ele-
:6

THE MAIDEN

vated themselves on a chest of drawers; another
rested on the oak-carved ‘cwoﬂer'; two on the wash-
stand; another on the stool; and thus all were, some-
how, seated at their ease. The stage of mental com-
fort to which they had arrived at this hour was one
wherein their souls expanded beyond their skins, and
spread their personalties warmly through the room.
In this process the chamber and its furniture grew
more and more digniﬁed and luxurious; the shawl
hanging at the window took upon itself the richness of
tapestry; the brass handles of the chest of drawers
were as golden knockers; and the carved bed-posts
seemed to have some kinship with the magniﬁcent
pillars of Solomon's temple.

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, having quickly walked hither-
ward after parting from Tess, opened the front door,
crossed the downstairs room, which was in deep gloom,
and then unfastened the stair-door like one whose
ﬁngers knew the tricks of the latches well. Her
ascent of the crooked staircase was a. slower process,
and her face, as it rose into the light above the last
stair, encountered the gaze of all the party assembled
in the bedroom.

‘—Being a few private friends I’ve asked in to
keep up club-walking at my own expense,’ the land-
lady exclaimed at the sound of footsteps, as gliny as a
child repeating the Catechism, while she peered over
the stairs. ‘Oh, ’tis you, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld—Lard—
how you frightened mel—I thought it might be some
gaffer sent by Gover'ment.’

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld was welcomed with glances and
nods by the remainder of the conclave, and turned to
where her husband sat. He was humming absently to
himself, in a low tone: ‘I be as goodassomefolks
here and there! I’ve got a great family vault at
Kingsbere—sub-Greenhill, and ﬁner skillentons than
any man in Wessex!’

‘I’ve something to tell ’ee that's come into my head
about that—a grand projick!’ whispered his cheerful

37

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

wife. ‘Hete, John, don’t 'ee see me?’ She nudged
him, while be, looking through her as through a
window-pane, went on with his recitative.

‘Hush! Don’t ’ee sing so loud, my good man,’ said
the landlady; ‘in case any member of the Gover’ment
should be passing, and take away my licends.’

‘He’s told 'ee what’s happened to us, I suppose?’
asked Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld.

‘Yes—in a way. D’ye think there's any money
hanging by it?’

‘Ah, that’s the secret,’ said Joan Durbeyﬂeld sagely.
‘However, 'tis well to be kin to a coach, even if you
don't ride in ’en.’ She dropped her ublic voice, and
continued in a low tone to her hus d: ‘I’ve been
thinking since you brought the news that there’s a
great rich lady out by Trantridge, on the edge 0' The
Chase, of the name of d’Urberville.’

‘Hey——what's that?" said Sir John.

She repeated the information. ‘That lady must be
our relation,’ she said. ‘And my projick is to send
Tess to claim kin.’

‘There ir a lady of the name. now you mention it,‘
said Durbeyﬁeld. ‘Pa’son Tringham didn't think of
that. But she’s nothing beside we—a junior branch
3: us, no doubt, hailing long since King Norman's

y-’

While this question was being discussed neither of
the pair noticed, in their preoccupation, that little
Abraham had crept into the room, and was awaiting
an opportunity of asking them to return.

‘She is rich, and she'd be sure to take notice 0’ the
maid,’ continued Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld; ‘and ’twill be a.
very good thing. I don't see why two branches 0' one
family should not be on visiting terms.’

‘Yes; and we'll all claim kin!’ said Abraham
brightly from under the bedstead. ‘And we'll all go
and see her when Tess has gone to live with her; and
we’ll ride in her coach and wear black clothes!’

‘How do you come here, child? What nonsense be

28

THE MAIDEN

ye talking! Goaway, and player: thestairstillfather
and mother be ready! . . . Well, Tess ought to go to
this other member of our family. She’d be sure to win
the lady—Tess would; and likely enough 'twould lead
to some noble gentleman marrying her. In short, I
know it.’

‘How?’
‘I tried her fate in the Fortune-Teller, and it brought
out that very thing! . . . You should ha’ seen how

pretty she looked to-day; her skin is as sumple as a
duchess’s.’

‘What says the maid herself to going?’

‘I’ve not asked her. She don’t know there is any
such lady relation yet. But it would certainly put her
in the way of a grand marriage, and she won’t say nay
to going.’

‘Tess is queer.’

‘But she’s tractable at bottom. Leave her to me.’

Though this conversation had been private, suf-
ﬁcient of its import reached the understandings of
those around to suggest to them that the Durbeyﬁelds
hadweightierconeernstotalkofnowthaneommon
folks had, and that Tess, their pretty eldest daughter,
had ﬁne prospects in store.

‘Tessisaﬁneﬁgureo'fun,as1saidtomyself
to-day when I need her vamping round parish with the
rest,’ observed one of the elderly boozers in an under-
tone. ‘But Joan Durbeyﬁeld must mind that she
don't get green malt in ﬂoor.’ It was a local phrase
which had a peculiar meaning, and there was no
reply.

The conversation became inclusive, and presently
other footsteps were heard crossing the room below.

‘—Being a few private friends asked in to-night
to keep up club-walking at my own expense.’ The
landlady had rapidly reoused the formula she kept on
hand for intruders before she recognized that the
newcomer was Tess.

Even to her mother’s gaze the girl’s young features

:9

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

looked sadly out of place amid the alcoholic vapours
which ﬂoated here as no unsuitable medium for
wrinkled middle-age; and hardly was a reproachful
ﬂash from Tess’s dark eyes needed to make her father
and mother rise from their seats, hastily ﬁnish their
ale, and descend the stairs behind her, Mrs. Rolliver‘s
caution following their footsteps.

‘No noise, please, if ye'll be so good, my dears;
or I mid lose my licends, and be summons'd, and I
don’t know what all! 'Night t'ye!’

They went home together, Tess holding one arm
of her father, and Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld the other. He
had, in truth, drunk very little—not a fourth of the
quantity which a systematic tippler could carry to
church on a Sunday afternoon without a hitch in his
eastings or genuﬂections; but the weakness of Sir
John's constitution made mountains of his petty sins
inthislcind. Onreachingthefreshairhewassuf-
ﬁciently unsteady to incline the row of three at one
moment as if they were marching to London, and at
another as if they were mardaing to Bath—which pro-
duced a comical eﬁect, frequent enough in families on
nocturnal homegoings; and, like most comical eﬁects,
not quite so comic after all. The two women valiantly
disguised these forced excursions and oountermarches
as well as they could from Durbeyﬁeld their cause, and
from Abraham, and from themselves; and so they ap-
proached by degrees their own door, the head of the
family bursting suddenly into his former refrain as
he drew near, as if to fortify his soul at sight of the
smallness of his present residence—

‘I've got a. fam—ily vault at Kingsbere!’

‘I-Iush—don’t be so silly, Jacky,’ said his wife.
‘Yours is not the only family that was of ’oount in
wold days. Look at the Anktells, and Horseys, and
the Tringhams themselves—gone to seed a'most as
mudi as you—though you was bigger folks than they,
that’s true. Thank God, I was never of no family,
and have nothing to be ashamed of in that way!’

. 3°

THE MAIDEN

‘Don't you be so sure 0' that. From your nater
’tis my belief you've disgraced yourselves more than
any 0' us, and was kings and queens outright at one
time.’

Tess turned the subject by saying what was far
more prominent in her own mind at the moment than
thoughts of her ancestry—

‘I am afraid father won't be able to take the
journey with the beehives to-morrow so early.’

‘I? Ishallheallrightinanhourortwo,’said
Durbeyﬁeld.

It was eleven o’clock before the family were all in
bed, and two o'clock next morning was the latest hour
for starting with the beehives if they were to be
delivered to the retailers in Casterbridge before the
Saturday market began, the way thither lying by bad
roads over a distance of between twenty and thirty
miles, and the horse and waggon being of the slowest.
At half-past one Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld came into the large
bedroom where Tess and all her little brothers and
sisters slept.

‘The poor man can’t go,‘ she said to her eldest
daughter, whose great eyes had opened the moment
her mother’s hand touched the door.

Tesssatupinbed,lostinava.gueinterspace
between a dream and this information.

‘But somebody must go,‘ she replied. 'It is late
for the hives already. Swarming will soon be over
for the year; and if we put off taking 'em till next
week’s market the call for ’em will be past, and they'll
be thrown on our hands.’

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld looked unequal to the emergency.
‘Some young teller, perhaps, would go? One of th
who were so much after dancing with ’ee yesterday,’
she presently suggested.

‘0 no—-I wouldn’t have it for the world !' declared
Tess proudly. ‘And letting everybody lmow the reason
mohathingtobeashamedof! Ithinkloouldgo
ifAbraham could go with me to kip me company.’

31

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Her mother at length agreed to this arrangement.
Little Abraham was aroused from his deep sleep in a
comer of the same apartment, and made to put on his
clothes while still mentally in the other world. Mean-
while Tess had hastily dressed herself; and the twain,
lighting a lantern, went out to the stable. The
rickety little waggon was already laden, and the girl
led out the horse, Prince, only a degree less rickety
than the vehide.

The poor creature looked wonderineg round at
the night, at the lantern, at their two ﬁgures, as if he
could not believe that at that hour, when every living
thingwasintendedtobeinshelterandatrest.hewas
called upon to go out and labour. They put a stock
of candle-ends into the lantern, hung the latter to the
off-side of the load, and directed the horse onward,
walking at his shoulder at ﬁrst during the uphill parts
of the way, in order not to overload an animal of so
little vigour. To cheer themselves as well as they
could, they made an artiﬁcial morning with the lantern,
some bread and butter, and their own conversation,
the real morning being far from come. Abraham, as
he more fully awoke (for he had moved in a sort of
trance so far), began to talk of the strange shapes
assumed by the various dark objects against the sky;
of this tree that looked like a raging tiger spring-
ing from a lair; of that which resembled a giant's
head.

When they had passed the little town of Stourcastle,
dumny somnolent under its thick brown thatch, they
reached higher ground. Still higher, on their left, the
elevation called Bulbarrow or Bealbarrow, well~nigh
the highest in South Wessex, swelled into the sky,
engirdled by its earthen trenches. From hereabout
the long road was fairly level for some distance
onward. They mounted in front of the wagon, and
Abraham grew reﬂective.

‘Tessl’ he said in a preparatory tone, after a
silence.

. I5-

THE MAIDEN

‘Yes, Abraham.‘

'Bain’t you glad that we've become gentleiolk?’

‘Not particular glad.’

‘Butyoubegladthatyou’mgoingtomatrya
gentleman?‘

‘What?’ said Tess, lifting her tace.

‘Thatourgreatrelationwillhelp'eetomarrya
gentlman.’

“I? Our great relation? We have no such rela-
tion. What has put that into your head?’

‘I heard 'em talking about it up at Rolliver’s when
I went to ﬁnd father. There's a rid: lady of our
family out at Trantridge, and mother said that if you
claimed kin with the lady she'd put ’ee in the way of
marrying a gentleman.’

His sister became abruptly still, and lapsed into a
pondering silence. Abraham talked on, rather for the
pleasure of utterance than for audition, so that his
sister's abstraction was of no account. He leant back
against the hives, and with upturned face made obser-
vations on the stats, whose cold pulses were beating
amid the black hollows above. in serene dissociation
from these two wisps of human life. He asked how
far away those twinklers were, and whether God was
on the other side of them. But ever and anon his
childish prattle recurred to what impressed his imagi-
nation even more deeply than the wonders of creation.
If Tess were made rich by marrying a gentleman,
would she have money enough to buy a spy-glass so
largethatitwoulddrawthestarsasneartoheras
Nettlecombe Tout?

The renewed subject, which seemed to have im-
pregnated the whole family, ﬁlled Tess with impa-
tience.

‘Never mind that now!’ she exclaimed.

‘gid you say the stars were worlds, Tess?’

‘ es.’ .

'All like ours?’

‘I don't know; but I think so. They sometimes

33

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

seem to be like the apples on our stubbard-tree. Most
of them splendid and sound—a few blighted.’

'Which do we live on—a splendid one or a
blighted one?’

‘A blighted one.’

"Tis very unlucky that we didn't pitch on a
sounrd one, when there were so many more of 'em!’

( $.1

‘Is it like that really, Tess?’ said Abraham, tum-
ing to her much impressed, on reconsideration of this
rare information. “How would it have been if we
had pitched on a, sound one?’

‘Well, father wouldn’t have coughed and creeped
about as he does, and wouldn’t have got too tipsy to
go this journey; and mother wouldn’t have been
always washing, and never getting ﬁnished.’

‘And you would have been a rich lady ready-made,
andnothavehadtobemaderichbymarryinga
gentleman?’

‘0 Aby, don’t—don't talk of that any more!’

Left to his reﬂections, Abraham soon grew drowsy.
Tess was not skilful in the management of a horse,
but she thought that she could take upon herself the
entire conduct of the load for the present, and allow
Abraham to go to sleep if he wished to do so. She
'madehimasort of nest in front of the hives, in such
a manner that he could not fall, and, taking the reins
into her own hands, jogged on as before.

Prince required but slight attention, lacking energy
for superﬂuous movements of any sort. With no
longer a companion to distract her, Tess fell more
deeply into reverie than ever, her back leaning against
the hives. The mute procession past her shoulders
of trees and hedges became attached to fantastic
scenes outside reality, and the occasional heave of
the wind became the sigh of some immense sad soul,
oonterminous with the universe in space, and with
history in time.

Then, examining the mesh of events in her own

34

THE MAIDEN

life, she seemed to see the vanity of her father's pride;
the gentlemanly suitor awaiting herself in her mother’s
fancy; to see him as a grimacing personage, laughing
at her poverty, and her shrouded knightly ancestry.
Everything grew more and more extravagant, and
she no longer knew how time passed. A sudden jerk
shook her in her seat, and Tess awoke from the sleep
into which she, too, had fallen.

They were a long way further on than when she
had lost consciousness, and the waggon had stopped.
A hollow groan, unlike anything she had ever heard
in her life, came from the front, followed by a about
of ‘Hoi there!’

The lantern hanging at her waggon had gone out,
but another was shining in her face—much brighter
than her own had been. Something terrible had
happened. The harness was entangled with an object
which blocked the way.

In consternation Tess jumped down, and discovered
thedreadfultruth. Thegroanhadproeeededfrom
her father’s poor horse Prince. The morning mail-
cart, with its two noiseless wheels, speeding along
these lanes like an arrow, as it always did, had driven
into her slow and unlighted equipage. The pointed
shaft of the cart had entered the breast of the unhappy
Prince like a sword, and from the wound his life’s
blood was spouting in a. stream, and falling with a his
into the road.

In her despair Tess sprang forward and put her
hand upon the hole, with the only result that she
becamesplashedfromfacetosldrtwiththecrimson

. Then she stood helplessly looking on. Prince
also stood ﬁrm and motionless as long as he could;
till he suddenly sank down in a. heap.

By this time the mail-cart man had joined her, and
began ' and unharnessing the hot form of
Prince. But he was already dead, and, seeing that
nothing more could be done immediately, the mail-cart
man returned to his own animal, which was uninjured.

35

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘You was on the wrong side,’ he said. ‘I am
bound to go on with the mail—bags, so that the best
thing for you to do is to bide here with your load.
I'll send somebody to help you as soon as I can. It
is getting daylight, and you have nothing to fear.’

He mounted and sped on his way; while Tess
stood and waited. The atmosphere turned pale, the
birds shook themselves in the hedges, arose, and
twittered; the lane showed all its white features, and
Tess showed hers, still whiter. The huge pool of
blood in front of her was already assuming the iri-
descence of coagulation; and when the sun rose a
hundred prismatic hues were reﬂected from it. Prince
lay alongside still and stark; his eyes half open, the
hole in his chest looking scarcely large enough to have
let out all that had animated him.

"Tis all my doing——all mine!’ the girl cried, gazing
at the spectacle. ‘No excuse for rue—none. What
will mother and father live on now? Aby, Aby!’
She shook the child, who had slept soundly through
the whole disaster. ‘We can't go on with our load
—Prince is lcilled!’

When Abraham realized all, the furrows of ﬁfty
years were extemporized on his young face.

‘Why, I danced and laughed only yesterday!’ she
went on to herself. ‘To think that I was such a fool!‘

“Tis because we be on a blighted star, and not
a sound one, isn’t it, Tess?’ murmured Abraham
through his tears.

In silence they waited through an interval which
seemed endless. At length a. sound, and an approach-
ing object, proved to them that the driver of the mail-
cart had been as good as his word. A farmer’s man
from near Stourcastle came up, leading a strong cob.
He was harnessed to the wagon of beehives in the
place of Prince, and the load taken on towards Caster—
bridge.

The evening of the same day saw the empty waggon
reach again the spot of the accident. Prince had lain

36

THE MAIDEN

there in the ditch since the morning; but the place
of the blood-pool was still visible in the middle of the
road, though scratched and scraped over by passing
vehicles. All that was left of Prince was now hoisted
into the wagon he had formerly hauled, and with his
hoofs in the air, and his shoes shining in the setting
sunlight, he retraced the eight or nine miles to Marlott.

Tess had gone back earlier. How to break the
news was more than she could think. It was a relief
to her tongue to ﬁnd from the faces of her parents that
they already knew of their loss, though this did not
lessen the self-reproach which she continued to heap
upon herself for her negligence.

But the very shiftlessness of the household rendered
the misfortune a less terrifying one to them than it
would have been to a striving family, though in the
present case it meant ruin, and in the other it would
only have meant inconvenience. In the Durbeyﬁeld
countenances there was nothing of the red wrath that
would have burnt upon the girl from parents more
ambitious for her welfare. Nobody blamed Tess as
she blamed herself.

When it was discovered that the knacker and
tanner would give only a very few shillings for Prince's
carcase because of his deerepitude, Durbeyﬁeld rose
to the occasion.

‘No,’ said he stoically. ‘I won’t sell his old body.
When we d’Urbervilles was knights in the land, we
didn't sell our chargers for cat’s meat. Let ’em keep
their shillings! He 've served me well in his lifetime,
and I won't part from him now.’

He worked harder the next day in digging a. grave
for Prince in the garden than he had worked for
months to grow a crop for his family. When the hole
was ready, Durbeyﬁeld and his wife tied a rope round
the horse and dragged him up the path towards it, the
children following in funeral train. Abraham and
’Liza-Lu sobbed, Hope and Modesty discharged their
griefs in loud blares which echoed from the walls; and

37

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

when Prince was tumbled in they gathered round the
grave. The bread-winner had been taken away from
them; what would they do?

‘Is he gone to heaven?’ asked Abraham, between
the sobs.

Then Durbeyﬁeld began to shovel in the earth,
and the children cried anew. All except Tess. Her
face was dry and pale, as thbugh she regarded herself
in the light of a. murderess,

V

THE haggling business, which had mainly depended
on the horse, became disorganized forthwith. Dis-
tress, if not penury, loomed in the distance. Durbey-
ﬁeld was what was locally called a slack-twisted fellow;
he had good strength to work at times; but the times
could not be relied on to coincide with the hours of
requirement; and, having been unaccustomed to the
regular toil of the day-labourer, he was not particular—
ly persistent when they did so coincide.

Tess, meanwhile, as the one who had dragged her
parents into this quagmire, was silently wondering
what she could do to help them out of it; and then
her mother broached her scheme.

'We must take the ups wi’ the downs, Tess,’ said
she; ‘and never could your high blood have been
found out at a more called-for moment. You must
try your friends. Do ye know that there is a very
rich Mrs. d’Urberville living on the outskirts o' The
Chase, who must be our relation? You must go to
herandclaimkimandaskforsomehelpinour
trouble.’

‘I shouldn’t care to do that,’ says Tess. ‘If there
is such a lady, 'twould be enough for us if she were
friendly—not to expect her to give us help.’

‘You could win her round to do anything, my dear.
Besides, perhaps there's more in it than you know of.
I’ve heard what I’ve heard, good-now.’

The oppressive sense of the harm she had done led
Tess to be more deferential than she might otherwise
have been to the maternal wish; but she could not
understand why her mother should ﬁnd such satis-

3')

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

faction in contemplating an miter-prise of, to her, such
doubtful proﬁt. Her mother might have made in-
quiries, and have discovered that this Mrs. d’Urber-
ville was a lady of unequalled virtues and charity.
But Tess’s pride made the part of poor relation one
of particular distaste to her.

II’d rather try to get work,’ she murmured.

‘Durbeyﬁeld, you can settle it,’ said his wife,
turning to where he sat in the background. ’If you
say she ought to go, she will go.’

‘I don’t like my children going and making them—
selves beholden to strange kin,’ murmured he. ‘I'm
the head of the noblest branch 0' the family, and I
ought to live up to it.’

His reasons for staying away were worse to Tess
than her own objection to going. ‘Well, as I killed
the horse. mother,’ she said moumfully, ‘I suppose I
ought to do something. I don’t mind going and see-
ing her, but you must leave it to me about asking for
help. And don’t go thinking about her making a
match for me—it is silly.’

‘Very well said, Tess!’ observed her father sen-
tentiously.

‘Who said I had such a thought?’ asked Joan.

‘I fancy it is in your mind, mother. But I'll go.‘

Rising early next day, she walked to the hill-town
called Shaston, and there took advantage of a van
which twice in the week ran from Shaston eastward to
Chaseborough, passing near Tranttidge, the parish in
which the vague and mysterious Mrs. d'Urberville had
her residence.

Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s route on this memorable morn-
ing lay amid the north-eastern undulations of the
Vale in which she had been born, and in whidJ her
life had unfolded. The Vale of Blaclnnoor was to her
the world, and its inhabitants the races thereof. From
the gates and stiles of Marlott she had looked down
its length in the wondering days of infancy, and what
had been mystery to her then was not much less than

40

THE MAIDEN

mystery to her now. She had seen daily from her
chamber-window towers, villages, faint white man-
sions; above all the town of Shaston standing majesti-
cally on its height, its windows shining like lamps in
the evening sun. She had hardly ever visited the
place, only a small tract even of the Vale and its en-
virons being known to her by close inspection. Much
less had she been far outside the valley. Every con-
tourofthesurroundinghillswasaspersonaltoher
as that of her relatives' faces; but for what lay be—
yond her judgment was dependent on the teaching of
the village school, where she had held a leading place
at the time of her leaving, a year or two before this
date.

In those early days she had been much loved by
others of her own sex and age, and had used to be
seen about the village aS'one of three—all nearly of
the same year~walking home from school side by
side; Tess the middle one—in a pink print pinafore,
of a ﬁnely reticulated pattern, worn over a stuﬁ frock
that had lost its original colour for a nondescript
tertiary—marching on upon long stalky legs, in tight
stockings which had little ladder-like holes at the
knees, torn by kneeling in the roads and banks in
search of vegetable and mineral treasures; her then
earth-coloured hair hanging like pot-hooks; the arms
of the two outside girls resting round the waist of Tess;
her arms on the shoulders of the two supporters.

As Tess grew older, and began to see how matters
stood, she felt quite a Malthusian towards her mother
for thoughtlesst giving her so many little sisters and
brothers, when it was such a trouble to nurse and
provide for them. Her mother's intelligence was that
of a happy child: Joan Durbeyﬁeld was simply an
additional one, and that not the eldest, to her own
long family of waiters on Providence.

However, Tess became humanely beneﬁoent tow-
ards the small ones, and to help them as much as
possible she used, as soon as she left school, to lend a.

4!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

hand at haymaking or harvesting on neighbouring
' farms; or, by preference, at milking or butter-making
processes, which she had learnt when her father had
owned cows; and being deft-ﬁngered, it was a kind of
work in which she excelled.

Every day seemed to throw upon her young
shoulders more of the family burdens, and that Tess
should be the representative of the Durbeyﬁelds at
the d’Urberville mansion came as a thing of course.
In this instance it must be admitted that the Durbey-
ﬂelds were putting their fairest side outward.

She alighted from the van at Trantridge Cross, and
ascended on foot a hill in the direction of the district
known as The Chase, on the borders of which, as
she had been informed, Mrs. d'Urberville’s seat, The
Slopes, would be found. It was not a memorial home
in the ordinary sense. with ﬁelds, and patures, and a
grumbling farmer, out of whom the owner had to
squeeze an income for himself and his family by hook
or by crook. It was more, far more; a. country-house
built for enjoyment pure and simple, with not an acre
of troublesome land attadied to it beyond what was
required for residential purposes, and for a little fancy
kept in hand by the owner, and tended by a.

The crimson brick lodge came ﬁrst in sight, up to
its eaves in den5e evergreens. Tess thought this was
the mansion itSelf till, passing through the side wicket
with some trepidation, and onward to a point at which
the drive took a turn, the house proper stood in full
view. It was of recent erection—indeed almost new——
and of the same rich red colour that formed such a.
contrast with the evergreens of the lodge. Far behind
the corner of the house—which rose like a. geranium
bloom against the subdued colours around—stretched
the soft azure landscape of The Chase—a truly
venerable tract of forest land, one of the few remain-
ing woodlands in England of undoubted primaaval
date, wherein Druidical mistletoe was still found on

42

THE MAIDEN

aged oaks, and where enormous yew-trees, not planted
by the hand of man, grew as they had grown when
they were pollarded for bows. All this sylvan antiq-
uity, however, though visible from The Slopes. was
outside the immediate boundaries of the estate.

Everything on this snug property was bright,
thriving, and well kept; acres of glass-houses stretched
down the inclines to the copses at their feet. Every-
thing looked like money—er the last coin issued
from the Mint. The stables, partly screened by
Austrian pines and evergreen oaks, and ﬁtted with
every late appliance, were as digniﬁed as Chapels-of-
Ease. On the extensive lawn stood an ornamental
tent, its door being towards her.

Simple Tess Durbeyﬁeld stood at gaze, in a half-
alarmed attitude, on the edge of the gravel sweep.
Her feet had brought her onward to this point before
she had quite realized where she was; and now all
was contrary to her expectation.

‘I thought we were an old family; but this is all
new!’ she said, in her artlessness. She wished that
she had not fallen in so readily with her mother’s
plans for ‘claiming ldn,’ and had endeavoured to gain
assistance nearer home. V

The d'Urbervilles—or Stoked'Urbervilles, as they
at ﬁrst called themselves—who owned all this, were a
somewhat unusual family to ﬁnd in such an old-
fashioned part of the country. Parson Tringham had
spoken truly when he said that our shamng John
Durbeyﬁeld was the only really lineal representative
of the old d’Urberville family existing in the county,
or near it; he might have added, what he knew very
well, that the Stoke—d’Urbervilles were no more
d'Urbervilles of the true tree than he was himself.
Yet it must be admitted that this family formed a
verygoodstockwhereontoregraftanamewhich
sadly wanted such renovation.

When old Mr. Simon Stoke, latterly deceased, had

43

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

made his fortune as an honest merchant (some said
money-lender) in the North, he decided to settle as
a county man in the South of England, out of hail of
his business district; and in doing this he felt the
necessity of recommencmg with a name that would
not too readily identify him with the smart tradesman
of the past, and that would be less commonplace than
the original bald stark words. Conning for an hour
in the British Museum the pages of works devoted
to extinct, half-extinct, obscured, and ruined families
appertaining to the quarter of England in which he
proposed to settle, he considered that d’Urbem'Uc
looked and sounded as well as any of them: and
d’Urberville accordingly was annexed to his own
name for himself and his heirs eternally. Yet he
was not an extravagant-minded man in this. and in
constructing his family tree on the new basis was
dulyreasonableinﬁ‘aminghisin 'esand
aristocratic links, never inserting a single title above
a rank of strict moderation.

Of this work of imagination poor Tess and her
parents were naturally in ignorance—much to their
discomﬁture; indeed, the very possibility of such
annexations was unknown to them; who su
that, though to be well-favoured might be the gift of
fortune, a family name came by nature.

Tess still stood hesitating like a bather about to
make his plunge, hardly knowing whether to retreat
or to persevere, when a ﬁgure came forth from the
dark triangular door of the tent. It was that of a
tall young man, smoking.

He had an almost swarthy complexion, with full
lips, badly moulded, though red and smooth, above
which was a well-groomed black moustache with
curled points, though his age could not be more
than three- or four-and-twenty. Despite the touches
of barbarism in his contours, there was a singular force
in the gentleman’s face, and in his bold rolling eye.

‘Well, my Beauty, what can I do for you?’ said

44

THE MAIDEN

he, coming forward. And perceiving that she stood
quite confounded: ‘Never mind me. I am Mr. d’Urber-
ville. Have you come to see me or my mother?’

This embodiment of a d’Urberville and a. namesake
differed even more from what Tess had expected than
the house and grounds had differed. She had dreamed
of an aged and digniﬁed face, the sublimation of all
the d'Urberville lineaments, furrowed with incarnate
memories representing in hieroglyphic the centuries of

.her family’s and England's history. But she screwed
herself up to the work in hand, since she could not
get out of it, and answered—

‘I came to see your mother, sir.

‘I am afraid you cannot see her—she is an in—
valid,’ replied the present representative of the spu-
rious house; for this was Mr. Alec, the only son of
the later deceased gentleman. ‘Cannot I answer
your purpose? What is the business you wish to see
her about?’

‘It isn’t business—it is—I can hardly say what!’

‘Pleasure?’

'Oh no. Why, sir, if I tell you, it will seem—’

Tess's sense of a certain ludicrousness in her errand
was now so strong that, notwithstanding her awe of
him, and her general discomfort at being here, her
rosy lips curved towards a smile, much to the attrac-
tion of the swarthy Alexander.

‘It is so very foolish,’ she stammered; ‘I fear I
can’t tell you!’

‘Never mind; I like foolish things. Try again,
my dear,’ said he kindly.

‘Mother asked me to come,’ Tess continued; ‘and,
indwd, I was in the mind to do so myself likewise.
But I did not think it would be like this. I came, sir,
totellyouthatweareofthesamefamilyasyou.’

‘Ho! Poor relations?’

‘Yes.’

'Stokes?’

‘No; d’Urbervilles.’

4s

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

'Ay, ay; I mean d'Urbervilles.’

‘Our names are worn away to Durbeyﬁeld; but we
have several proofs that we are d’Urbervilles. Anti-
quarians hold we are—and—and we have an old seal,
marked with a ramping lion on a shield, and a castle
over him. And we have a very old silver spoon, round
in the bowl like a little ladle, and marked with the same
castle. But it is so worn that mother uses it to stir
the pea-soup!

‘A castle argent is certainly my crest,' said he‘
blandly. ‘And my arms a lion rampant.’

‘And so mother said we ought to make ourselves
belcnown to you—as we’ve lost our horse by a bad
accident, and are the oldest branch 0’ the family.’

‘Very kind of your mother, I'm sure. And I, for
one, don’t regret her step.’ Alec looked at Tess, as he
spoke, in a way that made her blush a little. ‘And so,
my pretty girl, you’ve come on a friendly visit to us,
as relations?’

‘I suppose I have,’ {altered Tess, looking uncom-
fortable again.

‘Well—there’s no harm in it. Where do you live?
What are you?’

She gave him brief particulars; and responding to
further inquiries told him that she was intending to go
back by the same carrier who had brought her.

‘It is a long while before he returns past Trantridge
Cross. Supposing we walk round the grounds to
pass the time, my pretty Coz?’

Tess wished to abridge her visit as much as possible;
but the young man was pressing, and she consented to
accompany him. He conducted her about the lawns,
and ﬂower—beds, and conservatories; and thence to
the fniit-garden and green-houses, where he asked her
if she liked strawberries.

‘Yes,’ said Toss, ‘when they come.‘

‘They are already here.’ D’Urberville began
gathering specimens of the fruit for her, handing them
back to her as he stooped; and, presently, selecting a

46

THE MAIDEN

specially ﬁne product of the ‘British Queen’ variety,
he stood up and held it by the star: to her mouth.

‘No—no!’ she said quickly, putting her ﬁngers
between his hand and her lips. ‘I would rather take
it in my own hand.‘

'Nonsense!’ he insisted; and in a slight distress
she parted her lips and took it in.

They had spent some time wandering desultorily
thus, Tess eating in a half-pleased, half-reluctant state
whatever d’Urberville offered her. When she could
consume no more of the strawberries he ﬁlled her
little basket with them; and then the two passed round
to the rose-trees, whence he gathered blossoms and
gave her to put in her bosom. She obeyed like one
inadream,andwhenshecouldaﬂixnomorehe
himself tucked a bud or two into her hat, and heaped
her basket with others in the prodigality of his
bounty. At last, looking at his watch, he said,
'Now, by the time you have had something to eat, it
willbetimeforyoutoleave,ifyouwanttocatchthe
carrier to Shaston. Come here, and I’ll see what
grub I can ﬁnd.’

Stoke-d'Urberville took her back to the lawn and
into the tent, where he left her, soon reappear-lug with
a basket of light luncheon, which he put before her
himself. It was evidently the gentleman's wish not
to be disturbed in this pleasant talc-(Hale by the
servantry.

‘Do you mind my smoking?’ he asked.

‘Oh, not at all, sir.’

He watched her pretty and unconsdous munching
through the skeins of smoke that pervaded the tent,
and Tess Durbeyﬁeld did not divine, as she innocently
looked down at the roses in her bosom, that there
behind the blue narcotic haze was potentially the
‘tragic mischief ' of her drama—one who stood fair to
be the blood-red ray in the spectrum of her young life.
She had an attribute which amounted to a disad-
vantage just now; and it was this that caused Alec.

47

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

d’Urberville’s eyes to rivet themselves upon her.
It was a luxuriance of aspect, a fulness of growth,
which made her appear more of a woman than she
really was. She had inherited the feature from her
mother without the quality it denoted. It had
troubled her mind occasionally, till her companions
had said that it was a fault which time would cure.

She soon had ﬁnished her lunch. ‘Now I am
going home, sir,’ she said,

‘And what do they call you?’ he asked, as he
accompanied her along the drive till they were out of
sight of the house.

‘Tess Durbeyﬁeld, down at Marlott.‘

‘And you say your people have lost their horse?‘

‘I—killed him!‘ she answered, her eyes ﬁlling
with tears as she gave partimﬂars of Prince’s death.
‘And I don't know what to do for father on account
of it!’

‘I must think if I cannot do something. My
mother must ﬁnd a berth for you. But, Tess, no non-
sense about “d’Urberville”;—-“Durbeyﬁeld" only,
you know—quite another name.’

‘I wish for no better, sir,’ said she with something
of dignity.

For a moment—only for a moment—when they
were in the turning of the drive, between the tall
rhododendan and conifers, before the lodge became
visible, he inclined his face towards her as if—but,
no: he thought better of it, and let her go.

Thus the thing began. Had she perceived this
meeting’s import she might have asked why she was
doomedtobeseenandcovetedthatdaybythewrong
man, and not by some other man, the right and desired
one in all res nearly as humanity can supply
the right and desired; yet to him who amongst her
acquaintance might have approximated to this kind,
she was but a transient impression, half forgotten.

In the ill-judged execution of the well-judged plan
of things the call seldom produces the comer, the man

48

 

THE MAIDEN

to love rarely coincides with the hour for loving.
Nature does not often say ‘See!’ to her poor creature
at a time when seeing can lead to happy doing; or
reply ‘Here!’ to a body’s cry of ‘Where?’ till the
hide-and-seek has become an irksome, outworn game.
We may wonder whether at the acme and summit of
the human progress these anachronisms will be
corrected by a ﬁner intuition, a closer interaction of
the social machinery than that which now jolts us
round and along; but such completeness is not to be
prophesied, or even conceived as possible. Enough
thatinthepresentcase,asinmillions,itwasnotthe
two halves of a perfect whole that confronted each
other at the perfect moment; a missing counterpart
wandered independently about the earth waiting in
crass obtuseness till the late time came. Out of
which maladroit delay sprang anxieties, disappoint-
ments, shocks, catastrophes, and passing-strange
destinies.

When d’Urberville got back to the tent he sat
down astride on a chair reﬂecting, with a pleased
gleam in his face. Then he broke into a loud laugh.

‘Well, I'm damned! What a funny thing! Ha-
ha-ha! And what a crumby girl!’

VI

TESS went down the hill to Trantridge Cross, and
inattentively waited to take her seat in the van return-
ing from Chaseborough to Shaston. She did not know
what the other occupants said to her as she entered,
though she answered them; and when they had
started anew she rode along with an inward and not
an outward eye.

One among her fellow - travellers addressed her
more pointedly than any had spoken before: ‘Why,
you be quite a posyl And such roses in early

une!‘

Then she became aware of the spectacle she pre-
sented to their surprised vision: roses at her breast;
roses in her hat; roses and strawberries in her basket
to the brim. She blushed, and said confusedly that
the ﬂowers had been given to her. When the
passengers were not looking she stealtth removed
the more prominent blooms from her hat and placed
them in the basket, where she covered them with her
handkerchief. Then she fell to reﬂecting again, and
in looking downwards a thorn of the rose remaining in
her breast accidentally pricked her chin. Like all
the cottages in Blackmoor Vale, Tess was steeped in
fancies and preﬁgurative superstitions; she thought
this an ill omen—the ﬁrst she had noticed that day.

The van travelled only so far as Shaston, and there
were several miles of pedestrian descent from that
mountain-town into the vale to Marlott. Her mother
had advised her to stay here for the night, at the house
of a cottage-woman they knew, if she should feel too

50

THE MAIDEN

tired to come on; and this Tess did, not descending to
her home till the following afternoon.

When she entered the house she perceived in a.
moment from her mother’s triumphant manner that
something had occurred in the interim.

‘0 yes; I know all about it! I told 'ee it would
be all right, and now ’tis proved!’

‘Since I've been away? What has?’ said Tess
rather wearily.

Her mother surveyed the girl up and down with
arch approval, and went on banteringly: ‘So you’ve
brought 'em round!’

‘How do you know, mother?’

‘I’ve had a letter.'

Tess then remembered that there would have been
time for this.

‘ They say—Mrs. d’Urberville says—that she wants
you to look after a. little fowl—farm which is her hobby.
But this is only her artful way of getting ’ee there
without raising your hopes. She’s going to own ’ee
as kin—that’s the meaning o't.‘

‘But I didn’t see her.’

‘You zid somebody, I suppose?

‘I saw her son.’ ‘

‘And did he own 'ee?’

‘Well—he called me Coz.’

‘An’ I knew it! Jacky—he called her Coz!‘ cried
Joan to her husband. “Well, he spoke to his mother,
of course, and she do want ’ee there.’

‘But I don't know that I am apt at tending fowls,’
said the dubious Tess.

‘Then I don’t know who is apt. You’ve be'n born
in the business, and brought up in it. They that be
born in a business always know more about it than any
’prentice. Besides, that’s only just a show of some-
thing for you to do, that you midn’t feel beholden.’

‘I don’t altogether think I ought to go,’ said Tess
thoughtfully. ‘Who wrote the letter? Will you let
me look at it?’

51

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Mrs. d’Urberville wrote it. Here it is.’

The letter was in the third person, and brieﬂy in-
formed Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld that her daughter’s services
would be useful to that lady in the management of her
poultry-farm, that a comfortable room would be pro-
vided for her if she could come, and that the wages
would be on a liberal scale if they liked her.

‘Oh—that’s all!’ said Tess.

‘You couldn’t expect her to throw her arms round
'ee an’ to kiss and to coll ’ee all at once.’

Tess looked out of the window.

‘I would rather stay here with father and you,’
she said.

‘But why?’

‘I’d rather not tell you why, mother; indeed, I
don't quite know why.’

A week afterwards she came in one evening from
an unavailing search for some light occupation in the
immediate neighbourhood. Her idea had been to get
together sufﬁcient money during the summer to pur-
chase another horse. Hardly had she crossed the
threshold before one of the children danced acros the
room, saying, ‘The gentleman’s been here!’

Her mother hastened to explain, smiles breaking
from every inch of her person. Mrs. d’Urberville’s
son had called on horseback, having been riding by
chance in the direction of Marlott. He had wished to
know, ﬁnally, in the name of his mother, if Tess could
really come to manage the old lady’s fowl-farm or not;
the lad who had hitherto superintended the birds
having proved untrustworthy. ‘ Mr. d'Urberville says
youmustbeagoodgirlifyouareatallasyouappear;
he lmows you must be worth your weight in gold. He
is very much interested in 'ee—truth to tell.’

Tess seemed for the moment really plow to
hearthatshehadwonsuchhighopinionfroma
strangerwhen, inherownesteem, shehadsunkso
ow.

‘It is very good of him to think that,’ she mur—

52

THE MAIDEN

mured; ‘and if I was quite sure how it would be living
there, I would go any-when.’

‘He is a mighty handsome man!’

‘I don’t think so,’ said Tess coldly.

'Well, there's your chance, whether or no; and
I’m sure he wears a beautiful diamond ring!’

‘Yes,’ said little ,Abraham, brightly, from the
window-bench; ‘and I seed it! and it did twinkle
when he put his hand up to his mistarshers. Mother,
why did our grand relation keep on putting his hand
up to his nﬁstarshers?‘

‘Hark at that child !' cried Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld,
with parenthetic admiration.

‘Perhaps to show his diamond ring,’ murmured
Sir John, dreamily, from his chair.

‘I’ll think it over,’ said Tess, leaving the room.

‘Well, she’s made a conquest o’ the younger branch
of us, straight oﬂ,’ continued the matron to her hus-
band, ‘and she’s a fool if she don’t follow it up.’

‘I don't quite like my children going away from
home,’ said the haggler. ‘As the head of the family,
the rest ought to come to me.’

‘But do let her go, Jacky,‘ coaxed his poor witless
wife. ‘I-Ie's struck wi’ her—you can see that. He
called her 002! He’ll marry her, most likely, and
make a lady of her; and then she’ll be what her fore-
fathers was.’

John Durbeyﬁeld had more conceit than energy or
health, and this supposition was pleasant to him.

‘Wdl, perhaps that's what young Mr. d’Urberville
means,’ he admitted; ‘and sure enough he mid have
serious thoughts about improving his blood by link-
ing on to the old line. Tess, the little rogue! And
hﬁg’she really paid ’em a visit to such an end as

Meanwhile Tess was walking thoughtftu among
the gooseberry-bushes in the garden, and over Prince’s
grave. When she came in her mother pursued her
advantage.

53

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Well, what be you going to do?’ she asked.

‘I wish I had seen Mrs. d’Urberville,’ said Tess.

‘I think you mid as well settle it. Then you’ll
see her soon enough.’

Her father coughed in his chair.

‘I don't know what to say!’ answered the girl
restlessly. ‘It is for you to decide. I killed the old
horse, and I suppose I ought to do something to get
ye a new one. But—but—I don't quite like Mr.
d’Urberville being there!’ -

The children, who had made uSe of this idea of
Tess being taken up by their wealthy kinsfolk (which
they imagined the other family to be) as a species of
dolorifuge after the death of the horse, began to cry
at Tess’s reluctance, and teased and reproached her
for hesitating. .

‘Tess won’t go—or——o and be made a la—a—dy
of !—no, she says she wo—o—on’t!’ they wailed,
with square mouths. ‘And we shan’t have a nice
new horse, and lots 0' golden money to buy fairlings!
And Tess won’t look pretty in her best cloze no
mo—o—ore!’

Her mother chimed in to the same tune: a certain
way she had of making her labours in the house seem
heavier than they were by prolonging them indeﬁnite-
ly, also weighed in the argument. Her father alone
preserved an attitude of neutrality.

‘I will go,’ said Tess at last.

Her mother could not repress her consciousness of
the nuptial Vision conjured up by the girl’s consent.

‘That’s right! For such a pretty maid as 'tis, this
is a ﬁne chance!’

Tess smiled crossly.

‘I hope it is a chance for earning money. It is no
other kind of chance. You had better say nothing
of that silly sort about parish.’

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld did not promise. She was not
quite sure that she did not feel proud enough, after
the visitor's remarks, to say a good deal.

54

 

THE MAIDEN

Thus it was arranged; and the young girl wrote,
agreeingtobereadytosetoutonanydayonwhich
she might be required. She was duly informed that
Mrs. d’Utberville was glad of her decision. and that a.
spring—cart should be sent to meet her and her luggage
at the top of the Vale on the day after the marrow,
when she must hold herself prepared to start. Mrs.
d’Urberville’s handwriting seemed rather masculine.

‘A cart?’ murmured Joan Durbeyﬁeld doubtingly.
‘ It might have been a carriage for her own kin!’

Having at last taken her course, Tess was less
restless and abstracted, going about her busines with
some Self-assurance in the thought of acquiring an-
other horse for her father by an occupation which
would not be onerous. She had hoped to be a teacher
at the school, but the fates seemed to decide other-
wise. Being mentally older than her mother, she did
not regard Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld's matrimonial hopes for
her in a serious aspect for a. moment. The light-
minded woman had been discovering good matches
for her daughter almost from the year of her birth.

VII

ON the morning appointed for her departure Tess was
awake before dawn—at the marginal minute of the
dark when the grove is still mute, save for one pro-
phetic bird who sings with a. clear-voiced conviction
that he at least knows the correct time of day, the
rest preserving silence as if equally convinced that he
is mistaken. She remained upstairs packing till
breakfast-time, and then came down in her ’
week-day clothes, her Sunday apparel being careftu
folded in her box.

Her mother expostulated. ‘You will never set
out to see your folks without dressing up more the
dead than that?’

‘But I am going to work!’ said Tess.

‘Well, yes,’ said Mrs. Dm-beyﬁeld; and in a.
private tone, ‘at ﬁrst there mid be a little pretence
o’t. . . . ButIthinkitwillbewiserof’eetoputyour
best side outward,’ she added.

‘Very well; I suppose you know best,’ replied Tess
with calm abandonment.

And to please her parent the girl put herself quite
in Joan's hands, saying serenely—“Do what you like
with me, mother.’

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld was only too delighted at this
tractability. First she fetched a great basin, and
washed Tess’s hair with such thoroughness that when
dried and brushed it looked twice as much as at other
times. She tied it with a broader pink ribbon than
usual. Then she put upon her the white frock that
Tess had worn at the club-walking, the airy fulness of
which, supplementing her enlarged coiﬂ'ure, imparted

56

THE MAIDEN

to her developing ﬁgure an amplitude which belied her
age. andmightcausehertobeestimatedasawoman
when she was not much more than a child.

‘I declare there’s a hole in my stocking-heel?
said Tess.

‘Never mind holes in your stockings—they don’t
speak! Wheanasamaid,solongasIhadapretty
bonnet the devil might ha’ found me in heels.’

Her mother's pride in the girl’s appearance led her
to step back, like a painter from his easel, and survey
her work as a whole.

‘You must zee yourself!’ she cried. ‘It is much
better than you was t’other day.’

As the looking-glass was only large enough to
reﬂect a very small portion of Tess's person at one
time, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld hung a black cloak outside the
casement, and so made a large reﬂector of the panes,
as it is the wont of bedecking oottagers to do. After
this she went downstairs to her husband, who was
sitting in the lower room.

‘I’ll tell ’ee what ’tis, Durbeyﬁeld,’ said she exult-
ingly; 'he’ll never have the heart not to love her.
But whatever you do, don't zay too much to Tess of
his fancy for her, and this chance she has got. She is
such an odd maid that it mid zet her against him, or
against going there, even now. If all goes well. I shall
certainly be for making some return to that pa’son at
Stagfoot Lane for telling us—dear, good man!’

However, as the moment for the girl's setting out
drew nigh, when the ﬁrst excitement of the '
had passed oﬁ, a slight found place in Joan
Durbeyﬁeld’s mind. It prompted the matron to say
that she would walk a little way—as far as to the point
where the acclivity from the valley began its ﬁrst steep
ascent to the outer world. At the top Tess was going
to be met with the spring-cart sent by the Stoke~
d’Urbervilles, and her box had already been wheeled
ahead towards this summit by a lad with trucks, to be
in readiness.

57

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Seeing their mother put on her bonnet, the younger
children clamoured to go with her.

‘I do want to walk a. little-ways wi’ Sissy, now
she’s going to marry our gentleman-cousin, and wear
ﬁne eloze!’

‘Now,’ said Tess, ﬂushing and turning quickly,
‘I’ll hear no more 0’ that! Mother, how could you
ever put such stuff into their heads?’

‘Going to work, my dears, for our rich relation,
and help get enough money for a new horse,’ said
Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld paciﬁcally.

‘Good-bye, father,’ said Tess, with a lumpy throat.

‘Good-bye, my maid,’ said Sir John, raising his
head from his breast as he suspended his nap, induced
by a slight excess this morning in honour of the
occasion. ‘Well, I hope my young friend will like
such a comer sample of his own blood. And tell’n,
Tess, that being sunk, quite, from our former grandeur,
I’ll sell him the title——yes, sell it—and at no onreason-
able ﬁgure.’

‘Not for less than a thousand pound? cried Lady
Durbeyﬁeld.

‘Tell’n—I’ll take a. thousand pound. Well, I’ll
take less, when I come to think o't. He’ll adorn it
better than a poor lammicken feller like myself can.
Tell’n he shall hae it for a hundred. But I won’t
stand upon triﬂes—tell’n he shall hae it for ﬁfty—for
twenty pound! Yes, twenty pound—that’s the
lowest. Dammy, family honour is family honour,
and I won’t take a penny less!’

Tess’s eyes were too full and her voice too choked
to utter the sentiments that were in her. She turned
quickly, and went out.

So the girls and their mother all walked together,
a child on each side of Tess, holding her hand, and
looking at her meditativer from time to time, as at
one who was about to do great things; her mother
just behind with the smallest; the group forming a
picture of honest beauty ﬂanked by innocence, and

58

THE MAIDEN

backed by simple-souled vanity. They followed the
way till they reached the beginning of the ascent, on
the crest of which the vehicle from Trantridge was to
receive her, this limit having been ﬁxed to save the
horse the labour of the last slope. Far away behind
the ﬁrst bills the cliff-like dwellings of Shaston broke
the line of the ridge. Nobody was visible in the
elevated road which skirted the ascent save the lad
whom they had sent on before them, sitting on the
handle of the barrow that contained all Tess‘s worldly
ons.

‘Bide here a bit, and the cart will soon come, no
doubt,’ said Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld. ‘Yes, I see it yonder?

It had come—appearing suddenly from behind the
forehead of the nearest upland, and stopping beside
the boy with the barrow. Her mother and the children
thereupon decided to go no farther, and bidding them
a hasty good-bye Tess bent her steps up the hill.

They saw her white shape draw near to the spring-
cart, on which her box was already placed. But before
she had quite reached it another vehicle shot out from
a clump of trees on the summit, came round the bend
of the road there, passed the luggagecart, and halted
beside Tess, who looked up as if in great surprise.

Her mother perceived, for the ﬁrst time, that the
second vehicle was not a humble conveyance like the
ﬁrst, but a spick—and-span gig or dog-cart, highly
varnished and equipped. The driver was a young
man of three- or four-and-twenty, with a cigar between
his teeth; wearing a dandy cap, drab jacket, breaches
of the same hue, white neckcloth, stick-up collar, and
brown driving-gloves—in short, he was the handsome,
horsey young buck who had visited Joan a week or
two before to get her answer about Tess.

Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld clapped her hands like a child.
.Then she looked down, then stared again. Could she
be deceived as to the meaning of this?

‘Is dat the gentleman-kineman who’ll make Sissy
a lady?’ asked the youngest child.
59

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Meanwhile the muslined form of Tess could be
seen standing still, undecided, beside this tum-out,
whose owner was talking to her. Her seeming in-
decision was, in fact, more than indecision: it was
misgiving. She would have preferred the humble
cart. The young man dismounted, and appeared to
urge her to ascend. She turned her face down the
hill to her relatives, and regarded the little group.
Something seemed to quicken her to a determination;
possibly the thought that she had killed Prince. She
suddenly stepped up; he mounted beside her, and
immediately whipped on the horse. In a moment
they had passed the slow cart with the box, and
disappeared behind the shoulder of the hill.

Directly Tess was out of sight, and the interest of
the matter as a drama was at an end, the little ones'
eyes ﬁlled with tears. The youngest child said, ‘I
wish poor, poor Tess wasn’t gone away to be a lady!’
and, lowering the corners of his lips, burst out crying.
The new point of view was infectious, and the next
child did likewise, and then the next, till the whole
three of them wailed loud.

There were tears also in Joan Durbeyﬁeld's eyes
as she turned to go home. But by the time she had
got back to the village she was passively trusting to
the favour of accident. However, in bed that night
she sighed, and her husband asked her what was the
matter.

‘Oh, I don’t know exactly,’ she said. ‘I was
thinking that perhaps it would he] been better if Tess
had not gone.’

‘Oughtn't ye to have thought of that before?

‘Well, 'tis a chance for the maid— Still, if ’twere
the doing again, I wouldn't let her go till I had
found out whether the gentleman is really a good-
hearted young man and choice over her as his kins-
woman.

‘Yes, you ought, perhaps, to ha’ done that,’ snored
Sir John.

60

 

THE MAIDEN

Joan Durbeyﬂeld always managed to ﬁnd consola-
tion somewhere: ‘Well, as one of the genuine stock,
she ought to make her way with ’en, if she plays her
trump card aright. And if he don’t marry her afoxe
he W411 after. For that he’s all aﬁre wi’ love for her
any eye can see.’

‘What’s her trump card? Her d'Urberville blood,
you mean?’

‘No, stupid; her face—as ’twas mine.’

VIII

HAVING mounted beside her, Alec d’Urberville drove
rapidly along the crest of the ﬁrst hill, chatting compli-
ments to Tess as they went, the cart with her box
being left far behind. Rising still, an immense land-
scape stretched around them on every side; behind,
the green valley of her birth, before, a gray country of
which she knew nothing except from her ﬁrst brief
visit to Trautxidge. Thus they reached the verge of
an incline down which the road stretched in a long
straight descent of nearly a mile.

Ever since the accident with her father's horse
Tess Durbeyﬁeld, courageous as she naturally was,
had been exceedingly timid on wheels; the least irregu-
larity of motion startled her. She began to get uneasy
at a certain recklessness in her conductor's driving.

‘You will go down slow, sir, I suppose?’ she said
with attempted unconcern.

D'Urberville looked round upon her, nipped his
cigar with the tips of his large white centre-teeth, and
allowed his lips to smile slowly of themselves.

‘W‘hy, Tess,’ he answered, after another whiff or
two, ‘it isn't a brave bouncing girl like you who asks
that? Why, I always go down at full gallop. There’s
nothing like it for raising your spirits.’

‘But perhaps you need not now?’

‘Ah,’ he said, shaking his head, ‘there are two to
be reckoned with. It is not me alone. Tib has to
be $sidered, and she has a very queer temper.’

' 0??

‘Why, this mare. I fancy she looked round at me
in a very grim way just then. Didn't you notice it?’

62

 

THE MAIDEN

‘Don‘t try to frighten me, sir,’ said Tess stiﬂiy.

‘Well, I don’t. If any living man can manage this
horse I canz—l won't say any living man can do it—
but if such has the power, I am he.’

‘Why do you have such a horse?’

‘Ah, well may you ask it! It was my fate, I
suppose. Tib has killed one chap; and just after
I bought her she nearly killed me. And then, take
my word for it, I nearly killed her. But she's touchy
still, very touchy; and one's life is hardly safe behind
her sometimes.’

They were just beginning to descend; and it was
evident that the horse, whether of her own will or of
his (the latter being the more likely). knew so well the
reckless performance expected of her that she hardly
required a. hint from behind.

Down, down, they sped, the wheels humming like
a. top, the dog-cart rocking right and left, its axis
acquiring a slightly oblique set in relation to the line
of progress; the ﬁgure of the horse rising and falling
in undulations before them. Sometimes a wheel was
off the ground, it seemed, for many yards; sometimes
a stone was sent spinning over the hedge, and ﬂinty
sparks from the horse’s hoofs outshone the daylight.
The aspect of the straight road enlarged with their
advance, the two banks dividing like a splitting stick;
one rushing past at each shoulder.

The wind blew through Tess’s white muslin to her
very skin, and her washed hair ﬂew out behind. She
was determined to show no open fear, but she clutched
d’Urberville’s rein-arm.

‘Don’t touch my arm! We shall be thrown out if
you do! Hold on round my waist!’

She grasped his waist, and so they reached the
bottom.

‘Safe, thank God, in spite of your fooling!’ said
she, her face on ﬁre.

‘Tess—ﬁe! that’s temper!’ said d’Urberville.

"’I‘is truth.’

63

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Well, you need not let go your hold of me so
thanklessly the moment you feel yourself out of
danger.’

- She had not considered what she had been doing;
whether he were man or woman, stick or stone, in her
involuntary hold on him. Recovering her reserve,
she sat without replying, and thus they reached the
summit of another declivity.

‘Now then, again!’ said d’Urberville.

‘No, no!’ said Tess. ‘Show more sense, do, please.'

‘But when people ﬁnd themselves on one of the
highest points in the county, they must get down
again,’ he retorted.

He loosened rein, and away they went a second
time. D’Urberville turned his face to her as they
rocked, and said, in playful raillery: ‘Now then, put
your arms round my waist again, as you did before,
my Beauty.’ -

‘Never!’ said Tess independently, holding on as
well as she could without touching him.

‘ Let me put one little kiss on those holmberry lips,
Tess, or even on that warmed cheek, and I’ll stop—
on my honour, I will!’

Tess, surprised beyond measure, slid farther back
still on her seat, at which he urged the horse anew,
and rocked her the more.

'Will nothing else do?’ she cried at length, in
desperation, her large eyes staring at him like those
of a. wild animal. This drexing her up so prettily by
herhmother had apparently hem to lamentable pur-

pose.

‘Nothing, dear Tess,’ he replied.

‘Oh, I don’t know—very well; I don't mind!’ she
panted miserably.

Hedrewrein,andastheyslowedhewasonthe
point of the desired salute, when, as if

yet aware of her own modesty, she dodged
aside. His arms being occupied with the reins, there
was left him no power to prevent her mnnmuvne.
64

THE MAIDEN

‘Now, damn it—I’ll break both.our necks!’ swore
her capriciously passionate companion. ‘So you can
gofPromymirwordlikethat,youyoungwiteh,mn
you ’

‘Very well,' said Tess, 'I’ll not move since you be
so determined! But I—thought you would be kind
to me, and protect me, as my kinsman!’

‘Kinsman be hanged! Now!’

‘But I don’t want anybody to kiss me, sir!’ she
implored, a big tear beginning to roll down her face,
and the corners of her mouth trembling in her at-
tempts not to cry. ‘And I wouldn’t ha.’ come if I
had known?

He was inexorable, and she sat still, and d’Urber-
ville gave her the kiss of mastery. No sooner had
he done so than she ﬂushed with shame, took out
her handkerchief, and wiped the spot on her cheek
that had been touched by his lips. His ardour was
nettled at the sight, for the act on her part had been
unconsciously done.

‘You are mighty sensitive for a cottage-girl? said
the young man.

Tess made no reply to this remark, of which,
indeed, she did not quite comprehend the drift, un-
heeding the snub she had administered by her in-
stinctive rub upon her cheek. She had, in fact,
undone the kiss, as far as such a thing was physically
possible. With a dim sense that he was vexed she
looked steadily ahead as they trotted on near Melbury
Down and Wingreen, till she saw, to her consternation,
that there was yet another descent to be undergone.

‘You shall be made sorry for that!’ he resumed,
his injured tone still remaining, as he ﬂourished the
whip anew. ‘Unless, that is, you agree willingly to
let me do it again, and no handkerchief.’

She sighed. ‘Very well, sir!’ she said. ‘Oh—
let me get my hat!’

At the moment of speaking her hat had blown 011'
into the road, their present speed on the upland being

65

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

by no means slow. D’Urberville pulled up, and said
he would get it for her, but Tess was down on the
other side. .

She turned back and picked up the article.

‘You look prettier with it off, upon my soul, if
that's possible,’ he said, contemplating her over the
back of the vehicle. ‘Now then, up again! What’s
the matter?’

The hat was in place and tied, but Tess had not
stepped forward.

‘No, sir,’ she said, revealing the red and ivory of
her mouth as her eye lit in deﬁant triumph; ‘not
again, if I know it!’ ~

‘What—you won’t get up beside me?’

‘No; I shall walk.’

“Tis ﬁve or six miles yet to Trantridge.’

‘I don’t care if ’tis dozens. Besides, the cart is
behind.’

‘You artful hussyl Now, tell me—didn't you
ggke that hat blow off on purpose? I’ll swear you

Her strategic silence conﬁrmed his suspicion.

Then d’Urberville cursed and swore at her, and
called her everything he could think of for the trick.
Turning the horse suddenly, he tried to drive back
upon her, and so hem her in between the gig and the
hedge. But he could not do this short of injuring her.

‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself for using
such wicked words!’ cried Tess with spirit, from the
top of the hedge into which she had scrambled. ‘I
don’t like ’ee at all! I hate and detest you! I'll go
back to mother, I will!’

D'Urberville’s bad temper cleared up at sight of
hers; and he laughed heartily.

‘Well, I like you all the better,’ he said. 'Come,
let there be peace. I’ll never do it any more against
your will. My life upon it now!’

Still Tess could not be induced to mount. She
did not, however, object to his keeping his gig along-

66

 

THE MAIDEN

side her; and in this manner, at a slow pace, they
advanced towards the village of Trantridge. From
time to time d’Urberville exhibited a sort of ﬁerce
distress at the sight of the tramping he had driven her
to undertake by his misdemeanour. She might in
truth have safely trusted him now; but he had for-
feited her conﬁdence for the time, and she kept on
the ground, progressing thoughtfully, as if wondering
whether it would be wiser to return home. Her
resolve, however, had been taken, and it seemed
vacillating even to childishness to abandon it now,
unless for graver reasons. How could she face her
parents, get back her box, and diseoncert the whole
scheme for the rehabilitation of her family on such
sentimental grounds?

A few minutes later the chimneys of The Slopes
a in view, and in a snug nook to the right the
poultry-farm and cottage of Tess’s destination.

IX

THE community of fowls to which Tess had been
appointed as supervisor, purveyor, nurse, surgeon,
and friend made its headquarters in an old thatched
cottage standing in an enclosure that had once been a.
garden, but was now a trampled and sanded square.
The house was overrun with ivy, its chimney being
enlarged by the boughs of the parasite to the aspect of
a ruined tower. The lower rooms were entirely giVen
over to the birds, who walked about them with a pro-
prietary air, as though the place had been built by
themselves, and not by certain dusty copyholders who
now lay east and west in the churchyard. The
descendants of these bygone owners felt it almost as a
slight to their family when the houSe which had so
much of their aﬁection, had cost so much of their
forefathers’ money, and had been in their possession
for several generations before the d'Urbervilles came
and built here, was indifferently turned into a, fowl-
house by Mrs. Stoke-d’Urberville as soon as the
property fell into hand according to law. "Twas
good enough for Christians in grandfather’s time,’
they said.

The rooms wherein dozens of infants had wailed
at their nursing now resounded with the tapping of
nascent chicks. Distracted hens in coops occupied
spots where formerly stood chairs supporting sedate
agﬁculturists. The chimney—comer and once blazing
hearth was now ﬁlled with inverted beehivw, in which
the hens laid their eggs; while out of doors the plots
that each succeeding householder had carefully shaped
with his spade were torn by the cocks in wildest

fashion.
as

 

THE MAIDEN

The garden in which the cottage stood was sur-
rot‘iinded by a wall, and could only be entered through
a cor.

When Tess had occupied herself about an hour
the next morning in altering and improving the
arrangements, according to her skilled ideas as the
daughter of a professed poulterer, the door in the wall
opened and a servant in white cap and apron entered.
She had come from the manor-house.

‘Mrs. d’Urberville wants the fowls as usual,’ she
said; but perceiving that Tess did not quite under-
stand, she explained, ‘ Mis’ess is a old lady, and blind.’

‘Blind!’ said Tess.

Almost before her misgiving at the news could ﬁnd
time to shape itself she took, under her companion's
direction, two of the most beautiful of the Hamburghs
in her arms, and followed the maid—servant, who had
likewise taken two, to the adjacent mansion, which,
though ornate and imposing, showed traces everywhere
on this side that some occupant of its chambers could
bend to the love of dumb creatures—feathers ﬂoating
within view of the front, and hen-coops standing on
the grass. .

In a sitting-room on the ground ﬂoor, ensconced in
an armchair with her back to the light, was the owner
and mistress of the estate, a white-haired woman of not
more than sixty, or even less, wearing a large cap.
She had the mobile face frequent in those whose sight
has decayed by stages, has been laboriously striven
after, and reluctantly let go, rather than the stagnant
mien apparent in persons long sightless or born blind.
Tess walked up to this lady with her feathered
charges—one sitting on each arm.

‘Ah, you are the young woman come to look after
my birds?’ said Mrs. d'Urbm-ville, recognizing a new
footstep. ‘I hope you will be kind to them. My
bailiff tells me you are quite the proper person. Well,
where are they? Ah, this is Strut! But he is hardly
so lively today, is he? He is alarmed at being

69

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

handled by a stranger. I suppose. And Phena too—-
yes, they are a little frightened—aren’t you, deal-s?
But they will soon get used to you.’

WhiletheoldladyhadbeenspeakingTessand
the other maid, in obedience to her gestures, had
placed the fowls severally in her lap, and she had felt
them over from head to tail, examining their beaks,
their combs, the manes of the cocks, their wings, and
their claws. Her touch enabled her to recognize them
in a. moment, and to discover if a single feather were
crippled or draggled. She handled their crops. and
knew what they had eaten, and if too little or too
much; her face enacting a. vivid pantomime of the
criticisms passing in her mind.

The birds that the two girls had brought in were
duly returned to the yard, and the process was re
peatedtillallthepetcocksandhenshedbeensub-
mitted to the old woman—Hamburghs, Bantams,
Cochins, Brahmas, Dorkings, and such other sorts as
were in fashion just then—her perception of each
visitor being seldom at fault as she received the bird
upon her knees.

It reminded Tess of 8. Conﬁrmation, in which Mrs.
d'Urberville was the bishop, the fowls the young
people presented, and herself and the maid-servant
the person and curate of the parish bringing them up.
At the end of the ceremony Mrs. d’Urberville abruptly
asked Tess, Wrinkling and twitching her face into un-
dulations, ‘Can you whistle?’

‘Whistle, Ma'ami"

‘Yes, whistle tunes.’

Tess could whistle like most other country girls,
though the accomplishment was one which she did not
care to profess in genteel company. However, she
blandly admitted that such was the fact.

‘Then you will have to practise it every day.
I had a lad who did it very well, but he has left.
I want you to whistle to my bullﬁnches; as I cannot
seethem,Iliketohearthem.andweteach'emaixs

70

 

THE MAIDEN

that way. Tell her where the cages are, Elizabeth.

You must begin tomorrow, or they will go back in

stair piping. They have been neglected these several
ys-’

‘Mr. d’Urberville wh'mtled to ’em this morning,
ma’am.’ said Elizabeth.

‘Hel Pooh!’

The old lady's face creased into furrows of repug-
nance, and she made no further reply.

Thus the reception of Tess by her fancied kins-
womanterminated,andthebirdsweretakenbackto
their quarters. The girl’s surprise at Mrs. d’Urber-
ville's manner was not great; for since seeing the size
of the house she had expected no more. But she was
far from being aware that the old lady had never heard
a word of the so-called kinship. She gathered that
no great aﬂection ﬂowed between the blind woman and
her son. But in that, too, she was mistaken. Mrs.
d’Urberville was not the ﬁrst mother compelled to love
her oﬁspring resentfully, and tobe bitterly fond.

In spite of the unpleasant initiation of the day
before, Tess inclined to the freedom and novelty of
her new position in the morning when the sun shone,
now that she was once installed there; and she was
curious to test her powers in the unexpected direction
asked of her, so as to ascertainherchanceofretaining
her post. As soon as she was alone within the walled
garden she sat herself down on a coop, and seriously
screwed up her mouth for the long-neglected practice.
She found her former ability to have degenerated to
the production of a hollow rush of wind through the
lips, and no clear note at all.

She remainai fruitlessly blowing and blowing,
wondering how she could have so grown out of the art
which had come by nature, till she became aware of a
movement among the ivy-boughs which cloaked the
garden-wall no less than the cottage. Looking that
way she beheld a form springing from the coping to

71

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

the plot. It was Alec d'Urberville, whom she had not
set eyes on since he had conducted her the day before
to the door of the gardener’s cottage where she had
lodgings.

‘Upon my honour!’ cried he, ‘there was never
before such a beautiful thing in Nature or Art as you
look, "Cousin" Tess [“Cousin” had a faint ring of
mockery]. I have been watching you from over the
wall—sitting like Int—patience on a. monument, and
pouting up that pretty red mouth to whistling shape,
and whooing and whooing, and privately swearing,
and never being able to produce a note. Why, you
are quite cross because you can't do it.’

‘I may be crow, but I didn’t meat.’

‘Ah! I understand why you are trying—those
bullies! My mother wants you to carry on their
musical education. How selﬁsh of her! As if attend-
ing to these curst cocks and hens here were not enough
work for any girl. I would ﬂatly refuse, if I were you.’

‘But she wants me particularly to do it, and to be
ready by to-morrow morning.’

‘ Does she? Well then—I'll give you a lesson or two.’

‘Oh no, you won’t!’ said Tess, withdrawing towards
the door.

‘Nonsense; I don't want to touch you. See—I’ll
stand on this side of the wire-netting, and you can
keep on the other; so you may feel quite safe. Now,
look here; you screw up your lips too harshly. There
'tis—so.’

He suited the action to the word, and whistled a
line of ‘Take, 0 take those lips away.’ But th
allusion was lost upon Tess. -

‘Now try.’ said d'Urberville.

She attempted to look reserved: her face put on a
sculptural severity. But he persisted in his demand,
and at last, to get rid of him, she did put up her lips as
directed for producing a clear note; laughing distress-
fully, however, and then blushing with vexation that
she had laughed. *

72

THE MAIDEN

He encouraged her with ‘Try again!’

Tess was quite serious, painfully serious by this
time; and she tried—ultimately and unupectedly
emitting a real round sound. The momentary pleasure
of success got the better of her; her eyes enlarged, and
she involuntarily smiled in his face.

‘That’s it! Now I have started you—you’ll go on
beautifully. There—I said I would not come near
you; and, in spite of such temptation as never be-
fore fell to mortal man, I’ll keep my word. . . . Tess,
do you think my mother a queer old soul?’

‘I don't know much of her yet, sir.‘

‘You’ll ﬁnd her so; she must be, to make you
learn to whistle to her bullﬁnches. I am rather out of
her books just now, but you will be quite in favour if
you treat her live-stock well. Good morning. If you
meet with any diﬁiculties and want help here, don't go
to the bailiﬂ, come to me.’

It was in the economy of this regime that Tess
Durbeyﬁeld had undertaken to ﬁll a place. Her ﬁrst
day's experiences were fairly typical of those which
followed through many succeeding days. A famili-
arity with Alec d’Urberville’s presence—which that
young man carefully cultivated in her by playful dia-
logue, and by jestingly calling her his cousin when they
were alone—removed much of her original shyness of
him, without, however, implanting any feeling which
could engender shyness of a new and tenderer kind.
But she was more pliable under his hands than a
mere companionship would have made her, owing to
her unavoidable dependence upon his mother, and,
hithgugh that lady's comparative helplessness, upon

She soon found that whistling to the bullﬁnches in
Mrs. d’Urberville's room was no such onerous business
when she had regained the art, for she had caught from
her musical mother numerous airs that suited those
songsters admirably. A far more satisfactory time

73

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

than when she practised in the garden was this
whistling by the cages each morning. Unrestrained
by the young man’s presence, she threw up her mouth,
put her lips near the bars, and piped away in easeful
grace to the attentive listeners.

Mrs. d’Urberville slept in a large four-post bed-
stead hung with heavy damask curtains, and the bull-
ﬁnches occupied the same apartment, where they
ﬂitted about freely at certain hours, and made little
white spots on the furniture and upholstery. Once
while Tess was at the window where the cages were
ranged, giving her lesson as usual, she thought she
heard a rustling behind the bed. The old lady was
not present, and turning round the girl had an im-
pression that the toes of a pair of boots were visible
below the fringe of the curtains. Thereupon her
whistling became so disjointed that the listener, if
such there were. must have discovered her suspicion
of his presence. She searched the curtains every
morning after that, but never found anybody within
them. Alec d’Urberville had evidently thought better
ofhisfreaktoterrifyherbyanambush ofthatkind.

 

X

EVERY village has its idiosyncrasy, its constitution,
often its own code of morality. The levity of some of
the younger women in and about Trantn'dge was
marked, and was perhaps symptomatic of the choice
spirit who ruled The Slopes in that vicinity. The
place had also a more abiding defect; it drank hard.
The staple conversation on the farms around was on
the uselessness of saving money; and smockfrocked
arithmeticians, leaning on their ploughs or hoes, would
enter into calculations of great nicety to prove that
parish relief was a fuller provision for a man in his old
age than any which could result from savings out of
their wages during a whole lifetime.

The chief pleasure of these philosophers lay in
going every Saturday night, when work was done, to
Chaseborough, a decayed market-town two or three
miles distant; and, returning in the small hours of the
next morning, to spend Sunday in sleeping 05 the
dyspeptic eﬁects of the curious compounds sold to
them as beer by the monopolizers of the once inde-
pendent inns.

For a. long time Tess did not join in the weekly
pilgrimages. But under pressure from matrons not
much older than herself—for a ﬁeld-man’s wages being
as high at twenty-one as at forty, marriage was early
here—Tess at length consented to go. Her ﬁrst ex-
perience of the journey afforded her more enjoyment
than she had expected, the hilariousness of the others
being quite contagious after her monotonous attention
to the poultry-farm all the week. She went again and
again. Being graceful and interesting, standing more-

75

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

over on the momentary threshold of womanhood, her
appearance drew down upon her some sly

from loungers in the streets of Chaseborough; hence,
though sometimes her journey to the town was made
independently, she always searched for her fellows at
nightfall, to have the protection of their companion-
ship homeward.

This had gone on for a‘ month or two when there
came a Saturday in September, on which a fair and a
market coincided; and the pilgrims from Trantridge
sought double delights at the inns on that account.
Tess's occupations made her late in setting out, so
that her comrades reached the town long bdore her.
It was a ﬁne September evening, just before sunset,
when yellow lights struggle with blue shades in hair-
like lines, and the atmosphere itself forms a
without aid from more solid objects, except the
innumerable winged insects that dance in it.
this low-lit mistiness Tess walked leisurely along.

She did not discover the coincidence of the market
with the fair till she had reached the place, by which
time it was close upon dusk. Her limited marketing
was soon completed; and then as usual she began to
look about for some of the Trantridge cottagers.

At ﬁrst she could not ﬁnd them, and she was
informed that most of them had gone to what they
called a private little jig at the house of a hay-trusser
and peat—dealer who had transactions with their farm.
He lived in an out-of-the-way nook of the townlet,
and in trying to ﬁnd her course thither her eyes fell
upon Mr. d'Urberville standing at a street corner.

‘What—my Beauty? You here so late?’ he said.

She told him that she was simply waiting for
company homeward.

‘I’ll see you again,’ said he over her shoulder as
she went on down the back lane.

Approaching the hay-trusser's she could hear the
ﬁddled notes of a reel proceeding from some building

in the rear; but no sound of dancing was audible—an
76

THE MAIDEN

exceptional state of things for these parts, where as
a rule the stamping drowned the music. The front
door being open, she could see straight through the
houseintothegardenatthebackasfarastheshades
of night would allow; and nobody appearing to her
knock, she traversed the dwelling and went up the
path to the outhouse whence the sound had attracted
her.

It was a windowlw erection used for storage, and
from the open d00r there ﬂoated into the obscurity a
mist of yellow radiance, which at ﬁrst Tess thought to
be illuminated smoke. But on drawing nearer she
perceived that it was a cloud of dust, lit by candles
within the outhouse, whose beams upon the haze
carried forward the outline of the doorway into the
wide night of the garden.

When she came close and looked in she beheld
indistinct forms racing up and down to the ﬁgure of
the dance, the silence of their footfalls arising from
their being overshoe in ‘scroﬁ’-—that is to say, the
powdery residuum from the storage of peat and other
products, the stirring of which by their turbulent
feet created the nebulosity that involved the scene.
Through this ﬂoating, fusty debris of peat and hay,
mixed with the perspirations and warmth of the
dancers, and forming together a sort of vegeto-human
pollen, the muted ﬁddles feeny pushed their notes, in
marked contrast to the spirit with which the measure
was trodden out. They coughed as they danced, and
laughed as they coughed. Of the rushing couples
there could barely be discerned more than the high
lights—the indistinctness shaping them to satyrs
clasping nymphs—a multiplicity of Pans whirling a
multiplicity of Syrinxes; Lotis attempting to elude
Priapus, and always failing.

At intervals a couple would approach the doorway
for air. and, the haze no longer veiling their features,
the demigods resolved themselves into the homely
personalities of her own next-door neighbours. Could

77

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Trantridge in two or three short hours have meta-
morphosed itself thus madly!

Some Sileni of the throng sat on benches and hay-
trusses by the wall; and one of them recognized her.

‘The maids don’t think it respectable to dance at
“The Flower-de-Luce,"' he explained. ‘They don’t
like to let everybody see which be their fancy-men.
Besides, the house sometimes shuts up just when their
jints begin to get greased. So we come here and
Send out for liquor.’

‘But when be any of you going home?’ asked Tess
with some anxiety.

" ‘Now—a’most directly. This is all but the last
11g.’

She waited. The reel drew to a close, and some
of the party were in the mind for starting. But others
would not, and another dance was formed. This
would surely end it, thought Tess. But it merged in
yet another. She became restless and uneasy; yet,
having waited so long, it was necessary to wait longer;
on account of the fair the roads were dotted with
roving characters of possibly ill intent; and, though
not fearful of measurable dangers, she feared the un—
known. Had she been near Marlott she would have
had less dread. V

‘Don't ye be nervous, my dear good soul,‘ ex-
postulated, between his coughs, a young man with a
wet face, and his straw hat so far back upon his head
that the .brim encircled it like the nimbus of a saint.
‘What's yer hurry? To-morrow is Sunday, thank
God, and we can sleep it off in church-time. Now,
have a turn with me?’

She did not abhor dancing, but she was not going
to dance here. The movement grew more passionate:
the ﬁddlers behind the luminous pillar of cloud now
and then varied the air by playing on the wrong side
of the bridge or with the back of the bow. But it
did not matter; the panting shapes spun onwards.

They did not vary their partners if their inclination

78

THE MAIDEN

were to stick to previous ones. Changing partners
simply meant that a satisfactory choice had not as yet
been arrived at by one or other of the pair, and by
this time every couple had been suitably matched.
It was then that the ecstasy and the dream began, in
which emotion was the matter of the universe, and
matter but an adventitious intrusion likely to hinder
you from spinning where you wanted to spin.

Suddenly there was a dull thump on the ground:
a couple had fallen, and lay in a mixed heap. The
next couple, unable to check its progress, came
pling over the obstacle. An inner cloud of dust rose
around the prostrate ﬁgures amid the general one of
the room, in which a twitching entanglement of arms
and legs was discernible.

‘You shall catch it for this, my gentleman, when
you get home !' burst in female accents from the
human heap—those of the unhappy partner of the
man whose clumsiness had caused the mishap; she
happened also to be his recently married wife, in which
assortment there was nothing unusual at Trantridge
as long as any aﬁection remained between wedded
couples; and, indeed, it was not uncustomary in their
later lives, to avoid making odd lots of the single
people between whom there might be a warm under-
standing.

A loud laugh from behind Tess’s back, in the
shade of the garden, united with the titter within the
room. She looked round, and saw the red coal of a
cigar: Alec d'Urberville was standing there alone.
He beckoned to her, and she reluctantly retreated
towards him.

‘Well, my Beauty, what are you doing here?’

She was so tired after her long day and her walk
that she conﬁded her trouble to him—that she had
been waiting ever since he saw her to have their
company home, because the road at night was strange
to her. ‘But it seems they will never leave off, and I
really think I will wait no longer.’

79

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Certainly do not. I have only a saddle-horse
here to-day; but come to “ The Flowerde—Luoe," and
I'll hire a trap, and drive you home with me.’

Tess, though ﬂattered, had never quite got over
her original mistrust of him, and, despite their tardi-
ness, she preferred to walk home with the work-folk.
So she answered that she was much obliged to him,
but would not trouble him. ‘I have said that I will
wait for 'em, and they will expect me to now.’

‘Very well, Miss Independence. Please yourself.
. . .Thenlshallnothurry. . . . MygoodLord,what
a kick-up they are having there !’

He had not put himself forward into the light, but
some of them had perceived him, and his presence led
to a slight pause and a. consideration of how the time
was ﬂying. As soon as he had re-lit a cigar and
walked away the Trantridge people began to collect
themselves from amid those who had come in from
other farms, and prepared to leave in a body. Their
bundles and baskets were gathered up, and half an
hour later, when the clock—chime sounded a quarter
past eleven, they were straggling along the lane which
led up the hill towards their homes.

It was a. three-mile walk, along a dry white road,
made whiter to-night by the light of the moon.

Tess soon perceived as she walked in the ﬂock,
sometimes with this one, sometimes with that, that
the fresh night air was producing staggerings and
serpentine courses among the men who had partaken
too freely; some of the more careless women also
were wandering in their gait—to wit, a dark Virago,
Car Darch, dubbed Queen of Spades, till lately a
favourite of d’Urberv-llle’s; Nancy, her sister, nick-
named the Queen of Diamonds; and the young mar-
ried woman who had already tumbled down. Yet
however terrestrial and lumpy their appearance just
now to the mean unglarnoured eye, to themselves the
case was diﬁerent. They followed the road with a

so

THE MAIDEN

sensation that they were soaring along in a support-
ing medium, possessed of original and profound
thoughts, themselves and surrounding nature forming
an organism of which all the parts harmoniously and
joyoust interpenetrated each other. They were as
sublime as the moon and stars above them, and the
moon and stars were as ardent as they.

Tess, however, had undergone such painful experi-
ences of this kind in her father's house that the
discovery of their condition spoilt the pleasure she
was beginning to feel in the moonlight journey. Yet
she stuck to the party, for reasons above given.

In the open highway they had progressed in
scattered order; but now their route was through a
ﬁeld-gate, and the foremost ﬁnding a diﬂiculty in
opening it they closed up together.

ThisleadingpedestrianwasCartheQueenof
Spades, who carried a wicker-basket containing her
mother’s groceries, her own draperies, and other

for the week. The basket being large and
heavy, Car had placed it for convenience of porterage
onthetopofherhead,whereitrodeoninjeopardized
balance as she walked with arms akimbo.

‘Well—whatever is that a-creeping down thy back,
Car Dareh?’ said one of the group suddenly.

All looked at Car. Her gown was a light cotton
print, and from the back of her head a kind of rope
could be seen descending to some distance below her
waist, like a Chinaman’s queue.

"Tis her hair falling down,’ said another.

No; it was not her hair: it was a black stream of
something oozing from her basket, and it glistened
likeaslimysnakeinthecoldstilliaysofthemoon.

"Tis treacle,’ said an observant matron.

Treacle it was. Car's poor old grandmother had a
weakness for the sweet stuﬁ. Honey she had in
plenty out of her own hives, but treaele was what her
smildesired,andCarhadbeenabouttogivehera
treat of surprise. Hastily lowering the basket, the

8:

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

dark girl found that the vessel containing the syrup
had been smashed

By this time there had arisen a shout of laughter
at the extraordinary appearance of Car's back, which
irritated the dark queen into getting rid of the dis-
ﬁgurement by the ﬁrst sudden means available, and
independently of the help of the scoffers. She rushed
excitedly into the ﬁeld they were about to cross, and,
ﬂinging herself ﬂat on her back upon the grass, began
towipehergownaswellasshecouldbyspinning
horizontally on the herbage and dragging herself over
it upon her elbows.

The laughter rang louder; they clung to the gate,
to the posts, rested on their staves, in the weakness
engendered by their convulsions at the spectacle of Car.
Our heroine, who had hitherto held her peace, at this
wild moment could not help joining in with the rest.

It was a misfortune—in more ways than one. No
sooner did the dark queen hear the soberer richer
note of Tess among those of the other work-people
than a long smouldering sense of rivalry inﬂamed her
to madness. She sprang to her feet and closely faced
the object of her dislike.

‘How darest th' laugh at me, hussy!’ she cried.

‘I couldn't really help it when t‘others did,’ apolo-
gized Tess, still tittering.

‘Ah, th'st think th’ beest everybody, dostn't, be-
cause th' beest ﬁrst favourite with He just now! But
stop a hit, my lady, stop a bit! I'm as good as two
of such! Look here—here's at 'ee!‘

To Tess’s horror the dark queen began stripping off
the bodice of her gown—which for the added reason of
its ridiculed condition she was only too glad to be free
of-till she had bared her plump neck, shoulders, and
arms to the moonshine, under which they looked as
luminous and beautiful as some Praxitelean creation,
in their possession of the faultless rotundities of a lusty
country girl. She closed her ﬁsts and squared up at Tess.

‘Indeed, then, I shall not ﬁght!‘ said the latter
8::

 

THE MAIDEN

majestically; ‘and if I had known you was of that
sort, I wouldn’t have so let myself down as to come
with such a whorage as this is!’

The rather too inclusive speech brought down a
torrent of vituperation from other quarters upon fair
Tess's unlucky head, particularly from the Queen of
Diamonds, who, having stood in the relations to
d’Urbetville that Car had also been suspected of,

’united with the latter against the common enemy.
Several other women also chimed in, with an animus
which none of them would have been so fatuous as to
show but for the rollicking evening they had passed.
Thereupon, ﬁnding Tess unfairly browbeaten, the
husbands and lovers tried to make peace by defending
her; but the result of that attempt was directly to in-
crease the war.

Tess was indignant and ashamed. She no longer
minded the loneliness of the way and the lateness of
the hour; her one object was to get away from the
whole crew as soon as possible. She hiew well
enough that the better among them would repent of
their passion next day. They were all now inside the
ﬁeld, and she was edging back to rush 0E alone when
a horseman emerged almost silently from the corner of
the hedge that screened the road, and Alec d’Urber-
ville looked round upon them.

‘What the devil is all this row about, work-folk?’
he asked.

The explanation was not readily forthcoming; and,
in truth, he did not require any. Having heard their
voices while yet some way off, he had ridden creep-
ineg forward, and learnt enough to satisfy himself.

Tess was standing apart from the rest, near the
gate. He bent over towards her. ‘Jump up behind
me,’ he whispered, ‘ and we’ll get shot of the screaming
cats in a. jiffy !’

She felt almost ready to faint, so vivid was her
sense of the At almost any other moment of

her life she would have refused such proﬁered aid and
83

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

company, as she had refused them several times before;
and now the loneliness would not of itself have forced
her to do otherwise. But coming as the invitation did
at the particular juncture when fear and indignation at
these adversaries could be transformed by a spring of
the foot into a triumph over them, she abandoned
herself to her impulse, climbed the gate. put her toe
upon his instep, and scrambled into the saddle behind
him. The pair were speeding away into the distant
gray by the time that the contentious revellers became
aware of what had happened.

The Queen of Spades forgot the stain on her bodice,
and stood beside the Queen of Diamonds and the
new-married, staggering young woman—all with a
gaze of ﬁxity in the direction in which the horse’s
tramp was diminishing into silence on the road.

‘ at be ye looking at?’ asked a man who had
not observed the incident.

‘Ho-ho—ho!’ laughed dark Car.

‘Hee-hee-hee!’ laughed the tippling bride, as she
steadied herself on the arm of her fond husband.

‘Heu-heu-heu!’ laughed dark Car’s mother, strok-
ing her moustache as she explained laconically: 'Out
of the frying-pan into the ﬁre!’

Then these children of the open air, whom even
excess of alcohol could scarce injure permanently,
betook themselves to the ﬁeld-path; and as they went
there moved onward with them, around the shadow of
each one's head, a circle of opalized light. formed by
the moon‘s rays upon the glistening sheet of dew.
Each pedestrian could see no halo but his or her own,
which never deserted the head-shadow, whatever its
vulgar unsteadiness might be; but adhered to it, and
persistently beautiﬁed it; till the erratic motions
seemed an inherent part of the irradiation, and the
fumes of their breathing a component of the night’s
mist; and the spirit of the scene, and of the moon-
light, and of Nature. seemed harmoniously to mingle

with the spirit of wine.
84

XI

TEE twain centered along for some time without
speech, Tess as she clung to him still panting in her
triumph, yet in other respects dubious. She had per-
ceived that the horse was not the spirited one he
sometimes rode, and felt no alarm on that score,
though her seat was precarious enough despite her
tight hold of him. She begged him to slow the
animal to a walk, which Alec accordingly did.

‘Neatly done, was it not, dear Tess?’ he said by—
and-by.

‘Yes!’ said she. ‘I am sure I ought to be much
obliged to you.’

‘And are you?’

She did not reply.

‘Tess, why do you always dislike my kissing you?’

‘I suppose—because I don’t love you.’

‘You are quite sure?’

‘I am angry with you sometimes?

‘Ah, I half feared as much.' Nevertheless, Alec
did not object to that confession. He knew that any-
thing was better than ﬁigidity. ‘Why haven't you
told me when I have made you angry?’

‘You know very well why. Because I cannot help
myself here.’

‘I haven’t offended you often by love-making?

‘You have sometimes.’

‘How many times?’

‘You know as well as I—too many times.’

'Every time I have tried?’

She was silent, and the horse ambled along for a
considerable distance, till a faint luminous fog, which

35

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

had hung in the hollows all the evening, became
general and enveloped them. It seemed to hold the
moonlight in suspension, rendering it more pervasive
than in clear air. Whether on this account, or from
absent-mindedness, or from sleepiness, she did not
perceive that they had long ago passed the point at
which the lane to Trantridge branched from the high-
way, and that her conductor had not taken the Trent-
ridge track.

She was inexpressibly weary. She had risen at
ﬁve o'clock every morning of that week, had been on
foot the whole of each day, and on this evening had
in addition walked the three miles to Chaseborough,
waited three hours for her neighbours without eating
or drinking, her impatience to start them preventing
either; she had then walked a. mile of the way home,
and had undergone the excitement of the quarrel, till,
with the slow progress of their steed, it was now
nearly one o'clock. Only once, however, was she
overcome by actual drowsiness. In that moment of
oblivion her head sank gently against him.

D’Urberville stopped the horse, withdrew his feet
from the stirrups, turned sideways on the saddle, and
enclosed her waist with his arm to support her.

This immediately put her on the defensive, and
with one of those sudden impulses of reprisal to which
she was liable she gave him a little push from her.
In his ticklish position he nearly lost his balance and
only just avoided rolling over into the road, the horse,
{1110:1511 a. powerful one, bemg' fortunately the quietest

e e.

‘That is devilish unkind!’ he said. ‘I mean no
harm—only to keep you from falling.’

She pondered suspiciously; till, thinking that this
might after all be true, she relented, and said quite
humbly, ‘I beg your pardon, sir.’

‘I won't pardon you unless you show some eon-
ﬁdenoe in me. Good God!’ he burst out, ‘what am
I,toberepu1sedsobyamerechitlikeyou? For

86

THE MAIDEN

near three mortal months have you triﬂed with my
feelings, eluded me, and snubbed me; and I won't
stand it!’

‘I’ll leave you to-morrow, sir.

‘No, you will not leave me to-morrowl Will you,
I ask once more, show your belief in me by letting me
clasp you with my aim? Come, between us two and
nobody else, now. We know each other well; and
you know that I love you, and think you the prettiest
girl in the world, which you are. Mayn't I treat you
as a. lover?’

She drew a quick pettish breath of objection, writh-
ing uneasily on her seat, looked far ahead, and
murmured, ‘I don’t know—I wish—how can I say yes
or no when—'

He settled the matter by clasping his arm round
her as he desired, and Tess expressed no further
negative. Thus they sidled slowa onward till it
struck her they had been advancing for an uncon-
scionable time—far longer than was usually occupied
by the short journey from Chaseborough, even at this
walking pace, and that they were no longer on hard
road, but in a. mere trackway.

‘Why, where be we?’ she exclaimed.

‘Passing by a. wood.’

‘A wood—what wood? Surely we are quite out
of the road?’

‘A bit of The Chase—the oldest wood in England.
It is a lovely night, and why should we not prolong
our ride a little?‘

‘How could you be so treacherous? said Tess,
between archness and real dismay, and getting rid of
his arm by pulling open his ﬁngers one by one, though
at the risk of slipping off herself. ‘Just when I've
been putting such trust in you, and obliging you to
please you, because I thought I had wronged you by
that push! Please set me down, and let me walk home.’

‘You cannot walk home, darling, even if the air
were clear. We are miles away from Trantridge, if

87

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

I must tell you, and in this growing fog you might
wander for hours among these trees.’

‘Never mind that,’ she coaxed. ‘Put me down, I
beg you. I don’t mind where it is; only let me get
down, sir, please!’

‘Very well, then, I will—on one condition. Having
brought you here to this out-of-the—way place, I feel
myself responsible for your safe conduct home, what-
ever you may yourself feel about it. As to your
getting to Trantridge without assistance, it is quite
impossible; for, to tell the truth, dear, owing to this
fog, which so disguises everything, I don’t quite know
where we are myself. Now, if you will promise to
wait beside the horse while I walk through the bushes
till I come to some road or house, and ascertain
exactly our whereabouts, I’ll deposit you here will-
ingly. When I come back I’ll give you full directions,
and if you insist upon walking you may; or you may
ride—at your pleasure.’

She accepted these terms, and slid oﬂ on the near
side, though not till he had stolen a cursory kiss. He
sprang down on the other side.

‘I suppose I must hold the horse?’ said she.

‘Oh no; it’s not necessary,’ replied Alec, patting the
panting creature. ‘ He’s had enough of it for to-night.’

He turned the horse's head into the bushes, hitched
him on to a bough, and made a sort of couch or nest
for her in the deep mass of dead leaves

‘Now, you sit there,’ he said. ‘The leaves have
not got damp as yet. Just give an eye to the horse——
it will be quite suﬂicient.’

He took a few steps away from her, but, returning,
said, ‘By the bye, Tess, your father has a new oob
to-day. Somebody gave it to him.’

‘Somebody? You !'

D'Urberville nodded.

‘0 how very good of you that is!’ she exclaimed,
with a painful sense of the awkwardness of having to

thank him just then.
as

THE MAIDEN

‘And the children have some toys.’

‘I didn’t know—you ever sent them anything!’
she murmured, much moved. ‘I almost wish you had
not—yes, I almost wish it!’

‘Why, dear?’

‘It—hampers me so.’

‘ essy—don't you love me ever so little now?’

‘I’m grateful,’ she reluctantly admitted. ‘But I
fear I do not———’ The sudden vision of his passion
forherselfasafactorinthisresultsodistressedher
that, beginning with one slow tear, and then following
with anotha, she wept outright.

‘Don’t cry, dear, dear one! Now sit down here,
and wait till I come.’ She passively sat down amid
the leaves he had heaped, and shivered slightly.
‘Are you oold?’ he asked.

‘Not very—a little.’

He touched her with his ﬁngers, which sank into
her as into down. ‘You have only that puﬂy muslin
dress on—how’s that?’

‘It’s my best summer one. "I‘was very warm
when I started, and I didn’t know I was going to
ride, and that it would be night.’

‘Nights grow chilly in September. Let me see.
He pulled off a light overcoat that he had worn, and
put it round her tenderly. ‘That’s it—now you’ll
feel warmer,’ he continued. ‘Now, my pretty, rest
there; I shall soon be back again.’

Having buttoned the overcoat round her shoulders,
he plunged into the webs of vapour which by this time
formed veils between the trees. She could hear the
rustling of the branches as he ascended the adjoining
slope, till his movements were no louder than the
hopping of a bird, and ﬁnally died away. With the
setting of the moon the pale light lessened, and Tess
became invisible as she fell into reverie upon the
leaves where he had left her.

In the meantime Alec d'Urberville had pushed on
up the slope to clear his genuine doubt as to the

89

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

quarter of The Chase they were in. He had, in fact,
ridden quite at random for over an hour, taking any
turning that came to hand in order to prolong com-
panionship with her, and giving far more attention
to Tess's moonlit person than to any wayside object.
A little rest for the jaded animal being desirable, he
did not hasten his search for landmarks. A clamber
over the hill into the adjoining vale brought him to
the fence of a. highway whose contours he '
which settled the question of their whereabth
D'Urberville thereupon turned back; but by this time
the moon had quite gone down, and partly on account
of the fog The Chase was wrapped in thick darkness.
although morning was not far off. He was obliged
to advance with outstretched hands to avoid contact
with the boughs, and discovered that to hit the exact
spot from which he had started was at ﬁrst entirely
beyond him. Roaming up and down, round and
round, he at length heard a slight movement of the
horse close at hand; and the sleeve of his overcoat
unexpectedly caught his foot.

‘Tess!’ said d'Urberville.

Therewasnoanswer. Theobscuritywasnowso
great that he could see absolutely nothing but a pale
nebulousness at his feet, which represented the white
muslin ﬁgure he had left upon the dead leaves. Every-
thing else was blackness alike. D'Urberville stooped
and heard a gentle regular breathing. He knelt and
bent lower, till her breath warmed his face, and in a
moment his cheek was in contact with hers. She was
sleeping soundly, and upon her eyelashesthere lingered
tears.

Darkness and silence ruled everywhere around.
Above them rose the primeval yews and oaks of The
Chase, in which were poised gentle roosting birds in
their last nap; and about them stole the hopping
rabbits and hares. But. might some say, where was
Tess's guardian angel? where was the providence of
her simple faith? Perhaps, like that other god of
90

THE MAIDEN

whom the ironical Tishbite spoke, he was talking, or
he was pursuing, or he was in a journey, or he was
sleeping and not to be awaked.

Why it was that upon this beautiful feminine tissue,
sensitive as gossamer, and practically blank as snow
as yet, there should have been traced such a coarse
pattern as it was doomed to receive; why so often the
coarse appropriates the ﬁner thus, the wrong man the
woman, the wrong woman the man, many thousand
years of analytical philosophy have failed to explain
to our sense of order. One may, indeed, admit the
possibility of a retribution lurking in the present
catastrophe. Doubtless some of Tess d’Urberville’s
mailed ancestors rollicking home from a fray had
dealt the same measure even more ruthlessly towards
peasant girls of their time. But though to visit the
sins of the fathers upon the children may be a morality
good enough for divinities, it is scorned by average
human nature; and it therefore does not mend the
matter. ‘

As Tess’s own people down in those retreats are
never tired of saying among each other in their
fatalistic way: ‘It was to be.’ There lay the pity of
it. An immeasurable social chasm was to divide our
heroine’s personality thereafter from that previous
self of hers who stepped from her mother's door to
try her fortune at Trantridge poultry-farm.

END OF PHASE THE FIRST

 

 

 

PHASE THE SECOND

MAIDEN NO MORE

XII

The basket was heavy and the bundle was large, but
she logged them along like a person who did not ﬁnd
her especial burden in material things. Occasionally
she stopped to rest in a mechanical way by some gate
or post; and then, giving the baggage another hitch
upon her full round arm, went steadily on again.

It was a Sunday morning in late October, about
four months after Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s arrival at Trant-
ridge, and some few weeks subseqth to the night
ride in The Chase. The time was not long past
daybreak, and the yellow luminosity upon the horizon
behind her back lighted the ridge towards which her
face was set—the barrier of the vale wherein she had
of late been a stranger—which she would have to
climb over to reach her birthplace. The ascent was
gradual on this side, and the soil and scenery diﬁered
much from those within Blakemore Vale. Even the
character and accent of the two peoples had shades of
diﬁerence, despite the amalgamating eﬂects of a round.
about railway: so that, though less than twenty miles
from the place of her sojourn at Trantridge, her na-
tive village had seemed a far-away spot. The ﬁeld-
folk shut in there traded northward and westward,
travelled, courted, and married northward and west-
ward. thought northward and westward; those on this
side mainly directed their energies and attention to
the east and south.

9!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

The incline was the same down which d'Urberville
had driven with her so wildly on that day in June.
Tess went up the remainder of its length without
stopping, and on reaching the edge of the escarpment
gazed over the familiar green world beyond, now half-
veiled in mist. It was always beautiful from here; it
was terribly beautiful to Tess today, for since her
eyes last fell upon it she had learnt that the serpent
hisses where the sweet birds sing, and her views of

life had been totally changed for her by the lesson. ‘

Verin another girl than the simple one she had been
at home was she who, bowed by thought, stood still
here, and turned to look behind her. She could not
bear to look forward into the Vale.

Ascending by the long white road that Tess herself

had just laboured up, she saw a two-wheeled vehicle, 

beside which walked a. man, who held up his hand to
attract her attention.

She obeyed the s’gnal to wait for him with un-

tive repow, and in a few minutes man and
horse stopped beside her.

‘Why did you slip away by stealth like this?’ said
d'Urberville, with upbraiding breathlessness; ‘on a
Sunday morning, too, when people were all in bed! I
only discovered it by accident, and I have been driv-
ing like the deuce to overtake you. Just look at the
mare. Why go 05 like this? You know that nobody
wished to hinder your going. And how unnecessary
ithasbeenforyoutotoilalongonfoot, andenmnnber
yourself with this heavy load! I have followed like a
madman, simply to drive you the rest of the distance,
if you won't come back.’

‘I shan't come back,’ said she.

‘I thought you wouldn't—I said so! Well, then,
put up your baskets, and let me help you on.’

She listles‘sly placed her basket and bundle within
the dog-cart, and up, and they sat side by
side. She had no fear of him now, and in the cause
of her conﬁdence her sorrow lay.

.96

MAIDEN NO MORE

D’Urberville mechanically lit a cigar, and the jour-
ney was continued with broken unemotional conver-
sation on the commonplace objects by the wayside.
He had quite forgotten his struggle to kiss her when,
in the early summer, they had driven in the opposite
direction along the same road. But she had not, and
she sat now, like a puppet, replying to his remarks in
monosyllables. After some miles they came in view of
the clump of trees beyond which the village of Marlott
stood. It was only then that her still face showed
the least emotion, a tear or two beginning to trickle
down.

‘What are you crying for?’ he coldly asked.

‘I was only thinking that I was born over there,’
murmured Tess.

‘Well—we must all be born somewhere.’

‘I wish I had never been born-there or anywhere
else!’

‘quh! Well, if you didn't wish to come to Trent-
ridge why did you come?’

She did not reply.

‘You didn't come for love of me, that I'll swear.’

"Tis quite true. If I had gone for love 0’ you, if
I had ever sincerely loved you, if I loved you still, I
should not so loathe and hate myself for my weakness
asIdonow!...Myeyesweredazedbyyoufor
a little, and that was all.’

He shrugged his shoulders. She rammed——
la‘I didn’t understand your meaning till it was too

te.’

‘That’s what every woman says.’

‘How can you dare to use such words!’ she cried,

' impetuously upon him, her eyes ﬂashing as
the latent spirit (of which he was to see more some
day) awoke in her. ‘My God! I could knock you
out of the gig! Did it never strike your mind that
what every woman says some women may feel?’

‘Very well,’ he said, laughing; ‘I am sorry to
wound you. I did wrong—I admit it.’ He dropped

97

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

into some little bitterness as he continued: ‘Only you
needn't be so everlastineg ﬂinging it in my face. I
am ready to pay to the uttermost farthing. You know
you need not work in the ﬁelds or the dairies again.
You know you may clothe yourself with the best,
instead of in the bald plain way you have lately
aﬂected, as if you couldn’t get a ribbon more than
you earn.’

Her lip lifted slightly, though there was little scorn,
as a rule, in her large and impulsive nature.

‘I have said I will not take anything more from
you, and I will not—I cannot! I should be your
creature to go on doing that, and I won't!'

‘One would think you were a princess from your
manner, in addition to a. true and original d'Urberville
—-ha! ha! Well, Tess, dear, I can say no more. I
suppose I am a bad fellow—a damn bad fellow. I was
born bad, and I have lived bad, and I shall die bad in
all probability. But, upon my lost soul, I won't be
bad towards you again, Tess. And if certain circum-
stances should arise—you understand—in which you
are in the least need, the least diﬂiculty, send me one
line, and you shall have by return whatever you
require. I may not be at Trantridgk—I am going to
London for a. time—I can't stand the old woman. But
all letters will be forwarded.’

She said that she did not wish him to drive her
further, and they stopped just under the clump of
trees. D'Urberville alighted, and lifted her down
bodily in his aims, afterwards placing her articles on
the ground beside her. She bowed to him slightly,
her eye just lingering in his; and then she turned to
take the parcels for departure.

Alec d’Urberville removed his cigar, bent towards
her, and said——

‘You are not going to turn away like that, dear?
Come!’

‘If you wish,’ she answered indifferently. ‘See
how you've mastered mel’

98

MAIDEN NO MORE

She thereupon turned round and lifted her face to
his, and remained like a marble term while he im-
printed a. kiss upon her cheek—~half perfunctorily, half
as if zest had not yet quite died out. Her eyes vaguely
rested upon the remotest trees in the lane while the
kiss was given, as though she were nearly unconscious
of what he did.

‘Now the other side, for old acquaintanee' sake.’

She turned her head in the same passive way, as
one 'might turn at the request of a sketcher or hair-
dresser, and he kissed the other side, his lips touching
cheeks that were damp and smoothly chill as the skin
of the mushrooms in the ﬁelds around.

‘You don't give me your mouth and kiss me back.
3011 never willingly do that—you'll never love me, I

ear.’

‘I have said so, often. It is true. I have never
really and truly loved you, and I think I never can.’
She added moumfully, ‘Perhaps, of all things, a lie on
this thing would do the most good to me now; but I
have honour enough left, little as 'tis, not to tell that
lie. If I did love you I may have the best 0’ causes
for letting you know it. But I don’t.’

He emitted a laboured breath, as if the scene were
getting rather oppressive to his heart, or to his con-
science, or to his gentility.

‘Well, you are absurdly melancholy, Tess. I have
no reason for ﬂattering you now, and I can say plainly
that you need not be so sad. You can hold your own
for beauty against any woman of these parts, gentle
or simple; I say it to you as a practical man and well-
wisher. If you are wise you will show it to the world
more than you do before it fades. . . . And yet, Tess,
will you come back to me? Upon my soul I don’t
like to let you go like this!’

‘Never, never! Imade up my mindassoonasl saw
—-what I ought to have seen sooner; and I won’t come.’

‘Then good morning, my four months’ cousin—
good-bye!’

99

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

He leapt up lightly, arranged the reins, and was
gone between the tall red-herded hedges.

Tess did not look after him, but slowly wound
along the crooked lane. It was still early, and though
the sun's lower limb was just free of the hill, his rays,
ungenial and peering, addressed the eye rather than
the touch as yet. There was not a human soul near.
Sad October and her sadder self seemed the only two
en'stences haunting that lane.

As she walked, however, some footsteps approached
behind her, the footsteps of a man; and owing to the
bu'skness of his advance he was close at her heels and
had said ‘Good morning’ before she had been long
aware of his propinquity. He appeared to be an
artisan of some sort, and carried a tin pot of red paint
in his hand. He asked in a business-like manner if
he should take her basket, which she permitted him to
do, walking beside him.

‘It is early to be astir this Sabbath morn!’ he
said cheerfully. .

'Yes,’ said Tess.

‘When most people are at rest from their week's
work.’

She also assented to this.

‘Though I do more real work to-day than all the
week besides.’

‘Do you?’

‘All the week I work for the glory of man, and on
Sunday for the glory of God. That's more real than
the other—hey? I have a little to do here at this
stile.I The man turned as he spoke to an opening at
the roadside leading into a pasture. ‘If you'll wait a
moment,’ he added, ‘I shall not be long.‘

As he had her basket, she could not well do other-
wise; and she waited, observing him. He set down
her basket and the tin pot, and, stirring the paint with
the brush that was in it, began painting large square
letters on the middle board of the three composing the
stile, placing a. comma after each word, as if to give

[00

MAIDEN N 0 MORE

pause while that word was driven well home to the
reader’s heart—

THY, DAMNATION, SLUMBERETH, NOT.
a Per. ii. 3

Against the peaceful landscape, the pale decaying
tints of the copses, the blue air of the horizon, and the
lichened stile-boards, these staring vermilion words
shone forth. They seemed to shout themselves out
and make the atmosphere ring. Some people might
have cried ‘Alas, poor Theology!’ at the hideous
defaoement—the last grotesque phase of a creed which
had served mankind well in its time. But the words
entered Tess with accusatory horror. It was as if
thismanhadlmownherrecenthistory;yethewasa
total stranger.

Having ﬁnished his text, he picked ,up her basket,
and she mechanically resumed her walk beside him.

‘Do you believe what you paint?’ she asked in
low tones.

‘Believe that tex? Do I believe in my own
existence !’

‘But,’ said she tremulously, ‘suppose your sin was
not of your own seeldngi”

He shook his head.

‘I cannot split hairs on that burning query,’ he
said. ‘I have walked hundreds of miles this past
summer, painting these texes on every wall, gate, and
stile in the length and breadth of this district. I leave
their application to the hearts of the people who read
1%" '

‘I think they are horrible,’ said Tess. ‘Ctushing!
. . ',

"l‘hat’s what they are meant to be!’ he replied
in a trade voice. ‘But you should read my hottest
ones~them I kips for slums and seaports. They'd
make ye wriggle! Not but what this is a very good
tax for rural districts. . . . Ah—there’s a nice bit of
blank wall up by that barn standing to waste. I must

IO!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

put one there-one that it will be good for dangerous
young? females like yerself to heed. Will ye wait,
rmssy '

‘No,’ said she; and, taking her basket, Tess trudged
on. A little way forward she turned her head. The
oldgraywallbegantoadvertiseasimilarﬁeryletter—
ing to the ﬁrst, with a strange and unwanted mien, as
if distressed at duties it had never before been called
upon to perform. It was with a sudden ﬂush that she
read and realized what was to be the inscription he
was now half-way through——

rnou, SHALT, NOT, COMMIT—

Her cheerful friend saw her looking, stopped his
brush, and shouted—

‘If you want to ask for ediﬁcation on these things
of moment, there’s a very earnest good man going to
preach a charity-sermon to—day in the parish you are
going to—Mr. Clare of Emminster. I’m not of his

'on now, but he’s a good man, and he’ll ex-
pound as well as any person I know. "l‘was he
the work in me.’

But Tess did not answer; she throbbineg resumed
her walk, her eyes ﬁxed on the groun . ‘Pooh—I
don't believe God said such things!’ she murmured
contemptuoust when her ﬂush had died away.

A plume of smoke soared up suddenly from her
father’s chimney, the sight of which made her heart
ache. The aspect of the interior, when she reached
it, made her heart ache more. Her mother, who had
just come downstairs, turned to greet her from the
ﬁreplace, where she was kindling barked-oak twigs
under the breakfast kettle. The young children were
still above, as was also her father, it being Sunday
morning, when he felt justiﬁed in lying an additional
half-hour.

‘Welll—my dear Tess!" exclaimed her surprised
mother, jumping up and kissing the girl. ‘How be

102

MAIDEN NO MORE

ye? I didn't we you till you was in upon me! Have
you come home to be married?’

‘ No, I have not come home for that, mother.’

‘Then for a holiday?’

T ‘Yes—for a holiday; 'for a long holiday,’ said
ess.

‘What, isn’t your cousin going to do the handsome
thing?’

‘He's not my cousin, and he’s not going to marry
me.’

Her mother eyed her narrowly.

‘Come, you have not told me all,’ she said.

Then Tess went up to her mother, put her face
upon Joan’s neck, and told.

‘And yet th'st not got him to marry ’ee!’ reiterated
her mother. ‘Any woman would have done it but
you, after that?

‘Perhaps any woman would except me.’

‘It would have been something like a story to
come back with, if you had!’ continued Mrs. Durbey-
ﬁeld, ready to burst into tears of vexation. ‘After all
the talk about you and him which has reached us
here, who would have expected it to end like this!
Why didn’t ye think of doing some good for your
family instead 0' thinking only of yourself? See how
I’ve got to teave and slave, and your poor weak
father with his heart clogged like a dripping-pan. I
did hope for something to come out 0’ this! To see
what a pretty pair you and he made that day when
you drove away together four months ago! See
what he has given us—all, as we thought, because we
were his kin. But if he's not, it must have been done
because of his love for ’ee. And yet you’ve not got
him to marryl’

Get Alec d'Urberville in the mind to marry her!
He marry her! On matrimony he had never once
said a word. And what if he had? How a convulsive
snatching at social salvation might have impelled her
to answer him she could not say. But her poor fool-

103

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

ish mother little knew her present feeling towards
this man. Perhaps it was unusual in the circum-
stances, unlucky, unaccountable: but there it was;
and this, as she had said, was what made her detest
herself. She had never wholly cared for him, she did
not at all care for him now. She had dreaded him,
winced before him, succumbed to adroit advantages
he took of her helplessness; then, temporarily blinded
by his ardent manners, had been stirred to confused
surrender awhile: had suddenly despised and disliked
him. and had run away. That was all. Hate him
she did not quite; but he was dust and ashes to her,
and even for her name's sake she scarcely wished to
marry him.

‘You ought to have been morecarefulifyoudidn’t
mean to get him to make you his wife!’

‘0 mother, my mother!’ cried the agonized girl,
turning passionately upon her parent as if her poor
heart would break. ‘How could I be expected to
know? I was a child when I left this house four
months ago. Why didn’t you tell me there was
danger in men-folk? Why didn’t you warn me?
Ladies know what to fend hands against, because
they read novels that tell them of these tricks; but I
never had the chance 0' learning in that way, and
you did not help me !’

Her mother was subdued.

‘I thought if I spoke of his fond feelings and what
they might lead to, you would be hontish wi’ him and
lose your chance,’ she murmured, wiping her eyes
with her apron. ‘Well, we must make the best of it,
appease. ’Tis hater, after all, and what do please

1'

 

XIII

THE event of Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s return from the
manor of her bogus kinsfolk was rumoured abroad, if
rummirbenottoolargeawordforaspaeeofasquare
mile. In the afternoon several young girls of Mar-
lott, former schoolfellows and acquaintances of Tess,
calledtoseeher,an'ivingdressedintheirbeststarched
andironed,asbemmevisitoistoapetsonwhohad
made a transcendent conquest (as they supposed), and
satroundtheroomlookingatherwithgreatcm'i-
osity. For the fact that it was this said thirty-ﬁrst
cousin, Mr. d’Urberville, who had fallen in love with
her, a gentleman not altogether local, whose reputa-
tionasarecklessgallantandheart—breakerwasbe-
ginning to spread beyond the immediate boundaries
of Trantridge, lent Tess’s supposed position, by its
fearsomeness, a. far higher fasdnation than it would
have exercised if unhazardous.

Their interest was so deep that the younger ones
whispered when her back was turned——

‘How pretty she is; and how that best frock do
set her oﬁl I believe it cost an immense deal, and
thatitwasagiftfromhim.’

Tees, who was reaching up to get the tea-things
from the corner cupboard, did not hear these com-
mentaries. If she had heard them, she might soon
have set her friends right on the matter. But her
mother heard, and Joan's simple vanity, having been
deniedthehopeofadashingmaniage,feditselfas
Wellasit eouldupon the sensationofadashingﬂirta-
tion. Upon the whole she felt gratiﬁed, even though
such a limited and evanescent triumph should involve

:05

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

her daughter’s reputation; it might end in marriage
yet, and in the warmth of her responsiveness to their
admiration she invited her visitors to stay to tea.

Their chatter, their laughter, their good—humoured
innuendoes, above all, their ﬂashes and ﬂickerings of
envy, revived Tess's spirits also; and as the evening
wore on, she caught the infection of their excitement,
and grew almost gay. The marble hardness left her
face, she moved with something of her old bounding
step, and ﬂushed in all her young beauty.

At moments, in spite of thought, she would reply
to their inquiries with a manner of superiority, as if
recognizing that her experiences in the ﬁeld of court-
ship had, indeed, been slightly enviable. But so far
was she from being, in the words of Robert South, ‘in
love with her own ruin,’ that the illusion was transient
as lightning; cold reason came back to mock her
spasmodic weakness; the ghastliness of her momen-
tary pride would convict her, and recall her to reserved
listlessness again.

And the despondency of the next morning's dawn,
when it was no longer Sunday, but Monday; and no
best clothes; and the laughing visitors were gone, and
she awoke alone in her old bed, the innocent younger
children breathing softly around her. In place of the
excitement of her return, and the interest it had in-
spired, she saw before her a long and stony highway
which she had to tread, without aid, and with little
sympathy. Her depression was then terrible, and she
could have hidden herself in a tomb.

In the course of a few weeks Tess revived sufﬁ-
ciently to show herself so far as was necessary to get
to church one Sunday morning. She liked to hear
the chanting—such as it was—and the old Psalms, and
to join in the Morning Hymn. That innate love of
melody, which she had inherited from her ballad-
singing mother, gave the simplest music a power over
her which could well-nigh drag her heart out of her
how at times.

106

MAIDEN NO MORE

To be as much out of observation as possible for
reasons of her own, and to escape the gallantries of'the
young men, she set out before the chiming began, and
took a back seat under the gallery, close to the lumber,
where only old men and women came, and where the
bier stood on end among the churchyard tools.

Parishioners dropped in by twos and threes, de-
posited themselves in rows before her, rested three-
quarters of a minute on their foreheads as if they were
praying, though they were not; then sat up, and
looked around. When the chants came on one of her
favourites happened to be chosen among the rest—the
old double chant ‘Langdon’——but she did not know
what it was called, though she would much have liked
to know. She thought, without exactly wording the
thought, how strange and godlike was a composer’s
power, who from the grave could lead through se-
quences of emotion, which he alone had felt at ﬁrst, a
girl like her who had never heard of his name, and
never would have a clue to his personality.

The people who had turned their heads turned
them again as the service proceeded; and at last
observing her they whispered to each other. She
knew what their whispers were about, grew sick at
heart, and felt that she could come to church no more.

The bedroom which she had shared with some of the
children formed her retreat more continually than ever.
Here, under her few square yards of thatch, she
watched winds, and snows, and rains, gorgeous sun-
sets, and successive moons at their full. So close
kept she that at length almost everybody thought she
had gone away.

The only exercise that Tess took at this time was
after dark; and it was then, when out in the woods,
that she seemed least solitary. She knew how to hit
to a hair’s-breadth that moment of evening when the
light and the darkness are so evenly balanced that the
constraint of day and the suspense of night neutralize
each other, leaving absolute mental liberty. It is then

:01

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

that the plight of being alive becomes attenuated to
itsleast possible dimensions. She had no fear of the
shadows; her sole idea seemed to be to shun mankind
—or rather that cold accretion called the world, which,
so terrible in the mass, is so unformidable, even
pitiable, in its units.

On these lonely hills and dales her quiescent glide
was of a piece with the element she moved in. Her
ﬂexuous and stealthy ﬁgure became an integral part
of the scene. At times her whimsical fancy would
intensify natural processes around her till they seemed
a part of her own story. Rather they became a. part
of it; for the world is only a psychological phenom-
enon, and what they seemed they were. The mid-
night airs and gusts, moaning amongst the tightly-
wrapped buds and bark of the winter twigs, were
formulae of bitter reproach. A wet day was the
expression of irremediable grief at her weakness in
the mind of somé vague ethical being whom she could
not class deﬁnitely as the God of her childhood, and
could not comprehend as any other.

But this encompassment of her own characteriza-
tion, based on shreds of convention, peopled by
phantoms and voices antipathetic to her, was a sorry
and mistaken creation of Tess’s fancy—e. cloud of
moral hobgoblins by which she was terriﬁed without
reason. It was they that were out of harmony with
the actual world, not she. Walking among the
sleeping birds in the hedges, watching the skipping
rabbits on a. moonlit warren, or standing under a.
pheasant-laden bough, she looked upon herself as a
ﬁgure of Guilt intruding into the haunts of Innocence.
But all the while she was making a distinction where
there was no difference. Feeling herself in antagonism,
shewasquiteinaccord. Shehadbeenmadetobreal:
an accepted social law, but no law known to the
environment in which she fancied herself such an
anomaly.

:08

XIV

IT was a. hazy sunrise in August. The denser noc-
turnal vapours, attacked by the warm beams, were
dividing and shrinking into isolated ﬂeeces within
hollows and coverts, where they waited till they should
be dried away to nothing.

The sun, on account of the mist, had a. curions
sentient, personal look, demanding the masculine pro«
noun for its adequate expression. His present aspect,
coupled with the lack of all human forms in the scene,
explained the old-time heliolatries in a moment. One
could feel that a. saner religion had never prevailed
under the sky. The luminary was a golden-haired,
beaming, mild-eyed, God-like creature, gazing down
in the vigour and intentness of youth upon an earth
that was brimming with interest for him.

His light, a little later, broke through chinks of
cottage shutters, throwing stripes like red-hot pokers
upon cupboards, chests of drawers, and other furni-
ture within; and awakening harvesters who were not
already astir.

But of all ruddy things that morning the brightest
were two broad arms of painted wood, which rose
from the margin of a yellow cornﬁeld hard by Marlott
village. They, with two others below, formed the
revolving Maltese cross of the reaping-machine, which
had been brought to the ﬁeld on the previous evening
to be ready for operations this day. The paint with
which they were smeared, intensiﬁed in hue by the
sunlight, imparted to them a. look of having been
dipped in liquid ﬁre.

~The ﬁeld had already been ‘opened'; that is to
109

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

say, a lane a few feet wide had been hand—cut through
the wheat along the whole circumference of the ﬁeld,
for the ﬁrst passage of the horses and machine.

Two groups, one of men and lads, the other of
women, had come down the lane just at the hour when
the shadows of the eastern hedge-top struck the west
hedge midway, so that the heads of the groups were
enjoying sunrise while their feet were still in the dawn.
They disappeared from the lane between the two stone
posts which ﬂanked the nearest ﬁeld-gate.

Presently there arose from within a ticking like
the love-making of the grasshopper. The machine
had begun, and a moving concatenation of three horses
and the aforesaid long rickety machine was visible
over the gate, a driver sitting upon one of the hauling
horses, and an attendant on the seat of the implement.
Along one side of the ﬁeld the whole wain went, the
arms of the mechaniml reaper revolving slowly, till it
passed down the hill quite out of sight. In a minute it
came up on the other side of the ﬁeld at the same
equable pace; the glistening brass star in the forehead
of the fore horse ﬁrst catching the eye as it rose into
view over the stubble, then the bright arms, and then
the whole machine.

The narrow lane of stubble encompassing the ﬁeld
grew wider with each circuit, and the standing corn
was reduced to smaller area as the morning wore on.
Rabbits. hares, snakes, rats, mice, retreated inwards
as into a fastness, unaware of the ephemeral nature of
their refuge, and of the doom that awaited them later
in the day when, their covert shrinking to a more and
more horrible narrowness, they were huddled to-
gether, friends and foes, till the last few yards of up-
right wheat fell also under the teeth of the unerring
reaper, and they were every one put to death by the
sticks and stones of the harvesters.

The reaping-machine left the fallen corn behind it
in little heaps, each heap being of the quantity for a
sheaf; and upon these the active binders in the rear

110

 

MAIDEN NO MORE

laid their hands—mainly women, but some of them
men in print shirts, and trousers supported round their
waists by leather straps, rendering useless the two
buttons behind, which twinkled and bristled with
sunbeams at every movement of each wearer, as if
theywereapairofeyesinthesmallofhisback.

But those of the other sex were the most in '
of this company of binders, by reason of the charm
which is acquired by woman when she becomes part
and parcel of outdoor nature, and is not merely an
object set down therein as at ordinary times. A ﬁeld-
man is a personality aﬁeld; a ﬁeld-woman is a portion
of the ﬁeld; she has somehow lost her own margin,
imbibed the essence of her surrounding, and assimi-
lated herself with it.

The women—or rather girls, for they were mostly
young—wore drawn cotton bonnets with great ﬂap-
ping curtains to keep off the sun, and gloves to prevent
their hands being wounded by the stubble. There
was one wearing a pale pink jacket, another in a.
cream-coloured tight-sleeved gown, another in a pet-
ticoat as red as the arms of the reaping-machine;
and others, older, in the brown-rough ‘wropper'
or over-all——the old-established and most appropriate
dress of the ﬁeld-woman, which the young ones were
abandoning. This morning the eye returns involun-
tarily to the girl in the pink cotton jacket, she being
the most ﬂexuous and ﬁnely drawn ﬁgure of them
all. But her bonnet is pulled so far over her brow
that none of her face is disclosed while she binds,
though her complexion may be guessed from a stray
twine or two of dark brown hair which extends below
the curtain of her bonnet. Perhaps one reason why
she seduces casual attention is that she never courts it,
though the other women often gaze around them.

Her binding proceeds with clock-like monotony.
From the sheaf last ﬁnished she draws a handful of
ears, patting their tips with her left palm to bring
th even. Then, stooping low, she moves forward,

It!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

gathering the corn with both hands against her knees,
and pushing her left gloved hand under the bundle
to meet the right on the other side, holding the corn
in an embrace like that of a lover. She brings the
ends of the bond together, and kneels on the sheaf
while she ties it, beating back her skirts now and then
when lifted by the breeze. A bit of her naked arm is
visible between the buff leather of the gauntlet and
the sleeve of her gown; and as the day wears on its
feminine smoothness becomes scariﬁed by the stubble,
and bleeds.

Atintervalsshestandsuptorest,andtoretieher
disarranged apron, or to pull her bonnet straight.
Thenonecanseetheovalfaeeofahandsorneyoung
woman with deep dark eyes and long, heavy, clinging
tressee, which semi to clasp in a beseeching way
anything they fall against. The cheeks are paler, the
teethmoreregular,theredlipstbinnerthanisusual
in a country-bred girl.

It is Tess Durbeyﬁeld, otherwise d'Urberville, some-
what changed—the same, but not the same; at the
present stage of her existence living as a stranger
and an alien here, though it was no strange land that
she was in. After a long seclusion she had come to
a resolve to undertake outdoor work in her native
village, the busiest season of the year in the agricul-
tural world having arrived, and nothing that she could
do within the house being so remunerative for the
time as harvesting in the ﬁelds.

The movements of the other women were more or
less similar to Tess's, the whole bevy of them drawing
together like dancers in a. quadrille at the completion
ofasheafbyeach, everyoneplacinghersheafonend
against those of the rest, till a shock, or ‘stiteh' as it
was here called, of ten or a dozen was formed.

They went to breakfast, and came again, and the
work proceeded as before. As the hour of eleven
drew near a person watching her might have noticed
that every now and then Tess's glance ﬂitted wistfully

"2

MAIDEN NO MORE

to the brow of the hill, though she did not pause in her
sheaﬁng. On the verge of the hour the heads of a
group of children, of ages ranging from six to fourteen,
rose above the stubbly convexity of the hill.

The face of Tess ﬂushed slightly, but still she did
not pause.

The eldest of the corners, a girl who wore a tri-
angular shawl, its corner draggling on the stubble,
carried in her arms what at ﬁrst sight seemed to be a.
doll, but proved to be an infant in long clothes.
Another brought some lunch. The harvesters ceased
working, took their provisions, and sat down against
one of the shocks. Here they fell to, the men plying
a stone jar freely, and passing round a cup.

Tess Durbeyﬁeld had been one of the last to sus-
pend her labours. She sat down at the end of the
shock, her face turned somewhat away from her oom-
panions. Whenshehaddepositedherselfamanina
rabbit-skin cap and with a. red handkerchief tucked
into his belt, held the cup of ale over the top of the
shock for her to drink. But she did not accept his
oﬂer. As soon as her lunch was spread she called up
the big girl her sister, and took the baby of her,
who, glad to be relieved of the burden, went away to
the next shock and joined the other children playing
there. Tess, with a curiously stealthy yet courageous
movement, and with a still rising colour, unfastened
her frock and began suckling the child.

The men who sat nearest considerater turned
their faces towards the other end of the ﬁeld, some of
them beginning to smoke; one, with absent-minded
fondness, regretftu stroking the jar that would no
longer yield a stream. All the women but Tess fell
into animated talk. and adjusted the disarranged lcnots
of their hair.

When the infant had taken its ﬁll the young mother
sat it upright in her lap, and looking into the far
distance dandled it with a gloomy indifference that
wasalmostdislike;thenallofasuddenshefellto

n3

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

violently kissing it some dozens of times, as if she
could never leave all, the child crying at the vehem-
enoe of an onset which strangely combined passionate-
ness with contempt.

‘She’s fond of that there child, though she mid
pretend to hate en, and say she wishes the baby and
her too were in the churchyard,’ observed the woman
in the red pettiooat.

‘She'll soon leave off saying that,’ replied the one
in buff. ‘Lord, 'tis wonderful what a. body can get

"used to 0’ that sort in time!’

‘A little more than persuading had to do wi' the
coming o't. I reckon. There were they that heard a
sobbing one night last year in The Chase; and it mid
gla’gonehardwi’aoertainpartyiffolkshadoome

ong.’

‘Well, a little more, or a little less, 'twas a. thousand
pities that it should have happened to she, of all
others. But ’tis always the oomeliest! The plain
ones he as safe as churches—hey, Jenny? The
speakertumedtooneofthegmupwhoeertainlywas
not ill-deﬁned as plain.

It was a thousand pities, indeed; it was impossible
forevenanenemytofeelotherwiseonlookingat
Tess as she sat there, with her ﬂowerolike mouth and
large tender eyes, neither black nor blue nor gray nor
violet; rather all those shades together, and a. hundred
others, which could be seen if one looked into their
irises—shade behind shade—tint beyond tint—around
pupils that had no bottom; an almost standard woman,
but for the slight incautiousness of character inherited
from her race.

A resolution which had surprised herself had
brought her into the ﬁelds this week for the ﬁrst time
during many months. After wearing and wasting her
palpitating heart with every engine of regret that
lonely inexperience could devise, common-sense had
illumined her. She felt that she would do well to be
useful again—to taste anew sweet independence at

In

MAIDEN NO MORE

any price. The past was past; whatever it had been
it was no more at hand. Whatever its consequences,
time would close over them; they would all in a few
yearsbeasiftheyhadneverbeen, andsheherself
grassed down and forgotten. Meanwhile the trees
werejustasgreenasbefore;thebirdssangandthe
sun shone as clearly now as ever. The familiar
surroundings had not darkened because of her grief,
nor sickened because of her pain.

She might have seen that what had bowed her
head so profoundly—the thought of the world's con—
cern at her situation—was founded on an illusion.
She was not an existence, an experience, a passion, a
structure of sensations, to anybody but herself. To
all humankind besides Tess was only a passing thought.
Even to friends she was no more than a frequently
passing thought. If she made herself miserable the
livelong night and day it was only this much to them
——‘Ah, she makes herself unhappy.’ If she tried to
becheerful,todisrnissallcare,totakep1easureinthe
daylight, the ﬂowers, the baby, she could only be this
idea to them—‘ Ah,’ she bears it very well.’ Moreover,
alone in a desert island would she have been wretched
at what had happened to her? Not greatly. If she
could have been but just created, to discover herself as
a. spouseless mother, with no experience of life except
as the parent of a nameless child, would the position
have caused her to despair? No, she would have
taken it calmly, and found pleasures therein. Most of
the misery had been generated‘by her conventional
aspect, and not by her innate sensations.

Whatever Tess's reasoning, some spirit had induced
her to dress herself up neatly as she had formerly
done, and come out into the ﬁelds, harvest-hands
being greatly in demand just then. This was why she
had borne herself with dignity, and had looked
people calmly in the face at times, even when holding
the baby in her arms.

The harvest-men rose from the shock of corn. and

xrs

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

stretched their limbs, and extinguished their pipes.
The horses, which had been unharnessed and fed,
were again attached to the scarlet machine. Tess,
having quickly eaten her own meal, beckoned to her
eldest sister to come and take away the baby, fastened
her dress, put on the buﬁ gloves again, and stooped
anew to draw a bond from the last completed sheaf
for the tying of the next.

In the afternoon and evening the proceedings of
the morning were continued, Tess staying on till dusk
with the body of harvesters. Then they all rode home
in one of the largest waggons, in the company of a
broad tarnished moon that had risen from the ground
to the eastwards, its face resembling the outworn
gold-leaf halo of some worm-eaten Tuscan saint.
Tess's female companions sang songs, and showed
themselves very sympathetic and glad at her reappear-
ance out-of-doors, though they could not refrain from
mischievously throwing in a few verses of the ballad
about the maid who went to the merry green wood
and came back a changed state. There are counter-
poises and compensations in life; and the event which
hadmadeofherasocialwaminghadalsoforthe
moment made her the most interesting personage in
the village to many. Their friendliness won her still
further away from herself, their lively spirits were
contagious, and she became almost gay.

But now that her moral sorrows were
away a. fresh one arose on the natural side of her
which knew no social law. When she reached home
it wastolearn tohergiiefthatthebabyhadbeen
suddenly taken ill since the afternoon. Some such
collapse had been probable, so tender and puny was
its frame; but the event came as a shock nevertheless.

The baby's offence against society in coming into
the world was forgotten by the girl-mother; her soul’s
desire was to continue that oﬂence by preserving the
life of the child. However, it soon grew clear that

the hour of emancipation for that little prisoner of the
r l 6

MAIDEN NO MORE

ﬂesh was to arrive earlier than her worst misgivings
had conjectured. And when she had discovered this
she was plunged into a misery which transcended that
of the child’s simple loss. Her baby had not been
baptized.

Tess had drifted into a frame of mind which ac-
cepted passively the consideration that if she should
have to burn for what she had done, burn she must,
and there was an end of it. Like all village girls, she
was well grounded in the Holy Scriptures, and had
dutiftu studied the histories of Aholah and Aholibah,
and knew the inferences to be drawn therefrom. But
when the same question arose with regard to the baby,
it had a very different colour. Her darling was about
to die, and no salvation.

It was nearly bedtime, but she rushed downstairs
and asked if she might send for the parso . The
moment happened to be one at which her father's
sense of the antique nobility of his family was highest,
and his sensitiveness to the smudge which Tess had
set upon that nobility most pronounced, for he had
just returned from his weekly booze at Rolliver’s In.
No person should come inside his door, he declared,
prying into his aﬂairs, just then, when, by her shame,
it had become more necessary than ever to hide them.
He locked the door and put the key in his pocket.

The household went to bed, and, distressed beyond
measure, Tess retired also. She was continually
waking as she lay, and in the middle of the night
found that the baby was still worse. It was obviously
dying—quietly and painlessly, but none the less surely.

In her misery she rocked herself upon the bed.
The clock struck the solemn hour of one, that hour
when fancy stalks outside reason, and malignant possi-
bilities stand rock-ﬁrm as facts. She thought of the
child consigned to the nethermost corner of hell,
as its double doom for lack of baptism and lack of
legitimacy; saw the arch-ﬁend tossing it with his
three-pronged fork, like the one they used for heating

111

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

the oven on baking days; to which picture she added
many other quaint and curious details of torment
sometimes taught the young in this Christian country.
The lurid presentment so powerfully affected her
imagination in the silence of the sleeping house that
her nightgown became damp with perspiration, and
the bedstead shook with each throb of her heart.

The infant’s breathing grew more diﬁicult, and the
mother's mental tension increased. It was useless to
devour the little thing with kisses; she could stay
in bed no longer, and walked feverishly about the
room.

'0 merciful God, have pity; have pity upon my
poor baby!’ she cried. ‘Heap as much anger as
mdg’vant to upon me, and welcome; but pity the

She leant against the chest of drawers, and mur-
mured incoherent supplications for a. long while, till
she suddenly started up.

‘Ah! perhaps baby can be saved! Perhaps it will
be just the same!’

She spoke so brightly that it seemed as though
her face might have shone in the gloom surround-
ing her.

She lit a candle, and went to a second and a third
bed under the wall, where she awoke her young sisters
and brothers, all of whom occupied the same room.
Pulling out the washing-stand so that she could get
behind it, she poured some water from a jug, and
made them kneel around, putting their hands together
with ﬁngers exactly vertical. While the children,
scarcely awake, awe-stricken at her manner, their
eyes growing larger and larger, remained in this
position, she took the baby from her bed—a child’s
child—~50 immature as scarce to seem a sufﬁcient
personality to endow its producer with the maternal
title. Tess then stood erect with the infant on her
arm beside the basin, the next sister held the Prayer-
Book open before her, as the clerk at church held it

118

MAIDEN NO MORE

before the person; and thus the girl set about baptiz-
ing her child. ~

Her ﬁgure looked singularly tall and imposing as
she stood in her long white nightgown, a thick cable
of twisted dark hair hanging straight down her back
to her waist. The kindly dimness of the weak candle
abstracted from her form and features the little
blemishes which sunlight might have revealed—the
stubble scratches upon her wrists, and the weariness
of her eyes—her high enthusiasm having a transﬁgur-
ing eﬁect upon the face which had been her undoing,
showing it as a thing of immaculate beauty, with a
touch of dignity which was almost regal. The little
one: kneeling round, their sleepy eyes blinking and
red, awaited her preparations full of a suspended
wonder which their physical heaviness at that hour
would not allow to become active.

The most impressed of them said:

‘Be you really going to christen him, Tess?‘

The girl-mother replied in a grave afﬁrmative.

'What's his name going to be?’

She had not thought of that, but a name suggested
by a phrase in the book of Genesis came into her head
as she proceeded with the baptismal service, and now
she pronounced it:

‘Souow, I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.’

'She sprinkled the water, and there was silence.

‘Say "Amen," children.‘

The tiny voices piped in obedient response ‘Amen l'

Tess went on:

‘We receive this child ’-——and so forth—‘ and do sign
him with the sign of the Cross.’

Here she dipped her hand into the basin, and
fervently drew an immense cross upon the baby with
her foreﬁnger, continuing with the customary sen.
tences as to his manfully ﬁghting against sin, the
world, and the devil, and being a faithful soldier and
servant unto his life’s end. She duly went on with

I19

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

the Lord’s Prayer, the children lisping it after her in
a thin, gnat—like wail, till, at the conclusion, raising
their voices to clerk's pitch, they again piped into the
silence, ‘Amen!’ ’

Then their sister, with much augmented conﬁdence
in the efficacy of this sacrament, poured forth from the
bottom of her heart the thanksgiving that follows,
uttering it boldly and triumphantly in the stopt-
' diapason note which her voice acquired when her
heart was in her speech, and which will never be
forgotten by those who knew her. The ecstasy of
faith almost apotheosized her; it set upon her face a
glowing irradiation, and brought a red spot into the
middle of each cheek; while the miniature candle—
ﬂame inverted in her eye-pupils shone like a diamond.
The children gazed up at her with more and more
reverence, and no longer had a. will for questioning.
She did not look like Sissy to them now, but as a.
being large, towering, and awful—a divine personage
with whom they had nothing in common.

Poor Sorrow’s campaign against sin, the world, and
the devil was doomed to be of limited brilliancy—
luckily perhaps for himself, considering his ' ' .
In the blue of the morning that fragile soldier and
servant breathed his last, and when the other children
awoke they cried bitterly, and begged Sissy to have
another pretty baby.

The calmness which had possessed Tess since the
christening remained with her in the infant’s loss. In
the daylight, indeed, she felt her terrors about his soul
to have been somewhat exaggerated; whether Well
founded or not she had no uneasiness now, reasoning
that if Providence would not ratify such an act of
approximation she, for one, did not value the kind of
heaven lost by the irregularity—either for herself or
for her child.

So passed away Sorrow the Undesired—that in-
trusive creature, that bastard gift of shameless Nature
who respects not the social law; a waif to whom

no

 

MAIDEN N 0 MORE

eternal Time had been a matter of days merely, who
knew not that such things as years and centuries
ever were; to whom the cottage interior was the uni-
verse, the week's weather climate, new-born babyhood
human uistence, and the instinct to suck human
knowledge.

Tex, who mused on the christening a good deal,
wondered if it were doctrinally sufﬁcient to secure a
Christian burial for the child. Nobody could tell this
but the person of the parish, and he was a. newcomer,
and did not know her. She went to his house after
dusk, and stood by the gate, but could not summon
courage to go in. The enterprise would have been
abandoned if she had not by accident met him coming
homeward as she turned away. In the gloom she did
not mind spaking freely. ,

‘I should like to ask you something, sir.’

He expressed his willingness to listen, and she told
the story of the baby's illness and the extemporiwd
ordinance. -

‘And now, sir,’ she added earnestly, 'can you tell
methis—willitbejustthesameforhimasifyouhad
baptized him?’

Having the natural feelings of a tradesman at
ﬁnding that a job he should have been called in for
had beenunsldlfully botched by his customers among
themselves, be was disposed to say no. Yet the
dignity of the girl, the strange tenderness in her voice,
combined to aﬁect his nobler impulses—or rather those
that he had left in him after ten years of endeavour to
graft technical belief on actual scepticism. The man
and the ecclesiastic fought within him, and the victory
fell to the man.

‘My dear girl,’ he said, ‘it will be just the
same.’

‘Then will you give him a Christian burial? she
asked quickly.

The Vicar felt himself cornered. Hearing of the
baby's illness, he had conscientiously gone to the house

12!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

after nightfall to perform the rite, and, unaware that
the refusal to admit him had come from Tess’s father
and not from Tess, he could not allow the plea of
necessity for its irregular

‘Ah—that’s another matter,’ he said.

‘Another matter—why? asked Tess, rather warmly.

‘Well—I would willingly do so if only we two
were concerned. But I must not—for certain rea-
sons.’

‘Just for once, sir!’

‘Really I must not.’

‘0 sir!’ She seized his hand as she spoke.

He withdrew it, shaking his head.

‘Then I don't like you!’ she burst out, ‘and I'll
never come to your church no more!’

‘Don't talk so rashly.’

‘Perhaps it will be just the same to him if you
don’t? . . . Will it be just the same? Don't for God’s
sakespeakassainttosinner,hutasyouyourselfto
me myself—poor me!’ -

How the Vicar reconciled his answer with the
strict notions he supposed himself to hold on the
subject it is beyond a layman's power to tell, though
not to excuse. Somewhat moved, he said in this
case also-—

‘It will be just the same.’

Sothebabywasmniedinasmnlldealbox, under
an ancient woman's shawl, to the churchyard that
night, and buried by lantern-light. at the cost of a
shilling and a. pint of beer to the sexton, in that shabby
corner of God's allotment where He let the nettles
grow, and where all unbaptized infants, notorious
drunkards, suicides, and others of the conjecturally
damned were laid. In spite of the untoward surround-
ings, however, Tess bravely made a. little cross of two
laths and a piece of string, and having bound it with
ﬂowers, she stuck it up at the head of the grave one
evening when she could enter the churchyard without
being seen, putting at the foot also a bunch of the

I“

MAIDEN NO MORE

same ﬂowers in a. little jar of water to keep them alive.
What matter was it that on the outside of the jar the
eye of mere observation noted the words ‘Keelwell’s
Marmalade? The eye of maternal aﬁection did not
see them in its vision of higher things.

XV

‘BY experience,’ says Roger Ascham, ‘we ﬁnd out a.
short way by a long wandering.’ Not seldom that
long wandering unﬁts us for further travel, and of what
use is our experience to us then? Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s
experience was of this incapacitaﬁng kind. At last
she had learned what to do; but who would now ac-
cept her doing?

If before going to the d’Urbervilles' she had vigor-
ously moved under the guidance of sundry gnomic
texts and phrases known to her and to the world in
general, no doubt she would never have been imposed
on. But it had not been in Tess’s power—nor is it in
anybody’s power—to feel the whole truth of golden
opinions while it is possible to proﬁt by them. She—
and how many more—might have ironically said to
God with Saint Augustine: ‘Thou hast counselled a
better course than Thou hast permitted.’

She remained in her father’s house during the
winter months, plucking fowls, or cramming turkeys
and geese, or making clothes for her sisters and
brothers out of some ﬁnery which d’Urberville had
given her and she had put by with contempt. Apply
to him she would not. But she would often clasp her
hands behind her head and muse when she was sup-
posed to be working hard.

She philomphically noted dates as they came past
in the revolution of the year; the disastrous night of
her undoing at Trantridge with its dark background
of The Chase; also the dates of the baby’s birth and
death; also her own birthday; and every other day
individualized by incidents in which she had taken

:24

MAIDEN NO MORE

some share. She suddenly thought one afternoon,
when looking in the glass at her fairness, that there
was yet another date, of greater importance to her
than those; that of her own death, when all these
charms would have disappeared; a day which lay sly
and unseen among all the other days of the year,
giving no sign or sound when she annually passed
over it; but not the less surely there. When was it?
Why did she not feel the chill of each yearly encounter
with such a cold relation? She had Jeremy Taylor's
thought that some time in the future those who had
known her would say: ‘It is the ~th, the day that
poor Tess Durbeyﬁeld died’; and there would be
nothing singular to their minds in the statement. Of
that day, doomed to be her terminus in time through
all the ages, she did not know the place in month,
week, season, or year.

Almost at a leap Tess thus changed from simple
girl to complex woman. Symbols of reﬂectiveness
passed into her face, and a note of tragedy at times
into her voice. Her eyes grew larger and more elo-
quent. She became what would have been called a
ﬁne creature; her aspect was fair and arresting; her
soul that of a woman whom the turbulent experiences
of the last year or two had quite failed to demoralize.
But for the world's opinion those experiences would
have been simply a liberal education.

She had held so aloof of late that her trouble, never
generally known, was nearly forgotten in Marlott.
But it became evident to her that she could never be
really comfortable again in a place which had seen
the collapse of her family’s attempt to ‘claim kin’
—-and, through her, even closer union—with the rich
d’Urbervilles. At least she could not be comfortable
there till long years should have obliterated her keen
consciousness of it. Yet even now Tess felt the pulse
of hopeful life still warm within her; she might be
happy in some nook which had no memories. To
escape the past and all that appertained thereto was

:25

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

toannihilateit,andtodothatshewouldhavetoget
away.

Was once lost always lost really true of chastity?
she would ask herself. She might prove it false if she
could veil bygones. The recuperative power which
pervaded organic nature was surely not denied to
maidenhood alone. .

She waited a long time without ﬁnding opportunity
for a new departure. A particularly ﬁne spring came
round, and the stir of germination was almost audible
in the buds; it moved her, as it moved the wild
animals, and made her passionate to go. At last, one
day in early May, a letter reached her from a former
friend of her mother’s, to whom she had addressed
inquiries long betore-va person whom she had never
seen—thatasldlfulmillnnaidwasrequiredatadairy—
honse many miles to the southward, and that the
dairyman would be glad to have her for the summer
months.

It was not quite so far of! as could have been
wished; but it was probably for enough, her radius of
movement and repute having been so small. To per-
sons of limited spheres, miles are as geographical
degrees, parishes as counties, counties as provinces
and ldngdoms.

On one point she was resolved: there should be
no more d'Urberville air-castles in the dreams and
deeds of her new life. She would be the dairymaid
Tess, and nothing more. Her mother knew Tess’s
feeling on this point so well, though no words had
passed between them on the subject, that she never
alluded to the knightly ancestry now.

Yet such- is human inconsistency that one of the
interests of the new place to her was the accidental
virtue of its lying near her forefathers' country (for
they were not Blakemore men, though her mother
was Blakemore to the bone). The dairy called Tal-
bothays, for which she was bound, stood not remotely
from some of the former estates of the d’Urbervilles,

r26

MAIDEN NO MORE

near the great family vaults of her granddames and
their powerful husbands. She would be able to look
at th, and think not only that d’Urberville, like
Babylon, had fallen, but that the individual inno-
eence of a humble descendant could lapse as silently.
All the while she wondered if any strange good thing
might come of her being in her ancestral land; and
some spirit within her rose automatically as the
sap in the twigs. It was unexpended youth, surg-
ing up anew after its temporary check, and bringing
with it hope, and the invincible instinct towards
self-delight.

END OF PHJSE THE SECOND

 

 

 

PHASE THE THIRD

THE RALLY

XVI

ON a thyme-scented, bird-hatching morning in May,
between two and three years after the return from
Trantridge—silent reconstructive years for Tess Dur-
beyﬁeld—she left her home for the second time.

Having packed up her luggage so that it could be
sent to her later, she started in a hired trap for the
little town of Stourcastle. through which it was
necessarytopassonherjourney, nowinadirection
almost opposite to that of her ﬁrst adventuring. 0n
the curve of the nearest hill she looked back regret-
fully at Marlott and her father’s house, although she
hadbeensoanxioustogetaway.

Her kindred dwelling there would probably con-
tinue their daily lives as heretofore, with no great
diminution of pleasure in their consciousness, although
she would be far off, and they deprived of her smile.
In a few days the children would engage in their
games as merrily as ever without the sense of any gap
left by her departure. This leaving of the yotmger
children she had decided to be for the best; were she
to remain they would probably gain less good by her

ts than harm by her example.

She went through Stourcastle without pausing,
and onward to a junction of highways, where she
wold await a carrier’s van that ran to the south-west;
for the railways which engindled this interior tract of

I31

TESS 6F THE D'URBERVILLES

country had never yet struck across it. While wait-
ing, however, there came along a farmer in his spring-
cart, driving approximately in the direction that she
wished to pursue. Though he was a stranger to her
she accepted his oﬂer of a seat beside him, ignoring
that its motive was a mere tribute to her countenance.
He was going to Weatherbury, and by accompanying
him thither she could walk the remainder of the
distance instead of travelling in the van by way of
Casterbridge.

Tess did not stop at Weatherbury, after this long
drive, further than to make a slight nondescript meal
at noon at a cottage to which the farmer recommended
her. Thence she started on foot, basket in hand, to
reach the wide upland of heath, dividing this district
from the low-lying meads of a. further valley in which
the dairy stood that was the aim and end of her day's
pilgrimage- . ,

Tesshadneverbeforemtedthispartofthe
country, and yet she felt akin to the landscape. Not
soveryfartotheleftofhershecoulddiscernadark
patch in the scenery, whidi inquiry conﬁrmed her in
supposing to be trees marking the environs of Kings-
bere—in the church of which parish the bones of her
ancestors~her useless ancestors—lay entombed.

She had no admiration for them now; she almost
hated them for the dance they had led her; not a
thing of all that had been theirs did she retain but
the old seal and spoon. ‘Pooh—I have as much of
mother as father in me 1’ she said. ‘All my prettiness
comes from her, and she was only a dairymaid.’

The journey over the intervening uplands and
lowlands of Egdon, when she reached them, was a

‘ more troublesome walk than she had anticipated, the

distance being actually but a. few miles. It was two
hows, owing to sundry wrong turnings, ere she found
herself on a. summit commanding the long-sought—for
vale, the Valley of the Great Dairies, the valley in

which milk and butter grew to ranlcness, and were
:3:

THE RALLY

produced more profusely, if less delicately, than at her
home—the verdant plain so well watered by the river
Var or Froom.

It was intrinsically diﬁerent from the Vale of Little
Dairies, Blackmoor Vale, which, save during her
disastrous sojourn at Trantridge, she had exclusively
known till now. The world was drawn to a larger
pattern here. The enclosures numbered ﬁfty acres
instead of ten, the farmsteads were more extended,
the groups of cattle formed tribes hereabout; there
only families. These myriads of cows stretching
underhereyesfromthefareasttothefarwest
outnumbered any she had ever seen at one glance
before. The green lea was speckled as thickly with
them as a canvas by Van Alsloot or Sallaert with
burghers. The ripe hue of the red and dun kine
absorbed the evening sunlight, which the white-coated
animals returned to the eye in rays almost dazzling,
even at the distant elevation on which she stood.

The bird’s-eye perspective before her was not so
luxuriantly beautiful, perhaps, as that other one which
she knew so Well; yet it was more cheering. It lacked
the intensely blue atmosphere of the rival vale, and its
heavy soils and scents; the new air was clear, bracing,
ethereal. The river itself, which nourished the grass
and cows of these renowned dairies, ﬂowed not like
the streams in Blackmoor. Those were slow, silent,
often turbid; ﬂowing over beds of mud into which
the incautious wader might sink and vanish unawares.
The Froom waters were clear as the pure River of
Life shown to the Evangelist, rapid as the shadow of
a cloud, with pebbly shallows that 'prattled to the
sky all day long. There the water-ﬂower was the
lily; the crow-foot here.

Either the change in the quality of the air from
heavy to light, or the sense of being amid new scenes
where there were no invidious eyes upon her, sent up
her spirits wonderfully. Her hopes mingled with the
sunshine in an ideal photosphere which surrounded

:33 -

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

her as she bounded along against the soft south wind.
She heard a pleasant voice in every breeze, and in
every bird’s note seemed to lurk a joy.

Her face had latterly changed with changing states
of mind, continually ﬂuctuating between beauty and
ordinariness, according as the thoughts were gay or
grave. One day she was pink and ﬂawless; another
pale and tragical. When she was pink she was feel-
ing less than when pale; her more perfect beauty
accorded with her less elevated mood; her more
intense mood with her less perfect beauty. It was
her best face physically that was now set against the
south wind.

The irresistible, universal, automatic tendency to
ﬁnd sweet pleasure somewhere, which pervades all
life, from the meanest to the highest, had at length
mastered Tess. Being even now only a young woman
of twenty, one who mentally and sentimentally had
not ﬁnished growing, it was impossible that any event
should have left upon her an impression that was not
in time capable of transmutation.

And thus her spirits, and her thankfulness, and
her hopes, rose higher and higher. She tried several
ballads. but found them inadequate; till, recollecting
the psalter that her eyes had so often wandered over
of a Sunday morning before she had eaten of the tree
of knowledge, she chanted: ‘0 ye Sun and Moon
...OyeStars...yeGreen’l‘hingsupontheEarth
...yeFowlsoftheAir...BeastsandCattle.. .
ChildrenofMen. . .blessyethelnrd,praiseHim
and magnify Him for ever!’

She suddenly stopped and murmured: ‘But per-
haps I don't quite know the Lord as yet.’

And probably the half-unconscious rhapsody was
a Feticbistic utterance in a Monotheistic setting;
women whose chief companions are the forms and
forcesofoutdoorNatureretainintheirsoulsfar
more of the Pagan fantasy of their remote forefathers
than of the systematimd religion taught their race at

I34

TIE RALLY

later date. However, Tess found at least approximate
expression for her feelings in the old Benedicite that
she had lisped from infancy; and it was enough.
Such high contentment with such a slight per-
formanceasthatofhavingstartedtowardsameans
of independent living was a part of the Durbeyﬁeld
temperament. Tess really wished to walk uprightly,
while her father did nothing of the kind; but she
resembled him in being content with immediate and
small adﬁevements, and in having no mind for labo-
rious eﬂort towards such petty social advancement as
could alone be effected by a family so heavily han-
dicapped as the once powerful d'UrberviJles were now.

There was, it might be said, the energy of her
mother’s unexpended family, as well as the natural
energy of Tess’s years, rekindled after the experience
which had so overwhelmed her for the time. Let the
truth be told—women do as a rule live through such
humiliations, and regain their spirits, and again look
about th with an interested eye. While there's life
there’s hope is a conviction not so entirely unknown to
the 'betrayed’ as some amiable theorists would have
us believe.

Tess Durbeyﬁeld, then, in good heart, and full of
zest for life, descended the Egdon slopes lower and
lower towards the dairy of her pilgrimage.

The marked diﬂerence, in the ﬁnal particular,
between the rival vales now showed itself. The
secret of Blackmoor was best discovered from the
heights around; to read might the valley before her
it was necessary to descend into its midst. When
Tess had accomplished this feat she found herself to
be standing on a carpeted level, which stretched to
theeastandwestasfarastheeyecouldreach.

The river had stolen from the higher tracts and
broughtinparticlestothevaleallthishorizontal
land; and now, exhausted, aged, and attenuated, lay
spmlsserpentining' ' along through the midst of its former

135

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Not quite sure of her direction, Tess stood still
upon the hemmed expanse of verdant ﬂatness like a
ﬂy on a billiard-table of indeﬁnite length, and of no
more consequence to the surroundings than that ﬂy.
The sole effect of her presence upon the placid valley
sofarhadbeentoexcitethemindofasolitaryheron,
which, after descending to the ground not far from
her path, stood with neck erect, looking at her.

Suddenly there arose from all parts of the lowland
a prolonged and repeated call—

‘Waow! waow! waow!’

From the furthest east to the furthest west the
cries spread as if by contagion, accompanied in some
caries by the barking of a dog. It was not the ex-
pression of the valley’s consciousness that beautiful
Tess had arrived, but the ordinary announcement of
milking-time—han-past four o'clock, when the dairy-
rnen set about getting in the cows.

The red and white herd nearest at hand, which
had been phlegmatically waiting for the call, now
trooped towards the steading in the background, their
greatbagsofmilkswingingrmderthemasthey
walked. Tess followed slowly in their rear, and m-
tered the bar-ton by the open gate through which
they had entered before her. Long thatched sheds
stretched round the enclosure, their slopes encrusted
with vivid green moss, and their eaves supported by
wooden posts rubbed to a glossy smoothness by the
ﬂanks of inﬁnite cows and calves of bygone years, now

to an oblivion almost inconceivable in its
profundity. Between the posts were ranged the
milchers, each exhibiting herself at the present
momenttoawhimsicaleyeintherearasacircleon
two stalks, down the centre of which a switch moved
pendulum-wise; while the sun. lowering itself behind
this patient row, threw their shadows accurately
inwards upon the wall. Thus it threw shadows of
these obscure and homely ﬁgures every evening with
asmuchcareovereachcontourasifithadbeenthe

136

THE RALLY

proﬁle of a Court beauty on a. palace wall; copied
them as diligently as it had copied Olympian shapes
on marble facades long ago, or the outline of Alexan-
der, Caesar, and the Pharaohs.

They were the less restful cows that were stalled.
Those that would stand still of their own will were
milked in the middle of the yard, where many of such
better behaved ones stood waiting now—all prime
milchers, such as were seldom seen out of this valley,
and not always within it; nourished by the succulent
feed which the water-meads supplied at this prime
season of the year. Those of them that were spotted
with white reﬂected the sunshine in dazzling brilliancy,
and the polished brass knobs on their horns glittered
with something of military display. Their large-
veined udders hung ponderous as sandbags, the teats
sticking out like the legs of a gipsy’s crock; and as
each animal lingered for her turn to arrive the milk
oozedforthandfellindropstotheground.

XVII

TEE dairymaids and men had ﬂocked down from
their cottages and out of the dairy-house with the
arrival of the cows from the meads; the maids walking
in pattens, not on account of the weather, but to keep
their shoes above the mulch of the barton. Each
girl sat down on her three-legged stool, her face side-
ways, her right cheek resting against the cow; and
looked musineg along the animal’s ﬂank at Tess as
she approached. The male milkers, with hat-brims
turned down, resting ﬂat on their foreheads and gazing
on the ground, did not observe her.

One of these was a sturdy middle-aged man—whose
long white ‘pinner’ was somewhat ﬁner and cleaner
than the wraps of the others, and whose jacket under-
neath had a presentable marketing aspect—the master~
dairyman, of whom she was in quest, his double
character as a working milker and butter-maker here
during six days, and on the seventh as a man in
shining broad-cloth in his family pew at church, being
so marked as to have inspired a rhyme——

m .
All me
On Sundays Mista' Richard Crick.

Seeing Tess standing at gaze, he went across to her.

The majority of dairymen have a cross manner at
milking-time, but it happened that Mr. Crick was
glad to get a new hand—for the days were busy ones
now—and he received her warmly; inquiring for her

mother and the rest of the family—(though this as a

matter of form merely, for in reality he had not been
:38

THE RALLY

aware of Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld's existence till apprised of
the fact by a brief business-letter about Tess).

‘Oh—ay, as a lad I knowed your part 0’ the country
very well,’ he said terminatively. ‘Though I’ve never
been there since. And a aged woman of ninety that
used to live nigh here, but is dead and gone long ago,
told me that a family of some such name as yours
in Blachnoor Vale came originally from these parts,
and that 'twere a. old ancient race that had all but
perished OR the earth—though the new generations
didn’t know it. But, Lord, I took no notice of the
old woman’s ramblings, not I.’

‘Oh no—it is nothing,’ said Tess.

Then the talk was of business only.

‘You can milk 'ern clean, my maidy? I don’t
want my cows going azew at this time 0’ year.’

She reassured him on that point, and he surveyed
her up and down. She had been staying indoors a
good deal, and ‘her complexion had grown delicate.

‘Quite sure you can stand it? 'Tis comfortable
enough here for rough folk; but we don’t live in a
cowcumber frame.’

She declared that she could stand it, and her zest
and willingness seemed to win him over.

‘Well, I suppose you’ll want a dish 0’ tay, or
victunls of some sort, hey? Not yet? Well, do as
ye like about it. But, faith, if 'twas I, I should be as
dry as a kex wi’ travelling so far.’

T ‘I'll begin milking now, to get my hand in,’ said
ess.

She drank a. little milk as temporary refreshmt—
to the surprise—indeed, slight contempt—of Dairy-
man Crick, to whose mind it had apparently never
occurred that milk was good as a beverage.

‘Oh, if ye can swaller that, be it so,’ he said indif-
ferently, while a milker held up the pail that she sipped
from. "Tis what I hain’t touched for years—not I.
Rot the stuﬁ; it would lie in my innerds like lead.
You can try your hand upon she,’ he pursued, nodding

139

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

to the nearest cow. ‘ Not but what she do milk rather
hard. We’ve hard ones and we've easy ones, like
other folks. However, you'll ﬁnd out that soon
enough.’

When Tess had changed her bonnet for a hood,
and was really on her stool under the cow, and the
milk was squirting from her ﬁsts into the pail, she
appeared to feel that she really had laid a new founda-
tion for her future. The conviction bred serenity,
her pulse slowed, and she was able to look about her.

The milkers formed quite a little battalion of men
and maids, the men operating on the hard-tented
animals, the maids on the kindlier natures. It was
a large dairy. There were nearly a hundred milchers
under Crick’s management, all told; and of the herd
the master-dairyman milked six or eight with his
own hands, unless away from home. These were
the cows that milked hardest of all; for his journey-
milkmen being more or less casually hired, he would
not entrust this half-dozen to their treatment, lest,
from indifference, they should not milk them fully;
nor to the maids, lest they should fail in the same way
for lack of ﬁnger-grip; with the result that in course
of time the cows would ‘go azew'—that is, dry up.
It was not the loss for the moment that made slack
milking so serious, but that with the decline of de-
mand there came decline, and ultimately cessation, of
supply.

After Tess had settled down to her cow there was
for a time no talk in the barton, and not a sound
interfered with the pun- of the milk-jets into the
numerous pails, except a momentary exclamation to
one or other of the beasts requesting her to turn
round or stand still. The only movements were
those of the milkers’ hands up and down, and the
swing of the cows' tails. Thus they all worked on,
encompassed by the vast ﬂat mead which extended to
either slope of the valley—a level landscape com-

pounded of old landscapes long forgotten, and, no
140

THE RALLY

doubt, differing in character very greatly from the
landscape they composed now.

‘To my thinking,’ said the dairyman, rising sud—
denly from a cow he had just ﬁnished oﬂ, snatching
up his three-legged stool in one hand and the pail in
the other, and moving on to the next hard-yielder in
his vicinity; ‘to my thinking, the cows don’t gie
down their milk to-day as usual. Upon my life, if
Winker do begin keeping back like this, she’ll not be
worth going under by nﬁdsummer.’

"Tis because there's a new hand come among us,’
said Jonathan Kail. ‘I've noticed such things afore.’
‘To be sure. It may be so. I didn't think o't.’

‘I've been told that it goes up into their horns at
such times,’ said a dairymaid.

‘Well, as to going up into their horns,‘ replied
Dairyman Crick dubiously, as though even witch-
craft might be limited by anatomical possibilities, ‘I
couldn’t say; I certainly could not. But as nott cows
will keep it back as well as the horned ones, I don't
quite agree to it. Do ye know that riddle about the
nott cows, Jonathan? Why do nott cows give less
milk in a year than horned?"

‘I don't!’ interposed the milkmaid. ‘.Why do

‘Because there bain't so many of 'em,’ said the
dairyman. ‘Howsomever, these gam’sters do cer-
tainly keep back their milk tooday. Folks, we must
lift up a stave or two—that's the only cure for't.’

Songs were often resorted to in dairies hereabout
as an enticement to the cows when they showed signs
of withholding their usual yield; and the band of
milkers at this request burst into melody—in purely
business-er tones, it is true, and with no great
spontaneity; the result, according to their own belief,
being a decided improvement during the song’s con-
tinuance. When they had gone through fourteen or
ﬁfteen verses of a cheerful ballad about a murderer
whowasafraidtogotobedinthedarkbecausehe

14x

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

saw certain brimstone ﬂames around him, one of the
male milkers said-—

‘Iwishsingingonthestoopdidn’tuseupsomuch
of a man‘s wind! You should get your harp, sir; not
but what a ﬁddle is best.’

Tess, who had given ear to this, thought the words
were addressed to the dairyman, but she was wrong.
A reply, in the shape of ‘Why?’ came as it were out
ofthebellyofaduncowinthestalls; ithadbeen
spoken by a. milker behind the animal, whom she had
not hitherto perceived.

‘0 yes; there’s nothing like a ﬁddle,’ said the

' ‘Though I do think that bulls are more
moved by a tune than cows—at least that’s my

'ence. Once there was a old aged man over
at Mellstock—William Dewy by name—one of the
family that used to do a good deal of business as
tranters over there, Jonathan, do ye mind?—-—I lmowed
the man by sight as well as I know my own brother,
in a manner of speaking. Well, this manwasa-
coming home along from a. wedding where he had
been playing his ﬁddle, one ﬁne moonlight night, and
for shortness’ sake he took a cut across Forty-acres, a
ﬁeld lying that way, where a hull was out to grass.
The bull seed William, and took after him, horns
aground, begad; and though William runned his
best, and hadn’t much drink in him (considering ’twas
a wedding, and the folks well 011'), he found he'd
never reach the fence and get over in time to save
himself. Well, as a last thought, he pulled out his
ﬁddle as he runned, and struck up a jig, turning to
the bull, and banking towards the corner. The hull
softened down, and stood still, looking hard at Wil-
liam Dewy, who ﬁddled on and on; till a sort of a
smile stole over the bull's face. But no sooner did
William stop his playing and turn to get over hedge
than the bull would stop his smiling and lower his
horns towards the seat of William’s breech. Well,
William had to turn about and play on, willy-nilly;

14a

THE RALLY

and 'twas only three o'clock in the world, and ’a
knowed that nobody would come that way for hours,
and he so leery and tired that '29. didn’t know what to
do. When he had scraped till about four o’clock he
felt that he verily would have to give over soon, and
he said to himself, ” There’s only this last tune between
me and eternal welfare! Heaven save me, or I'm a
done man." Well, then he callw to mind how he'd
seen the cattle kneel 0’ Christmas Eves in the dead 0’
night. It was not Christmas Eve then, but it came
into his head to play a trick upon the bull. So he
broke into the 'Tivity Hymn, just as at Christmas
carol-singing; when 10, and behold. down went the
bull on his bended knees, in his ignorance, just as if
’twere the true ’Tivity night and hour. As soon as
his horned friend were down, William turned, clinked
off like a long-dog, and jumped safe over hedge, be-
fore the praying bull had got on his feet again to
take after him. William used to say that he'd seen
a. man look a fool a good many times, but never such
a fool as that bull looked when he found his pious
feelings had been played upon, and ’twas not Christ-
mas Eve. . . . Yes, William Dewy, that was the man's
name; and I can tell you to a foot where's he a-lying
in Mellstock Churchyard at this very moment—just
between the second yew-tree and the north aisle.’

‘It's a curious story; it carries us back to mediaaval
times, when faith was a living thing I'

The remark, singular for a. dairy - yard, was mur-
mured by the voice behind the dun cow; but as
nobody understood the reference no notice was taken,
except that the narrator seemed to think it might
imply scepticism as to his tale.

‘Well, 'tis quite true, sir, whether or no. I knowed
the man well.’

‘0 yes; I have no doubt of it,’ said the person
behind the dun cow.

 Tess's attention was thus attracted to the dairy-
man’s interlocutor, of whom she could see but the
us

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

merestpatch,owingtohisburyinghisheadsoper-
sistently in the ﬂank of the milcher. She could not
understand why he should be addressed as ‘sir'
even by the dairyman himself. But no explanation
was discernible; he remained under the cow long
enough to have milked three, uttering a private
ejaculation now and then, as if he could not get on.

‘Take it gentle, sir; take it gentle,’ said the dairy»
man. "Tis knack, not strength, that does it.’

‘So I ﬁnd,’ said the other, standing up at last and
stretching his arms. ‘I think I have ﬁnished her,
however, though she made my ﬁngers ache.’

Tess could then see him at full length. He wore
the ordinary white pinner and leather leggings of a
dairy-farmer when milking, and his boots were clogged
with the mulch of the yard; but this was all his local
livery. Beneath it was something educated, reserved,
subtle, sad, diﬁering.

But the details of his aspect were temporarily
thrust aside by the discovery that he was one whom
she had seen before. Such vicissitudes had Tess
passed through since that time that for a moment she
could not remember where she had met him; and
then it ﬂashed upon her that he was the pedestrian
who had joined. in the club—dance at Marlott—the
passing stranger who had come she knew not whence,
had danced with others but not with her, had slight-
ingly left her, and gone on his way with his friends.

The ﬂood of memories brought back by this re-
vival of an incident anterior to her troubles produced
a momentary dismay lest. reoogniz' g her also, he
should by some means discover her story. But it
passed away when she found no sign of remembrance
in him. She' saw by degrees that since their ﬁrst and
only encounter his mobile face had grown more
thoughtful, and had acquired a young man's shapely
moustache and beard—the latter of the palest straw
colour where it began upon his cheeks, and deepening
to a warm brown further from its root. Under his

144

THE RALLY

linen milking-pinna- he wore a dark velveteen jacket.
cord breaches and gaiters, and a starched white shirt.
Without the milking-gear nobody could have guessed
what he was. He might with equal probability have
been an eccentric landowner or a gentlernanly plough—
man. That he was but a novice at dairy-work she
hadrealizedinamoment,fromthetimehehadspent
upon the milldng of one cow.

Meanwhile many of the milkmaids had said to one
another of the newcomer, ‘How pretty she is!‘ with
something of real generosity and admiration, though
with a half hope that the auditors would qualify the
assertion—which, strictly speaking, they might have
done. prettiness being an inexact deﬁnition of what
struck the eye in Tess. When the milking was
ﬁnished for the evening they straggled indoors,
where Mrs. Crick, the dairyman's wife—who was too
respectable to go out milking herself, and wore a
hot stuﬂ gown in warm weather because the dairy-
maids wore prints—was giving an eye to the leads
and things.

Only two or three of the maids, Tess learnt, slept
in the dairy-house besides herself; most of the helpers
going to their homes. She saw nothing at supper-
time of the superior milker who had commented on
the story, and asked no questions about him, the
remainder of the evening being occupied in arranging
her place in the bed-chamber. It was a large room
over the milk-house, some thirty feet long; the
sleeping~oots of the other three indoor milkmaids
being in the same apartment. They were blooming
young women, and, except one, rather older than
herse . By bedtime Tess was thoroughly tired, and
fell asleep immediately.

But one of the girls who occupied an adjoining
bed was more wakeful than Tess, and would insist
upon relating to the latter various particulars of the
homestead into which she had just entered. The
girl’s whispered words mingled with the shades, and,

145

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

to TeS’s drowsy mind, they seemed to be generated
by the darkness in which they ﬂoated.

‘Mr. Angel Clare—he that is learning milking,
and that plays the harp—never says much to us. He
is a pa’son’s son, and is too much taken up wi’ his
own thoughts to notice girls. He is the dairyman's
pupil—learning farming in all its branches He has
learnt sheep-farming at another place, and he’s now
mastering dairy-work. . . . Yes, he is quite the gentle-
man-born. His father is the Reverent Mr. Clare at
Emminsta—a good many miles from here.’

‘Oh—I have heard of him,’ said her companion,
now awake. ‘ A very earnest clergyman, is he not?’

‘ Yes—that he is—the eamestest man in all Wessex,
they say—the last of the old Low Church sort, they
tell me—for all about here be what they call High.
All his sons, except our Mr. Clare, be made pa’sons
too.’

Tess had not at this hour the curiosity to ask why
thepresentMr. Clarewasnotmadeaparsonlikehis
brethren, and gradually fell asleep again, the words of
her informant coming to her along with the smell
of the cheeses in the adjoining cheese-loft, and the
measured dripping of the whey from the wings
downstairs.

XVIII

ANGEL CLARE rises out of the past not altogether as
a distinct ﬁgure, but as an appreciative voice, a long
regard of ﬁxed, abstracted eyes, and a mobility of
mouth somewhat too small and delicately lined for a
man's, though with an unexpectedly ﬁrm close of the
lower lip now and then: enough to do away with
any inference of indecision. Nevertheless, something
nebulous, preoccupied. vague, in his hearing and re—
gard, marked him as one who probably had no very
deﬁnite aim or concern about his material future.
Yet as a lad people had said of him that he was one
who might do anything if he tried.

He was the youngat son of his father, a poor per-
son at the other end of the county, and had arrived
at Talbothays Dairy as a six months’ pupil, after
going the round of some other farms, his object being
toaequireapracticalskillinthevariousprooessesof
farming, with a View either to the Colonies, or the
tenure of a home-farm, as circumstances might decide.

His entry into the ranks of the agriculturists and
breedeiswasastepintheyoungman’scareerwhich
had been anticipated neither by himself nor by others.

Mr. Clare the elder, whose ﬁrst wife had died and
left him a daughter, married a second late in life.
This lady had somewhat unexpectedly brought him
three sons, so that between Angel, the youngest, and
hisfatherthevicarthereseemedtobealmosta
missing generation. Of these boys the aforesaid
Angel, the child of his old age, was the only son who
had not taken a University degree, though he was the
single one of them whose early promise might have
done full justice to an academical

:47

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Some two or three years before Angel’s appearance
at the Marlott dance, on a day when he had left
school and was pursuing his studies at home, a parcel
came to the Vicarage from the local bookseller's,
directed to the Reverend James Clare. The vicar,
having opened it and found it to contain a book, read
a few pages; whereupon he jumped up from his seat
and went straight to the shop with the book under
his arm.

‘Why has this been sent to my house?’ he asked
peremptorily, holding up the volume.

‘It was ordered, sir.’

‘Not by me, or any one belonging to me, I am
happy to say.’

The shopkeeper looked into his order-book.

‘Oh, it has been misdirected, sir,’ he said. ‘It was
ordered by Mr. Angel Clare, and should have been
sent to him.’

Mr. Clare winced as if he had been struck. He
went home pale and dejected, and called Angel into
his study.

‘Look into this book, my boy,’ he said. ‘What
do you know about it?’ ~

‘I ordered it,’ said Angel simply.

‘What for?”

‘To read.’

‘How can you think of reading it?’

'How can I? Why—it is a system of philosophy.
There is no more moral, or even religious, work
published.’

‘Yes—moral enough; I don't deny that. But
religiousl—and for you, who intend to be a minister
of the Gospel!’

‘Since you have alluded to the matter, father,’ said
the son, with anxious thought upon his face, ‘I should
like to say, once for all, that I should prefer not to
take Orders. I fear I could not conscientiously do
so. I love the Church as one loves a parent. I shall
always have the warmest aﬁection for her. There is

u!

THE RALLY

no institution for whose history I have a deeper
admiration; but I cannot honestly be ordained her
minister, as my brothers are, while she refuses to
liberate her mind from an untenable redemptive
theolntry.’

It had never occurred to the straightforward and
simple-minded Vicar that one of his own ﬂesh and
blood could come to this! He was stultiﬁed, shocked,
paralyzed. And if Angel were not going to enter the
Church, what was the use of sending him to Cam.
bridge? The University as a step to anything but
ordinationseemed,tothisma.nofﬁxedideas,a
preface without a volume. He was a man not merely
religious, but devout; a. ﬁrm believer—not as the
phrase is now elusiver construed by theological
thimble-riggers in the Church and out of it, but in the
old and ardent sense of the Evangelical school: one

who could In
deed opme'
That the Eternal and Divine
Did, eighteen centuries ago

In very truth . . .
Angel's father tried argument, ‘on, entreaty.
‘No, father; I cannot underwrite Article Four

(leave alone the rest), taking it “in the literal and
grammatical sense" as required by the Declaration;
and, therefore, I can't be a person in the present state
of aﬂairs,’ said Angel. ‘ My whole instinct in matters
of religion is towards reconstruction; to quote your
favourite Epistle to the Hebrews, “the removing of
those things that are shaken, a: of things that are
made, that those things which cannot be shaken may
remain.”

His father grieved so deeply that it made Angel
quite ill to see him.

‘What is the good of your mother and me econo—
mizing and stinting ourselves to give you a University
education, if it is not to be used for the honour and
glory of God?’ his father repeated.

I49

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Why, that it may be used for the honour and
glory of man, father.’

Perhaps if Angel had persevered he might have
gone to Cambridge like his brothers. But the Vicar's
view of that seat of learning as a stepping-stone to
Orders alone was quite a family tradition; and so
rooted was the idea in his mind that perseverance
began to appear to the sensitive son aldn to an intent
to misappropriate a trust, and wrong the pious heads
of the household, who had been and were, as his
father had hinted, compelled to exercise much thrift
to carry out this uniform plan of education for the
three young men.

‘I will do without Cambridge,’ said Angel at last.
‘IfeelthatIhavenox-ighttogothereinthedr-
cumstances.’

The eﬂects of this decisive debate were not long
in showing themselves. He spent years and years in
desultory studies, undertakings, and meditations; he

to evince considerable indiﬁerenee to social
forms and Observances. The material distinctions of
rank and wealth he increasingly despised. Even the
‘good old family’ (to use a favourite phrase of a late
local worthy) had no aroma for him unless there were
new resolutions in its representatives. As a
balance to these austerities, when he went to live in
London to see what the world was like, and with a
view to practising a profession or business there, he
was carried oﬁ’ his head, and nearly entrapped by a
woman much older than himself, though luckily he
escaped not greatly the worse for the experience.

Early association with country solitudes had bred
in him an unconquerable, and almost unreasonable,
aversion to modern town life, and shut him out from
such success as he might have aspired to by following
a mundane calling in the impracticability of I the
spiritual one. But something had to be done; he
had wasted many valuable years; and having an
acquaintance who was starting on a thriving life as a

15°

THE RALLY

Colonial farmer, it occurred to Angel that this might
be a lead in the right direction. Farming, either in
the Colonies, America, or at home—farming, at any
rate, after becoming well qualiﬁed for the business
by a careful apprenticeship—that was a vocation
which would probably aﬁord an independence without
the sacriﬁce of what he valued even more than a
competency—intellectual liberty.

So we ﬁnd Angel Clare at six-and—twenty here at
Talbothays as a student of kine, and, as there were no
houses near at hand in which he could get a comfort-
able lodging, a boarder at the dairyman’s.

His room was an immense attic which ran the
whole length of the dairy-house. It could only be
reached by a ladder from the cheese-loft, and had
been closed up for a long time till he arrived and
selected it as his retreat. Here Clare had plenty of
space, and could often be heard by the dairy-folk
pacing up and down when the household had gone to
rest. portion was divided oﬂ at one end by a
curtain, behind which was his- bed, the outer part
being furnished as a homely sitting-room.

At ﬁrst he lived up above entirely, reading a good
deal, and strumming upon an old harp which he had
bought at a sale, saying when in a bitter humour that
he might have to get his living by it in the streets
some day. But he soon preferred to read human
nature by taking his meals downstairs in the general
dining-kitchen, with the dairyman and his wife, and
the maids and men, who all together formed a lively
assembly; for, though but few milking hands slept
in the house, several joined the family at meals. The
longer Clare resided here the less objection had he to
his company, and the more did he like to share
quarters with them in common.

Much to his surprise he took, indeed, a real de-
light in their companionship. The conventional farm-
folk of his imagination—personiﬁed by the pitiable
dummy known as Hodge—were obliterated after a

15x

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

few days’ residence. At close quarters no Hodge
was to be seen. At ﬁrst, it is true, when Clara's
intelligence was fresh from a contrasting society, these
friends with whom he now hobnobbed Seemed a little
strange. Sitting down as a. level member of the dairy-
man’s household seemed at the outset an undigniﬁed
proceeding. The ideas, the modes, the surroundings,
appeared retrogressive and unmeaning. But with liv-
ing on there, day after day, the acute sojourner
became conscious of a new aspect in the spectacle.
Without any objective change whatever, variety had
taken the place of monotonousness. His host and
his host’s household, his men and his maids, as they
became intimately known to Clare, began to differ-
entiate themselves as in a chemical process. The
thought of Pascal’s was brought home to him: ‘A
mesure qu’on a plus d’esprit, on trouve qu'il y a
plus d'hommes originator. Les gens du commun ne
trouvent pas de difference entre les hommes.’ The
typical and unvarying Hodge ceased to exist. He had
been disintegrated into a number of varied fellow-
creatures—beings of many minds, beings inﬁnite in
diﬁerenoe; some happy, many serene, a few depressed,
one here and there bright even to genius, some
stupid, others wanton. others austere; some muter
Miltonic, some potentially Ctomwellian; into men who
had private views of each other, as he had of his
friends; who could applaud or condemn each other,
amuse or sadden themselves by the contemplation of
each other’s foibles or vices; men every one of whom
ﬂed in his own individual way the road to dusty
ea .

Unexpectedly he began to like the outdoor life for
its own sake, and for what it brought, apart from its
bearing on his own proposed career. Considering his
position he became wonderfully free from the chronic
melancholy which is taking hold of the civilized races
with the decline of belief in a beneﬁcent Power.
For the ﬁrst time of late years he could read as his

:52

THE RALLY

musings inclined him, without any eye to crammhg
for a profession, since the few farming handbooks
which he deemed it desirable to master occupied him
but little time.

He grew away from old associations. and saw
something new in life and humanity. Secondarily,
he made close acquaintance with phenomena which
he had before known but darkly—the Seasons in
their moods, morning and evening, night and noon,
winds in their diﬁerent tempers, trees, waters, and
ﬂats, shad and silence, and the voices of inanimate

gs.

The early mornings were still sufﬁciently cool to
render a ﬁre acceptable in the large room wherein
they breakfasted; and, by Mrs. Crick’s orders, who
held that he was too genteel to mess at their table,
it was Angel Clare’s custom to sit in the yawning
chimney-comer during the meal, his cup-and~saucer
and plate being placed on a hinged ﬂap at his elbow.
The light from the long, wide, mullioned window
opposite shone in upon his nook, and, assisted by
a secondary light of cold blue quality which shone
down the chimney, enabled him to read there easily
whenever disposed to do so. Between Clare and the
window was the table at which his companions set,
their munching proﬁles rising sharp against the panes;
while to the side was the milk-house door, through
which were visible the rectangular leads in rows, full
to the brim with the morning’s milk. At the further
end the great churn could be seen revolving, and
its slip-slopping heard—the moving power being
discernible through the window in the form of a
i)sgc))iri1>.less horse walking in a circle and driven by a

y.

For several days after Tess’s arrival Clare, sitting
abstractedly reading from some book, periodical, or
piece of music just come by post, hardly noticed that
she was present at table. She talked so little, and the

t53

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

other maids talked so much, that the babble did not
strikehimaspossessinganewnote,a.ndhewasever
in the habit of neglecting the particulars of an out-
ward scene for the general One day,
however, when he had been conning one of his music-
scores, and by force of imagination was heating the
tune in his head, he lapsed into listlessness, and the
music-sheet rolled to the hearth. He looked at the
ﬁre of logs, with its one ﬂame pirouetting on the top
in a dying dance after the breakfast—cooking and
boiling, and it seemed to jig to his inward tune; also
at the two chimney crooks dangling down from the
cotterel or cross-bar, plumed with soot which quivered
to the same melody; also at the half-empty kettle
whining an accompaniment. The conversation at the
table mixed in with his phantasmal orchestra till he
thought: ‘What a ﬂuty voice one of those milkmaids
has! I suppose it is the new one.’

Clare looked round upon her, seated with the
others. '

She was not looking towards him. Indeed, owing
tohislongsilenee,hispresenceintheroomwas
almost forgotten.

‘I don't know about ghosts,’ she was saying; ‘but
I do know that our souls can be made to go outside
our bodies when we are alive.’

The dairyman turned to her with his mouth full,
his eyes charged with serious inquiry. and his great
knife and fork (breakfasts were breakfasts here)
planted erect on the table, like the beginning of a
gallows.

ng'hat—really now? And is it so, maidy?‘ he
sat .

‘A very easy way to feel 'em go,’ continued Tess,
‘is to lie on the grass at night and look straight up at
some big bright star; and, by ﬁxing your mind upon
it, you will soon ﬁnd that you are hundreds and
hundreds 0’ miles away from your body, which you
don't seem to want at all.'

154

THE RALLY

Thedairymanremovedhishm'dgazefmmTess
and ﬁxed it on his wife.

‘Now that’s a. rum thing, Christianner—hey? To
think 0’ the miles I’ve vamped o’ starlight nights these
last thirty year, courting, or trading, or for doctor, or
for muse, and yet never had the least notion 0’ that
tillnow,orfeeledmysoulrisesomuchasaninch
above my shirt-collar.’

The general attention being drawn to her, includ-
ing that of the dairyman’s pupil, Tess ﬂushed, and,
remarking evasively that it was only a fancy, resumed
her breakfast.

Clare continued to observe her. She soon ﬁnished
her eating, and, having a consciousness that Clare was
regardingher,begantotraceimaginarypatternson
the tablecloth with her foreﬁnger with the constraint
of a domestic animal that perceives itself to be
watched.

‘What a fresh and Virgina] daughter of Nature
that milkmaid is!’ he said to himself.

And then he seemed to discern in her something
that was familiar, something which carried him back
into a joyous and unforeseeing past, before the neces—
sity of taking thought had made the heavens gray.
He concluded that he had beheld her before; where,
he could not tell. A casual encounter during some
country ramble it certainly had been, and he was not
greatly curious about it. But the circumstance was
suﬁicient to lead him to select Tess in preference to
the other pretty milkmaids when he wished to con-
template contiguous womankind.

XIX

IN general the cows were milked as they presented
themselves, without fancy or choice. But certain
cows will show a fondness for a particular pair of
hands, sometimes carrying this predilection so far as
to refuse to stand at all except to their favourite,
the pail of a stranger being unceremoniously kicked
over.

It was Dairyman Crick's rule to insist on breaking
down these partialities and aversions by constant in-
terchange, since otherwise, in the event of a. milkman
or maid going away from the dairy, he was placed in a
diﬂiculty. The maids' private aims, however, were
the reverse of the dairyman’s rule, the daily selection
byeachdamseloftheeightortencowstowhichshe
had grown accustomed rendering the operation on
their willing udders surprisingly easy and effortless.

Tess, like her compeers, soon discovered which of
the cows had a preference for her style of manipula-
tion, and, her ﬁngers having become delicate from the
long domiciliary imprisonments to which she had sub-
jected herself at intervals during the last two orthree
years, she would have been glad to meet the milchers'
views in this respect. Out of the whole ninety-
ﬁve there were eight in partimilar—Dmnpling, Fancy,
Lofty, Mist, Old Pretty, Young Pretty, Tidy, and
Loud-—-who, though the teats of one or two were as
hard as carrots, gave down to her with a readiness
that made her work on them a mere touch of the
ﬁngers. Knowing, however, the dairyman’s wish, she
endeavoured conscientiously to take the animals just
as they came, excepting the very hard yielders which
she could not yet manage.

156

THE RALLY

But she soon found a curious correspondence
between the ostensibly chance position of the cows and
her wishes in this matter, till she felt that their orde
could not be the result of accident. The dairyman’s
pupil had lent a. hand in getting the cows together of
late, and at the ﬁfth or sixth time she turned her eyes.
as she rested against the cow, full of sly inquiry upon
him.
‘Mr. Clare, you have ranged the cows!’ she said,
blushing; and in making the accusation symptoms of
a smile gently lifted her upper lip in spite of her, so as
to show the tips of her teeth, the lower lip remaining
severely still.

‘Well, it makes no diﬂerence,’ said he. ‘You will
always be here to milk them.’

‘Do you think so? I hope I shall! But I don’t
know.’

She was angry with herself afterwards, thinking
that he, unaware of her grave reasons for liking this
seclusion, might have mistaken her meaning. She
had spoken so earnestly to him, as if his presence were
somehow a factor in her wish. Her misgiving was
such that at dusk, when the milking was over, she
walked in the garden alone to continue her regrets
thatshehaddisclosedtohimherdiscoveryofhis
considerateness.

It was a typical summer evening in June, the
atmosphere being in such delicate equilibrium and so
transmissive that inanimate objects seemed endowed
with two or three senses, if not live. There was no
distinction between the near and the far, and an
auditor felt close to everything within the horizon.
The soundlessness impressed her as a positive entity
rather than as the mere negation of noise. It was
broken by the strumming of strings.

Tess had heard those notes in the attic above her
head. Dim, ﬂattened, constrained by their conﬁne-
ment, they had never appealed to her as now, when
theywanderedinthestillairwithastarkqualitylike

I57

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

that of nudity. To speak absolutely, both instrument
and execution were poor; but the relative is all, and
as she listened Tess, like a fascinated bird, could not

- leave the spot. Far from leaving she drew up towards
the performer, keeping behind the hedge that he
might not guess her presence.

The outskirt of the garden in which Tess found
herself had been left uncultivated for some years. and
was now damp and rank with juicy grass which sent
up mists of pollen at a touch; and with tall blooming
weeds emitting offensive smells——weeds whose red
and yellow and purple hues formed a polychrome as
dazzling as that of cultivated ﬂowers. She went
stealthily as a cat through this profusion of growth,
gathering cuckoo-spittle on her skirts, cracldng snails
that were underfoot, staining her hands with thistle-
milk and slug-slime, and rubbing off upon her naked
arms sticky blights which, though snow-white on the
apple-tree trunks, made madder stains on her skin;
{all}: she drew quite near to Clare, still unobserved of

Tess was conscious of neither time nor .
The exaltation which she had described as being
producible at will by gazing at a star came now with-
out any determination of hers; she undulated upon
the thin notes of the second-hand harp, and their
harmonies passed like breezes through her, bringing
tears into her eyes. The ﬂoating pollen seemed to be
his notes made visible, and the dampness of the garden
the weeping of the garden's sensibility. Though near
nightfall, the rank-smelling weed-ﬂowers glowed as if
they would not close for intentness, and the waves of
colour mixed with the waves of sound.

The light which still shone was derived mainly
from a large hole in the western bank of cloud; it was
like a piece of day left behind by accident, dusk having
closed in elsewhere. He concluded his plaintive
melody, a very simple performance, demanding no
great skill; and she waited, thinking another might be

158

THE RALLY

. But, tired of playing, he had desultorily come
round the fence, and was rambling up behind her.
Tess, her cheeks on ﬁre, moved away furtively, as if
hardly moving at all.

Angel, however, saw her light summer gown, and
he spoke; his low tones reaching her, though he was
some distance 05.

‘What makes you draw off in that way, Tess?’
said he. ‘Are you afraid? '

‘0 no, sir . . . not of outdoor things; especially
just now when the apple-blooth is falling, and every-
thing so green.’ .

‘But you have your indoor fears—eh?

‘Well—yes, sir.’

‘What of?’

‘I couldn’t quite say.’

‘The milk turning souri”

‘No.’

‘Life in general?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Ah—so have I, very often. This bobble of being
alive is rather serious, don’t you think so?’

‘It is—now you put it that way.’

‘All the same, I shouldn't have expected a young
girl like you to see it so just yet. How is it you do?’

She maintained a. hesitating silence.

‘Come, Tess, tell me in conﬁdence.’

She thought that he meant what were the aspects
of things to her, and replied shyly——

‘The trees have inquisitive eyes, haven’t they?—
that is, seem as if they had. And the river says,—
“Why do ye trouble me with your looks?" And you
seem to see numbers of to-mormws just all in a line,
the ﬁrst of them the biggest and clearest, the others 
getting smaller and smaller as they stand further
away; but they all seem very ﬁerce and cruel and as
if they said, “I'm coming! Beware of me! Beware
of me!" . . . But you, sir, can raise up dreams with
your music, and drive all such horrid fancies awayl'

I59

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

He was surprised to ﬁnd this young woman—who
though but a milkmaid had just that touch of rarity
about her which might make her the envied of her
housemates—shaping such sad She was
expressing in her own native phrases—assisted a. little
by her Sixth Standard training—feelings which might
almost have been called those of the age—the ache of -
modernism. The perception arrested him less when
he reﬂected that what are called advanced ideas are
really in great part but the latest fashion in deﬁnition
—-a more accurate expression, by words in logy and
ism, of sensations which men and women have vaguely
grasped for centuries.

Still, it was strange that they should have come to
her while yet so young; more than strange; it was
impressive, interesting, pathetic. Not guessing the
cause, there was nothing to remind him that experi-
ence is as to intensity, and not as to duration. Tess's
passing corporeal blight had been her mental harvest.

Tess, on her part, could not understand why a man
of clerical family and good education, and above
physical want, should look upon it as a mishap to be
alive. For the unhappy pilgrim herself there was
very good reason. But how could this admirable and
poetic man ever have descended into the Valley of
Humiliation, have felt with the man of Uz—es she
herself had felt two or three years ago—‘My soul
chooseth strangling and death rather than my life. I
loathe it: I would not live alway.’

It was true that he was at present out of his class.
But she knew that was only because, like Peter the
Great in a shipwright’s yard, he was studying what he
wanted to know. He did not milk cows because he
was obliged to milk cows, but because he was learning
how to be a rich and prosperous dairyman, landowner,
agriculturist, and breeder of cattle. He would become
an American or Australian Abraham, commanding
like a monarch his ﬂocks and his herds, his spotted and

ring-straked, his men-servants and his maids. At
160

THE RALLY

times, nevertheless, it did seem unaccountable to her
that a decidedly bookish, musical, thinking young man
should have chosen deliberately to be a farmer, and
not a clergyman, like his father and brothers.

Thus, neither having the clue to the other’s secret,
they were respectively puzzled at what each revealed,
and awaited new knowledge of each other's character
and moods without attempting to pry into each other’s

history.

Every day, every hour, brought to him one more
little stroke of her nature, and to her one more of his.
Tess was trying to lead a repressed life, but she little
divined the strength of her own vitality.

AtﬁrstTessseemedtoregardAngelClareasan
intelligence rather than as a man. As such she
compared him with herself; and at every discovery of
the abundance of his illuminations. of the distance
between her own modest mental standpoint and the
unmeasurable, Andean altitude of his, she became
quite dejected, disheartened from all further eﬁort on
her own part whatever.

He observed her dejection one day, when he had
casually mentioned something to her about pastoral
life in ancient Greece. She was gathering the buds
allied ‘lords and ladies’ from the bank while he
spo e.

‘Why do you look so woebegone all of a sudden?’
he asked.

‘Oh, ’tis only—about my own self,’ she said, with
a frail laugh of sadness, ﬁtfully beginning to peel ‘a
lady’ meanwhile. ‘Just a sense of what might have
beenwithme! Mylifelooksasifithadbeenwasted
for want of chances! When I see what you know,
 what you have read, and seen, and thought, I feel

what 3. nothing I am! I'm like the poor Queen of
Sheba who lived in the Bible. There is no more
spirit in me.’

‘Bless my soul, don't go troubling about that!

161

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Why,’ he said with some enthusiasm, ‘I should be
only too glad, my dear Tess, to help you to anything
in the way of history, or any line of reading you
would like to take up—’

‘It is a lady again,’ interrupted she, holding out
the bud she had peeled.

‘What?’

‘I mean that there are always more ladies than
lords when you come to peel them.‘

‘Never mind about the lords and ladies. Would
you like to take up any course of study—history, for
example?’

‘Sometimes I feel I don't want to know anything
more about it than I know already.’

‘Why not?’

‘Because what’s the use of learning that I am one
of a long row only—ﬁnding out that there is set down
in some old book somebody just like me, and to know
that I shall only act her part; making me sad, that's
all. Thebestisnottorememberthat yournature and
your past doings have been just like thousands’ and
thousands’, and that your coming life and doings 'll
be like thousands' and thousan ’.’

‘What, really, then, you don't want to learn any-
thing?‘

'I shouldn't mind learning why—~why the sun do
shine on the just and the unjust alike,’ she answered,
with a slight quaver in her voice. 'But that’s what
books will not tell me.’

‘Tess, ﬁe for such bittemess!’ Of course he
spoke with a conventional sense of duty only, for that
sort of wondering had not been unknown to himself
in bygone days. And as he looked at the uner
mouth and lips he thought that such a daughter of
the soil could only have caught up the sentiment by
rote. She went on peeling the lords and ladies till
Clare, regarding for a. moment the wave-like curl of
herlashesastheydroopedwithherbentgazeonher
soft cheek, lingerineg went away. When he was

:62

 

THE RALLY

gone she stood awhile, thoughtfully peeling the last
bud; and then, awakening from her reverie, ﬂung it
and all the crowd of ﬂoral nobility impatiently on the
ground, in an ebullition of displeasure with herself for
her niaisen'es, and with a quickening warmth in her
heart of hearts.

How stupid he must think her! In an access of
hunger for his good opinion she bethought herself of
what she had latterly endeavoured to forget, so
unpleasant had been its issues——the identity of her
family with that of the knightly d’Urbervilles. Barren
attribute as it was, disastrous as its discovery had
been in many ways to her, perhaps Mr. Clare, as a
gentleman and a student of history, would respect her
suﬁciently to forget her childish conduct with the
lords and ladies if he knew that those Purbeck-marble
and alabaster people in Kingsbere Church really

ted her own lineal forefathers; that she was
no spurious d'Urberville, compounded of money and
ambition like those at Trantridge, but true d'Urber.
ville to the bone.

But, before venturing to make the revelation,
dubious Tess indirectly sounded the dairyman as to
its possible eﬂect upon Mr. Clare, by asking the
former if Mr. Clare had any great respect for old
county families when they had lost all their money
and land.

‘Mr. Clare,’ said the dairyman emphatically, ‘is
one of the most rebellest rozums you ever knowed—
not a bit like the rest of his family; and if there’s one
thing that he do hate more than another ’tis the
notion of what’s called a’ old family. He says that it
stands to reason that old families have done their
spurt of work in past days, and can’t have anything
left in 'em now. There's the Billetts and the Drenk-
hards and the Greys and the St. Quintins and the
Hardys and the Goulds, who used to own the lands
for miles down this valley; you could buy 'em all up

now for an old song a’most. Why, our little Retty
r63

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Pﬁddle here, you know, is one of the Paddelles—the
old family that used to own lots 0' the lands out by
King’s-Hintodc now owned by the Earl o' Wessex,
afore even he or his was heard of. Well, Mr. Clare
found this out, and spoke quite scornful to the poor
girl for days. “Ah!” he says to her, “you'll never
makeagooddairymaid! Allyoursldllwasusedup
ages ago in Palestine, and you must lie fallow for a
thousand years to git strength for more deeds!" A
boy came here t’other day asking for a job, and said
his name was Matt, and when we asked him his
surname he said he'd never heard that 'a had any
surname, and when we asked why, he said he supposed
his folks hadn’t been ’stablished long enough. “Ah!
you’re the very boy I want !" says Mr. Clare, jumping
up and shaking hands wi'en; “I've great hopes of
you"; and gave him half-amm. 0 no! he can't
stomach old families?

After hearing this caricature of Clare’s opinions
poor Tess was glad that she had not said a word in a
weak moment about her family—even though it was so
unusually old as almost to have gone round the circle
and become a new one. Besides, another dairy-girl
wasssgoodasshe,itseemed,inthatrespect. She
held her tongue about the d'Urberville vault, and the
Knight of the Conqueror whose name she bore. The
insight aﬁorded into Clare’s character suggested to
her that it was largely owing to her supposed untradi-
tional newness that she had won interest in his eyes.

XX

TEE season developed and matured. Another year’s
instalment of ﬂowers, leaves, nightingales, thrushes,
ﬁnches, and such ephemeral creatures, took up their
positions where only a year ago others had stood in
their place when these were nothing more than germs
and inorganic particles. Rays from the sunrise drew
forth the buds and stretched th into long stalks,
lifted up sap in noiseless streams, opened petals, and
sucked out scents in invisible jets and breathings. -
' ' Crick’s household of maids and then lived
on comfortably, placidly, even merrily. Their pon-
tion was perhaps the happiest of all positions in the
social scale, being above the line at which neediness
ends, and below the line at which the WWW:
begin to cramp natural feeling, and the stress of thread-
bare modishness makes too little of enough.

Thus passed the leafy time when arborescence
seems to be the one thing aimed at out-of-doors.
Tess and Clare unconsciously studied each other, ever
balanced on the edge of a. passion, yet apparently
keeping out of it. All the while they were converging,
under an irresistible law, as surely as two streams in
one vale.

Tess had never in her recent life been so happy as
she was now, possibly never would be so happy again.
She was, for one thing, physically and mentally suited
among these new surroundings. The sapling which
had rooted down to a poisonous stratum on the spot
ofitssowinghadbeenttansplantedtoadeepersoil.
Moreover she, and Clare also, stood as yet on the

debatable land between predilection and love; where
' 16s

TESS or 'l‘I-IE D’URBERVILLES

no profundities have been reached; no reﬂections have
set in, awkwardly inquiring, ‘Whither does this new
current tendtocarryme? What doesit meantomy
future? How does it stand towards my past?’

Tess was the merest stray phenomenon to Angel
Clare as yet—a rosy warming apparition which had
only just acquired the attribute of persistence in his
consciousness. So he allowed his mind to be occupied
with her, deeming his preoccupation to be no more
than a philosopher’s regard of an exceedingly novel,
fresh, and interesting specimen of womankind.

They met continually; they could not help it.
They met daily in that strange and solemn interval,
the twilight of the morning, in the violet or pink dawn;
for it was necessary to rise early, so very early, here.

' ' was done betimes; and before the milking
came the skimming, which began at a little past three.
It usually fell to the lot of some one or other of th
towaketherest,theﬁrstbeingarousedbyanalarm—
clock; and, as Tess was the latest arrival. and they
soon discovered that she could be depended upon not
tosleepthroughthealarmastheothersdid, thistask
was thrust most frequently upon her. No sooner had
the hour of three struck and whizzed than she left her
room and ran to the dairyman’s door; then up the
ladder to Angel's, calling him in a loud whisper;
then woke her fellow-millcmaids. By the time that
Tesswasdressed Clarewasdownstairsandoutinthe
humidair. Theremainingmaidsandthedairyman
usually gave themselves another turn on the pillow,
and did not appear till a quarter of an hour later.

The gray half-tones of daybreak are not the grey '
half-tones of the day’s close, though the degree of
their shade may be the same. In the twilight of the
morning light seems active, darkness passive; in the
twilight of evening it is the darkness which is active
and crescent, and the light which is the drowsy
reverse.

Being so often—«possibly not always by chance——

:66

THE RALLY

theﬁlsttwopersonstogetupatthedairy-house,they
seemedtothemselvestheﬁrstpersonsupofallthe
world. In these early days of her residence here Tess
did not skim, but went out—of-doors at once after
rising, where he was generally awaiting her. The
spectral, half-compounded, aqueous light which per-
vaded theopenmeadimpressedthemwithafeelingof
isolation, as if they were Adam and Eve. At this dim
inceptive stageofthedayTessseemedtoClareto
exhibit a digniﬁed largeness both of disposition and
physique, an almost regnant power, possibly because
he knew that at that pretematural time hardly any
woman sowellendowedinpersonasshewas likely to
bewalkinginthe openairwithinthebo‘mdnriesof
his horizon; very few in all England. Fair women
are usually asleep at midsummer dawns. She was
close at hand, and the rest were nowhere.

The mixed, singular. luminous gloom in which
they walked along together to the spot where the cows
layoftenmadehimthink of the Resurmctionhmu.
He little thought that the Magdalen might be at his
side. Whilst all the landscape was in neutral shade
his companion’s face, which was the focus of his eyes,
risingabovethemiststratum, seemedtohaveasort
of phosphorescence upon it. She looked ghostly, as
ifshewemmm-elyasoulatlarge. Inrealityherfnce,
without appearing to do so, had caught the cold gleam
of day from the north-east; his own face, though he
did not think of it, wore the same aspect to her.

Itwasthen.ashasbeensaid,thatshe'
him most deeply. She was no longer the milkmaid,
but a visionary essence of woman—n whole sex con-
densed into one typical form. He called her Artemis,
Demeter, and other fanciful names half teasingly,
:ﬁhich she did not like because she did not understand

em. ,
dh‘iCall me Tess,’ she would say askance; and he
Then it would grow lighter, and her features would

161

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

become simply feminine; they had changed from
thoseofadivinitywhoeouldconferblisstothoseofa
being who craved it.

At these non-human hours they could get quite
close to the waterfowl. Herons came, with a great
bold noise as of opening doors and shutters, out of the
boughs of a plantation which they frequented at the
side of the mead; or, if already on the spot, hardin
maintained their standing in the water as the pair
walked by, watching th by moving their heads
round in a slow, horizontal, passionless wheel, like the
turn of puppets by clockwork.

They could then see the faint summer fogs in
layers, woolly, level, and apparently no thicker than
counterpanes, spread about the meadows in detached
remnants of small extent. Onthe greymoistureof the
grassweremarkswherethecowshadlainthrmrghthe
night—dark-green islands of dry herbage the size of
theircareeses,inthegeneralseaofdew. Fromeach
island proceeded a serpentine trail, by which the cow
had rambled away to feed after getting up, at the end
of which trail they found her; the snoring puff from
her nostrils, when she recognized them, making an
intenser little fog of her own amid the prevailing one.
Then they drove the animals back to the barton, or
satdowntomilkthemonthespot,asthecasemight
require.

Or perhaps the summer fog was more general, and
the meadows lay like a white see, out of which the
scattered trees rose like dangerous rocks. Birds Would
soar through it into the upper radiance, and hang on
the wing sunning themselves, or alight on the wet rails
subdividing the mead, which now shone like glass rods.
Minute diamonds of moisture from the mist hung, too,
upon Tess’s eyelashes, and drops upon her hair, like
seed pearls. When the day grew quite strong and
commonplace these dried oﬁ her; moreover, Tess then
lost her strange and ethereal beauty; her teeth, lips,
andeyesscintillatedinthesunbeams,andshewas

x63

‘ THE RALLY

again the dazzlineg fair dairymaid only, who had to
hold her own against the other women of the world.

About this time they would hear Dairyman Crick's
voice, lecturing the non-resident milkers for arriving
late, and speaking sharply to old Deborah Fyander
for not washing her hands.

‘For Heaven’s sake, pop thy hands under the

pump, Deb! Upon my soul, if the London folk only
lmowed of thee and thy slovenly ways, they’d‘swaller
their milk and butter more mincing than they do
a’ready; and that’s saying a good deal.’
The milking progressed, till towards the end Tess
and Clare, in common with the rest, could hear the
heavy breakfast table dragged out from the wall in
the kitchen by Mrs. Crick, this being the invariable
preliminary to each meal; the same horrible scrape
accompanying its return journey when the table had
been cleared.

XXI

Tmnwasagreatstirinthemilk—housejustafter
breakfast. The churn revolved as usual, but the
butter would not come. Whenever this happened the
dairy was paralyzed. Squish, squash, echoed the milk
in the great cylinder, but never arose the sound they
waited for.

Dairyman Crick and his wife, the milkmaids Tess,
Marian, Retty Priddle, Izz Huett, and the married
ones from the cottages; also Mr. Clare, Jonathan
Kail, old Deborah, and the rest, stood gazing hope-
lessly at the churn; and the boy who kept the horse
going outside put on moon-like eyes to show his sense
of the situation. Even the melancholy horse himself
seemed to look in at the window in inquiring despair
at each walk round.

"Tis years since I went to Conjurer Trendle's son
in on—years l’ said the dairymanbitterly. ‘And
he was nothing to what his father had been. I have
said ﬁfty times, if I have said once, that I don't believe
in en. And I don't believe in en. But I shall have
to go to ’n if he’s alive. 0 yes, I shall have to go
to ’n, if this sort of thing continnys!’

Even Mr. Clare began to feel tragical at the dairy-
man’s desperation.

‘Conjuror Fall, t’other side of Casterbridge, that
they used to call “Wide-O," was a very good man
when I was a boy,’ said Jonathan Kail. ‘But he’s
rotten as tonchwood by now.’

'My grandfather used to go to Conjurer Mynterne,
out at Owlscombe, and a clever man ’a were, so I’ve
heard grandf’er say,’ continued Mr. Crick. ‘But
there’s no such genuine folk about nowadays!’

170

THE RALLY

hag/(firs. Crick‘s mind kept nearer to the matter in

‘Perhaps somebody in the house is in love,’ she
said tentatively. ‘ I've heard tell in my younger days
that that will cause it. Why, Crick-that maid we
had years ago, do ye mind, and how the butter didn’t
come then—-’

‘Ah, yes, yes!——but that isn't the rights o't. It
had nothing to do with the love-making. I can mind
all about it——’twas the to the churn.’

He turned to Clare.

‘Jack Dollop, a ’hore’s—bird of a fellow we had here
as milker at one time, sir, courted a young woman
over at Mellstock, and deceived her as he had deceived
many afore. But he had another sort 0’ woman to

' reckon wi’ this time, and it was not the girl herself.
One Holy Thursday, of all days in the almanaak, we
washereaswemidbenow, onlytherewasno churn~
ing in hand, when we aid the girl’s mother coming
up to the door, wi' a great brass-mounted umbrella
in her hand that would ha’ felled an ox, and saying
“Do Jack Dollop work here?——because I want him!
I have a big bone to pick with he, I can assure ’n!"
And some way behind her mother walked Jack's
y woman, crying bitterly into her handkercher.
“O Lard, here's a time!” said Jack, looking out o'
winder at 'em. “She'll murder me! Where shall I
get—where shall I—-———? Don’t tell her where I be!"
And with that he scrambled into the churn
the trap-door, and shut himself inside, just as the
young woman’s mother busted into the milk‘house.
“The villain—where is he?" says she. “I’ll claw his
face for’n, let me only catch him!” Well, she hunted
about everywhere, ballyragging Jack by side and by
seam, Jack lying a'most stiﬂed inside the churn, and
the poor maid—or young woman rather—standing
at the door crying her eyes out. I shall never forget
it, never! ’Twould have melted a marble stone! But
she couldn't ﬁnd him nowhere at all.’

17]

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Thedairymanpaused,andoneortwowondsof
comment came from the listeners.

Dairymsn Crick’s stories often seemed to be ended
when they were not really so, and strangers were
betrayed into premature interjections of ﬁnality;
though old friends knew better. The narrator went
on—

‘Well, how the old woman should have had the
wit to guess it I could never tell, but she found out
that he was inside that there chum. Without saying
a word she took hold of the winch (it was turned by
handpower then), and round she swung him, and Jack
began to ﬂop about inside. “0 Lard! stop the
churn! let me out!" says he, ’ out his head,
“I shallbe churned into a. pummy!" e was a cow-
ardly chap in his heart, as such men mostly be).
“Not till ye make amends for ravaging her virgin
innocence!" says the old woman. “Stop the churn,
you old witch!" screams be. “You call me old witch,
do ye, you deceiver!” says she, “when ye ought
to ha' been calling me mother-law these last ﬁve
months!" And on went the churn, and Jack’s bones
rattled round again. Well, none of us ventured to
interfere; and at last ’a promised to make it right wi’
her. “Yes—I’ll be as good as my word!" he said.
And so it ended that day.’

While the listeners were smiling their comments
there was a quick movement behind their backs, and
thwey looked round. Tess, palefaced, had gone to the

‘How warm ’tis to-day!’ she said, almost inaudibly.

It was warm, and none of th connected her
Withdrawal with the reminiscences of the dairyman.
He went forward, and opened the door for her, saying
with tender raillery—

‘Why, maidy' (be frequently, with unconscious
irony, gave her this pet name), ‘the prettiest milker
I've got in my dairy; you mustn't get so fagged as
this at the ﬁrst breath of summer weather, or we shall

r72

THE RALLY

be ﬁnely put to for want of ’ee by dog-days, shan't
we, Mr. Clare?’

‘1 was faint—and—I think I am better out-o'-
doors,’ she said mechanically; and disappeared out-
side.

Fortunately for her the milk in the revolving
churn at that moment changed its squashing for a
decided ﬂick-ﬂack.

"Tis corning!’ cried Mrs. Crick, and the attention
of all was called ad from Tess.

That fair suﬁerer soon recovered hersdf externally;
but she remained much depressed all the afternoon.
Whentheeveningmilldngwasdoneshedidnotcare
to be with the rest of them, and went out-of-doors,
wandering along she knew not whither. She was
wretched—O so wretched—at the perception that to
her companions the dairyman’s story had been rather
a humorous narration than otherwise; none of than
butherselfseemedtoseethesorrowofit3toacer-
tainty, not one knew how cruelly it touched the ten-
der place in her experience. The evening sun was
now ugly to her, like a great inﬂamed wound in the

. Only a solitary cracked-voiced reed-sparrow
greeted her from the bushes by the river, in a sad,
machine-made tone, resembling that of a past friend
whose friendship she had outworn.

In these long June days the milkmaids, and, in-
deed, most of the household, went to bed at sunset
or sooner, the morning work before milking being so
early and heavy at a time of full pails. Tess usually
accompanied her fellows upstairs. Tonight, however,
shewastheﬁrsttogototheir common chamber;
and she had dazed when the other girls came in.
She saw them undressing in the orange light of the
vanished sun, which ﬂushed their forms with its colour;
she domed again, but she was reawakened by their
vorces, and quietly turned her eyes towards them.

. Neither of her three chamberocompanions had got
into bed. They were standing in a group, in their
173

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

nightgowns, barefooted, at the window, the last red
rays of the west still warming their faces and necks,
and the walls around them. All were watching some-
body in the garden with deep interest, their three faces
close together: a jovial and round one, a pale one
with dark hair, and a fair one whose tnesses were
auburn.

‘Don’t push! You can see as well as I,’ said
Retty, the auburn-haired and youngest girl, without
removing her eyes from the window.

"Tisnouseforyoutobeinlovewithhimany
more than me, Retty Priddle,’ said jolly-faced Marian,
the eldest, slily. ‘His thoughts be of other cheeks
than thine!’

Remy Pdddle still looked, and the others looked
again.

‘There he is again!’ cried Izz Huett, the pale girl
with dark damp hair and keenly cut lips.

'You needn’t say anything, Izz,’ answered Retty.
‘For I zid you kissing his shade.’

‘ What did you see her doing?’ asked Marian.

‘Why—he was standing over the whey-tub to let
oﬂ the whey, and the shade of his face came upon the
wall behind, close to I22, who was standing there
ﬁlling a, vat. She put her mouth against the wall and
kissed the shade of his mouth; I zid her, though he
didn't.’

‘0 I22 Hnett!’ said Marian.

Chleiek rosy spot came into the middle of 122 Huett’s

‘Well, there was no harm in it,’ she declared, with
attempted coolness. ‘And if I be in love wi’en, so is
Retty. too; and so be you, Marian, come to that.’

. Marian's full face could not blush past its chronic

ess.
‘I!’ she said. ‘What a tale! Ah, there he is
again! Dear eyes—dear face—dear Mr. Clare !'
"l‘here—you've owned it!’
'So have you—so have we all,’ said Marian, with
174

THE RALLY

the dry frankness of complete indiﬁerence to opinion.
‘It is silly to pretend otherwise amongst ourselves,
though we need not own it to other folks. I would
just marry ’n to-morrow!’

‘So would I—and more,’ murmured Izz Huett.

‘And I too,’ whispered the more timid Retty.

The listener grew warm.

'We can’t all marry him,’ said Izz.

‘We shan’t, eithm' of us; which is worse still,’ said
the eldest. ‘There he is again!’

They all three blew him a silent kiss.

'Why?‘ asked Retty quickly.

‘Because he likes Tess Durbeyﬁeld best,‘ said
Marian, lowering her voice. ‘I have watched him
every day, and have found it out.’

There was a reﬂective silence.

‘But she don’t care anything for 'n?’ at length
breathed Retty.

‘We]l—I sometimes think that too.’

‘But how silly all this is!’ said In Huett impa-
tiently. ‘Of course he won't man-y any one of us,
or Tess either—a. gentleman's son, who's going to be
a great landowner and farmer abroad! More likely
toaslrustocomewi'enasfarm-handsatsomucha

One sighed, and another sighed, and Marian's
plump ﬁgure sighed biggest of all. Somebody in
bed hard by sighed too. Tears came into the eyes of
Retty Priddle, the pretty red-haired youngest—the
last bud of the Pan'delles, so important in the county
annals. They watched silently a little longer, their
three faces still close together as before, and the triple
hues of their hair mingling. But the unconscious Mr.
Clare had gone indoors, and they saw him no more;
and, the shades beginning to deepen, they crept into
their beds. In a few minutes they heard him ascend
the ladder to his own room. Marian was soon snoring,
but In did not drop into forgetfulness for a. long time.
Retty Priddle cried herself to sleep.

175

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

The deeper-passioned Tess was very far from
sleeping even then. This conversation was another
of the bitter pills she had been obliged to swallow that
day. Scarce the least feeling of jealousy arose in her
breast. For that matter she knew herself to have
the preference. Being more ﬁnely formed, better
educated, and, though the youngest except Retty,
more woman than either, she perceived that only the
slightest ordinary care was necessary for holding her
own in Angel Clare’s heart against these her candid
friends. But the grave question was, ought she to do
this? There was, to be sure, hardly a ghost of a
chance for either of them, in a serious sense; but
there was, or had been, a chance of one or the other
inspiring him with a passing fancy for her, and enjoy-
ing the pleasure of his attentions while he stayed
here. Such unequal attachments had led to marriage;
and she had heard from Mrs. Crick that Mr. Clare had
one day asked, in a laughing way, what would be the
use of his marrying a ﬁne lady, and all the while ten
thousand acres of Colonial pasture to feed, and cattle
torear,andcomtoreap. Afann-womanwouldbe
the only sensible kind of wife for him. But whether
Mr. Clare had spoken seriously or not, why should
she, who could never conscientiously allow any man
to marry her now, and who had religiously determined
that she never would be tempted to do so, draw all
Mr. Clara’s attention from other women, for the brief
happiness of sunning herself in his eyes while he
remained at Talbothays?

XXII

THEY came downstairs yawning next morning; but
skimming and milking were proceeded with as usual,
and they went indoors to breakfast. Dairyman Crick
was discovered stamping about the house. He had
received a letter, in which a. customer had complained
that the butter had a twang.

‘And begad, so ’t have!’ said the dairyman, who
held in his left hand a wooden slice on which a lump
of butter was stuck. ‘Yes—taste for yourself !’

Several of them gathered round him; and Mr.
Clare tasted, Tess tasted, also the other indoor milk-
rnaids. one or two of the milking-men, and last of all
Mrs. Crick, who came out from the waiting breakfast
table. There certainly was a twang.

The dairyman, who had thrown himself into ab-
straction to better realize the taste, and so divine the
particular species of noxious weed to which it apper-
tained, suddenly exclaimed—

”Tis garlic! and I thought there wasn't a blade
left in that mead!’

Then all the old hands remembered that a certain
dry mead, into which a few of the cows had been
admitted of late, had, in years gone by, spoilt the
butter in the same way. The ‘ had not
recognized the taste at that time, and thought the
butter bewitched.

‘We must overhaul that mead,’ he resumed; ‘this
mustn't continny!’

All having armed themselves with old pointed
knives, they went out together. As the plant
could only be present in very microscopic dimensions

117

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

'to have escaped ordinary observation, to ﬁnd it
seemed rather a hopeless attempt in the stretch of ridi
grass before them. However, they formed themselves
into line, all assisting, owing to the importance of the
' search; the dairyman at the upper end with Mr. Clare,
who had volunteered to help; then Tess, Marian, Izz
Huett, and Retty; then Bill Lewell, Jonathan, and the
married dairywomen—Beck Knibbs, with her woolly
black hair and rolling eyes; and ﬂaxeu Frances, con-
sumptive from the winter damps of the water-meads—
who lived in their respective cottages.

With eyes ﬁxed upon the ground they crept slowly
across a strip of the ﬁeld, returning a little further
down in such a manner that, when they should have
ﬁnished, not a single inch of the pasture but would
have fallen under the eye of some one of th. It
was a most tedious business, not more than half a.
dozen shoots of garlic being discoverable in the whole
ﬁeld; yet such was the herb's pungency that probably
one bite of it by one cow had been suﬂicient to season
the whole dairy’s produce for the day.

Diﬂering one from another in natures and moods
so greatly as they did, they yet formed, bending, a
curiously uniform row—automatic, noiseless; and an
alien observer passing down the neighbouring lane
might well have been excused for massing them as
‘Hodge.’ As they crept along, stooping low to dis-
cern the plant, a soft yellow gleam was reﬂected from
the buttercups into their shaded faces, giving them
an elﬁsh, moonlit aspect, though the sun was pouring
upon their backs in all the strength of noon.

Angel Clare, who communistically stuck to his rule
of taldng part with the rest in everything, glanced up
now and then. It was not, of course, by accident that
he walked next to Tess.

‘Well, how are you?’ he murmured.

‘Very well, thank you, sir,’ she replied demurely.

As they had been discussing a score of

natters only half-an-hour before, the introductory
r18

THE RALLY

style seemed a little superﬂuous. But they got no
further in speech just then. They crept and crept,
the hem of her pettiooat just touching his gaiter, and
his elbow sometimes brushing hers. At last the dairy-
man, who came next, could stand it no longer.

‘Upon my soul and body, this here stooping do
fairly make my back open and shut!’ he exclaimed,
straightening himself slowly with an excruciated look
till quite upright. ‘And you, maidy Tess, you wasn’t
well a day or two ago—«this will make your head ache
ﬁnely! Don’t do any more, if you feel fainty; leave
the rest to ﬁnish it.’

Dairyman Crick withdrew, and Tess dropped be.
hind. Mr. Clare also stepped out of line, and began
privateering about for the weed. When she found
him near her. her very tension at what she had heard
the night before made her the ﬁrst to speak.

‘Don’t they look pretty?’ she said.

‘Who?’

‘Izzy Huett and Retty.’

Tess had moodily decided that either of these
maidens would make a good farmer's wife, and that
she ought to recommend them, and obscure her own
wretched charms.

‘Pretty? Well, yer—they are pretty girls—fresh
looking. I have often thought so.’

‘Though, poor dears, prettiness won't last long!’

‘0 no, unfortunately.’

‘They are excellent dairywomen.’

‘Yes: though not better than you.’

‘They skim better than I.’

‘Do they?’ 

Clare remained observing them—not without their
observing him.

‘She is colouring up,’ continued Tess heroically.

‘Who?’

‘Retty Priddle.’

‘Oh! Why is that?’

‘Because you are looking at her.’

179

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Self-sacriﬁcing as her mood might be, Tess could
not well go further and cry, ‘Marry one of them,- if
you really do want a dairywoman and not a lady; and
don’t think of marrying me!’ She followed Dairymau
Crick, and had the mournful satisfaction of seeing that
Clare remained behind.

Fromthisdaysheforcedherselftotakepainsto
avoid him—never allowing herself, as formerly, to
remain long in his company, even if their juxtaposi-
tion were purer accidental. She gave the other three
every chance.

Tesswaswomanenoughtorealizefromtheir
avowals to herself that Angel Clare had the honour of
all the dairymaids in his keeping, and her perception
of his care to avoid compromising the happiness of
eitherintheleastdegreebredatenderrespectin’f‘ess
for what she deemed, rightly or wrongly, the self-
controlling sense of duty shown by him, a quality
whichshehadneverexpectedtoﬁndinoneofthe
opposite sex, and in the absence of which more than
one of the simple hearts who were his housemates
might have gone weeping on her pilgrimage.

XXIII

Tm: hot weather of July had crept upon them un-
awares, and the atmosphere of the ﬂat vale hung
heavy as an opiate over the dairy-folk, the cows, and
the trees. Hot steaming rains fell frequently, making
the grass where the cows fed yet more rank, and
hindering the late haymaking in the other meads.

It was Sunday morning; the milking was done;
the outdoor milkers had gone home. Tess and the
other three were dressing themselves rapidly. the
whole bevy having agreed to go together to Mellstock
Church, which lay some three or four miles distant
from the dairy-house. She had now been two months
at Talbothays, and this was her ﬁrst excursion.

All the preceding afternoon and night heavy
thunderstorms had hissed down upon the meads, and
washed some of the hay into the river; but this
morning the sun shone out all the more brilliantly. for
the deluge, and the air was balmy and clear.

The crooked lane leading from their own parish to
Mellstock ran along the lowest levels in a portion of
its length, and when the girls reached the most
depressed spot they found that the result of the rain
had been to ﬂood the lane over-shoe to a distance of
some ﬁfty yards. This would have been no serious
hindrance on a. week-day; they would have clicked
through it in their high pattens and boots quite
unconcerned; but on this day of vanity, this Sun’s—day,
when ﬂesh went forth to coquet with ﬂesh while hypo-
critically aﬁecting business with spiritual things; on
this occasion for wearing their white stockings and
thin shoes, and their pink, white, and lilac gowns, on

181

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

which every mud spot would be visible, the pool
was an awkward impediment. They could hear the
church—bell calling—as yet nearly a mile 03.

'Who would have expected such a rise in the
river in summer-time? said Marian, from the top of
the roadside bank on which they had climbed, and
were maintaining a precarious footing in the hope of
creeping along its slope till they were past the pool.

‘We can’t get there anyhow, without walking right
through it, or else going round the Turnpike way;
and that would make us so very late!’ said Retty,
pausxng hopelessly. '

‘And I do colour up so hot, walking into church
late, and all the people staring round,’ said Marian,
'that I hardly cool down again till we get into the
That-it-may—please—Thees.’

While they stood clinging to the bank they heard
asplashingroundthebend of the road,and presen -
1y appeared Angel Clare, advancing along the lane
towards them through the water.

Four hearts gave a big throb simultaneously.

His aspect was probably as un-Sabbatarian a one
as a dogmatic parson's son often presented; his attire
being his dairy clothes, long wading boots, 3. cabbage-
leaf inside his hat to keep his head cool, with a thistle-
spud to ﬁnish him off.

‘He’s not going to church,’ said Marian.

‘No—I wish he was!’ murmured Tess.

Angel, in fact, rightly or wrongly (to adopt the
safe phrase of evasive controversialists), preferred
sermons in stones to sermons in churches and chapels
on ﬁne summer days. This morning, moreover, he
had gone out to see if the damage to the hay by
the ﬂood was considerable or not. On his walk he
observed the girls from a long distance, though they
had been so occupied with their difﬁculties of passage
as not to notice him. He knew that the water had
risen at that spot, and that it would quite check
their progress. So he had hastened on, with a dim

182

THE RALLY

idea of how he could help th—one of them in
particular.

The rosy-cheeked, bright-eyed quartet looked so

' intheirlightsummerattire,clingingtothe
roadside bank like pigeons on a. roof-slope, that he
stopped a moment to regard them before coming
close. Their gauzy skirts had brushed up from the
grass innumerable ﬂies and butterﬂies which, unable
toescape,ren1ainedcagedinthetranspa1enttissueas
in an aviary. Angel’s eye at last fell upon Tess, the
hindmost of the four; she, being full of suppressed
laughter at their dilemma, could not help meeting his
glance radiantly.

He came beneath them in the water, which did
not rise over his long boots; and stood looking at the
entrapped ﬂies and butterﬂies.

‘Areyoutryingtogettochurch?’hesaidtoMar-ian,
who was in front, including the next two in his
remark, but avoiding Tess.

‘Yes, sir; and ’tis getting late; and my colour do
come up so——'

‘I'll carry you through the pool—every Jill of you.’

The whole four ﬂushed as if one heart beat through
them.

’I think you can't, sir,’ said Marian.

‘It is the only way for you to get past. Stand
still. Nonsense—~you are not too heavy! I’d carry
you all four together. Now, Marian, attend,’ he
continued, ‘and put your arms round my shoulders,
so. Now! Hold on. That’s well done.’

Marian had lowered herself upon his arm and
shoulder as directed, and Angel strode OK with her,
his slim ﬁgure, as viewed from behind, looldng like
the mere stem to the great nosegay suggested by hers.
They disappeared round the curve of the road, and
only his sousing footsteps and the top ribbon of
Marian’s bonnet told where they were. In a few
minutes he reappeared. Izz Huett was the next in

order upon the bank. ’
183

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Here he comes,’ she murmured, and they could
hear that her lips were dry with emotion. ‘And I
have to put my arms round his neck and look into his
face as Marian did.’

‘There's nothing in that,’ said Tess quickly.

‘There’s a time for everything,’ continued 122, un-
heeding. ‘A time to embrace, and a time to refrain
from embracing; the ﬁrst is now going to be mine.’

‘Fie—it is Scripture, Izz!‘

‘Yes,’ said Izz, ‘I've always a’ ear at church for
pretty verses.’

Angel Clare, to whom three-quarters of this per-
formance was a commonplace act of kindness, now
approached Izz. She quietly and dreamily lowered
herself into his arms, and Angel methodically marched
ed with her. When he was heard returning for the
third time Retty’s throbbing heart could be almost
seen to shake her. He went up to the red-haired girl,
and while he was seizing her he glanced at Tess. His
lips could not have pronounced more plainly, ‘It will
soon be you and I.’ Her comprehension appeared in
her face; she could not help it. There was an under~
standing between them.

Poor little Retty, though by far the lightest weight,
was the most troublesome of Clare's burdens. Marian
had been like a sack of meal, a dead weight of lump-
ness under which he had literally staggered. 22 had
ridden sensibly and calmly. Retty was a bunch of
hysterics.

However, he got through with the disquieted crea-
ture, deposited her, and returned. Tess could see
over the hedge the distant three in a group, standing
as he had placed them on the next rising ground. It
was now her turn. She was embarrassed to discover
that excitement at the proximity of Mr. Clare’s breath
and eyes, which she had contemned in her companions,
was intensiﬁed in herself; and as if fearful of betraying
her secret she paltered with him at the last moment.

‘I may be able to clim' along the bank perhaps—I

184

THE RALLY

can clim’ better than they. You must be so tired,
Mr. Clare!‘

‘No. no, Tess,’ said he quickly. And almost before
shewasawareshewasseatedinhis armsand resting
against his shoulder.

‘Three Leahs to get one Rachel.’ he whispered.

‘They are better women than I,’ she replied,
magnanimously sticking to her resolve.

‘Not to me,’ said Angel.

Hesawhergrowwarmatthis;andtheywent
some steps in silence.

. ‘I hope I am not too heavy?" she said timidly.

‘0 no. You should lift Marian! Such a lump.
You are like an undulating billow warmed by the sun.
And all this ﬂuﬁ of muslin about you is the froth.’

‘It is very pretty-if I seem like that to you.’

‘Do you know that I have undergone three-quarters
of this labour entirely for the sake of the fourth

quarter?’
‘No.’
‘I did not expect such an event today.’
‘Nor I. . . . The water came up so sudden.’

That the rise in the water was what she under-
stood him to refer to, thestate of her breathing belied.
Clare stood still and inclined his face towards hers.

‘0 Tessyl' he exclaimed.

The girl’s cheeks burned to the breeze, and she
could not look into his eyes for her emotion. It
reminded Angel that he was somewhat unfairly taking
advantage of an accidental position; and he went no
further with it. No deﬁnite words of love had crossed
their lips as yet, and suspension at this point was
desirable now. However, he walked slowly, to make
the remainder of the distance as long as possible; but
atlesttheycametothebend,andtherestoftheir
progress wasinfullviewoftheotherthree. Thedry
land was reached, and he set her down.

Her friends were looking with round, thoughtful

eyes at her and him, and she could see that they had
185

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

been talking of her. He hastily bade them farewell,
and splashed back along the stretch of submerged
road.

The four moved on together as before, till Marian
broke the silence by saying—

' ‘No—in all truth; we have no chance against her!’
She looked joylessly at Tess.

‘What do you mean?’ asked the latter.

‘He likes 'ee best—the very best! We could see
it as he brought ’ee. He would have kissed ’ee, if you
had encouraged him to do it, ever so little.’

'No, no,’ said she.

The gaiety with which they had set out had some-
how vanished; and yet there was no enmity or malice
between them. They were generous young souls;
they had been reared in the lonely country nooks
where fatalisrn is a strong sentiment, and they did not
blame her. Such supplanting was to be.

Tess’s heart ached. There was no concealing from
herself the fact that she loved Angel Clare, perhaps
all the more passionately from knowing that the
others had also lost their hearts to him. There is
contagion in this sentiment, especially among women.
And yet that same hungry heart of hers compassion.
ated her friends. Tess’s honest nature had fought
against this, but too feebly, and the natural result
had followed.

‘1 will never stand in your way, nor in the way of
either of you!’ she declared to Retty that night in the
bedroom (her tears running down). ‘ I can’t help this,
my dear! I don’t think marrying is in his mind at
all; butifhewereeventoaskmelshmildrefusehim,
as I should refuse any man.’ -

‘Oh! would you? Why?’ said wondering Retty.

'It cannot be! But I will be plain. Putting my-
self quite on one side, I don’t think he will choose either
0 you.’

‘I have never expected it—thought of it!’ moaned

Retty. ‘But 0! I wish I was dead!’
:86

 

THE RALLY

The poor child, torn by a feeling which she hardly
understood, turned to the other two girls who came
upstairs just then.

‘We be friends with her again,’ she said to them.
‘She thinks no more of his choosing her than we do.’

So the reserve went off, and they were conﬁding
and warm.

‘I don’t seem to care what I do now,’ said Marian,
whose mood was tuned to its lowest bass. ‘1 was
going to marry a dairyman at Stickleford, who's asked
me twice; but—my soul—I would put an end to my-
;elﬁrather’n be his wife now! Why don’t ye speak,

zz ’

‘To confess, then,’ murmured 122, ‘I made sure
to-day that he was going to kiss me as he held me;
and I lay still against his breast, hoping and hoping.
and never moved at all. But he did not. I don't like
hiding here at Talbothays any longer! I shall go
hwome.’

The air of the sleeping-chamber seemed to palpitate
with the hopeless passion of the girls. They writhed
feverishly under the oppressiveness of an emotion
thrust on them by cruel Nature’s law—an emotion
which they had neither expected nor desired. The
incident of the day had fanned the ﬂame that was
burning the inside of their hearts out, and the torture
was almost more than they could endure. The differ-
ences which distinguished them as individuals were
abstracted by this passion, and each was but portion
of one organism called sex. There was so much frank-
ness and so little jealousy because there was no hope.
Each one was a girl of fair common sense, and she did
not delude herself with any vain oonoeits, or deny her
love, or give herself airs, in the idea of outshining the
others. The full recognition of the futility of their
infatuation, from a social point of view; its purpose-
less beginning; its self —bounded outlook; its lack
of everything to justify its existence in the eye of
civilization (while lacking nothing in the eye of

187

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Nature); the one fact that it did exist, ecstasizing
themtoaldllingjoy;allthisimpartedtothema
resignation, a dignity, which a practical and sordid
expectation of winning him as a. husband would have
destroyed.

They tossed and turned on their little beds, and
the cheese-wring dripped monotonously downstairs.

‘B’ you awake, Tess?’ whispered one, half- -
hour later.

It was In Huett’s voice.

Tess replied in the afﬁrmative, whereupon also
Retty and Marian suddenly ﬂung the bedclothes of!
them, and sighed—

‘So be we!‘

‘I wonder what she is like—the lady they say his
family have looked out for him!’

‘I wonder,‘ said Izz.

‘Some lady looked out for him?’ gasped Tess,
starting. ‘1 have never heard 0’ that!’

‘0 yes—’tis whispered; a young lady of his own
rank, chosen by his family; a Doctor of Divinity’s
daughter near his father’s parish of Emminster; he
don’t much care for her, they say. But he is sure
to marry her.’

They had heard so very little of this; yet it was
enough to build up wretched dolorous dreams upon,
there in the shade of the night. They pictured all
the details of his being won round to consent, of the
wedding preparations, of the bride's happiness, of her
dress and veil, of her blissful home with him, when
oblivion would have fallen upon themselves as far as
he and their love were concerned. Thus they talked
and ached, and wept till sleep charmed their sorrow
away.

After this disclosure Tess nourished no further
foolish thought that there lurked any grave and
deliberate import in Clare's attentions to her. It was
a passing summer love of her face, for love’s own

temporary sake—nothing more. And the thorny
188

THE RALLY

crown of this sad conception was that she whom he
really did prefer in a cursory way to the rest, she who
knew herself to be more impassioned in nature.
cleverer, more beautiful than they, was in the eyes
of propriety far less worthy of him than the homelier
ones whom he ignored.

XXIV

Amn the oozing fatness and warm ferments of the
Var Vale, at a season when the rush of juices could
almost be heard below the hiss of fertilization, it was
impossible that the most fanciful love should not grow
passionate. The ready boscms existing there were
impregnated by their surroundings.

July passed over their heads, and the Thermidorean
weather which came in its wake seemed an eﬁort on
the part of Nature to match the state of hearts at
Talbothays Dairy. The air of the place, so fresh in
the spring and early summer, was stagnant and
enervating now. Its heavy scents weighed upon
them, and at mid-day the landscape seemed lying in a
swoon. Ethiopic scorchings browned the upper slopes
of the pastures, but there was still bright green herb-
age here where the watercourses purled. And as
Clare was oppressed by the outward heats, so was he
burdened inwardly by waxing fervour of passion for
the soft and silent Tess.

The rains having passed, the uplands were dry.
The wheels of the dairyman's spring—cart, as he sped
home from market, licked up the pulverized surface of.
the highway, and were followed by white ribands of
dust, as if they had set a thin powder-train on ﬁre.
The cows jumped wildly over the ﬁve-barred barten-
gate, maddened by the gad-ﬂy; Dairyman Crick kept
his shirt-sleeves permanently rolled up from Monday
to Saturday: open windows had no effect in ventila-
tion without open doors, and in the dairy-garden the
blacksz and thrushes crept about under the cur-
rent-bushes, rather in the manner of quadtupeds than

19°

THE RALLY

of winged creatures. The ﬂies in the kitchen were
lazy, teasing, and familiar, crawling about in unwanted
places, on the ﬂoor, into drawers, and over the backs
of the millnnaids' hands. Conversations were con-
cerning sunstroke; while butter-making, and still
more butter-keeping, was a despair.

They milked entirely in the meads for coolness
and convenience, without driving in the cows. '
the day the animals obsequiously followed the shadow
of the smallest tree as it moved round the stem with
the diurnal roll; and when the milkers came they
could hardly stand still for the ﬂies.

On one of these afternoons four or ﬁve unmilked
cowschanoedtostandapartfromthegeneralherd,
behind the corner of a hedge, among them being
Dumpling and Old Pretty, who loved Tess’s hands
above those of any other maid. When she rose from
her stool under a ﬁnished cow Angel Clare, who had
beenobservingherforsometirne,askedherifshe
would take the aforesaid creatures next. She silently
assented, and with her stool at arm's length, and the
pail against her knee, went round to where they
stood. Soon the sound of Old Pretty's milk ﬁzzing
into the pail came through the hedge, and then
Angel felt inclined to go round the corner also, to
ﬁnish 03 a hard-yielding milcher who had strayed
there, he being now as capable of this as the dairy-
man himself.

All the men, and some of the women, when milking,
dug their foreheads into the cows and gazed into the
pail. But a few—mainly the younger ones—rested
their heads sideways. This was Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s
habit, her temple pressing the milcher's ﬂank, her eyes
ﬁxed on the far end of the meadow with the quiet of
one lost in meditation. She was milldng Old
thus, and the sun chancing to be on the milking-side it
shone ﬁat upon her pink-gowned form and her white
curtain-bonnet, and upon her proﬁle, rendering it keen
asacameocutfromthedunbackgroundofthecow.

191

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

She did not know that Clare had followed her
round, and that he sat under his cow watching her.
The stillness of her head and features was remark-
able: she might have been in a. trance, her eyes
open, yet unseeing. Nothing in the picture moved
but Old Pretty’s tail and Tess’s pink hands, the latter
so gently as to be a rhythmic pulsation only, as if they
were obeying a reﬂex stimulus, like a beating heart.

How very lovable her face was to him. Yet there
was nothing ethereal about it; all was real vitality.
real warmth, real incarnation. And it was in her
mouth that this culminated. Eyes almost as deep
and speaking he had seen before, and cheeks perhaps
asfair; browsasarched,achinandthroat almost as
shapely; her mouth he had seen nothing to equal on
thefaceoftheearth. Toayoungmanwiththeleast
ﬁre in him that little upward lift in the middle of her
red top lip was distracting, infatuating, maddening.
He had never before seen a. woman's lips and teeth
which forced upon his mind with such persistent
iteration the old Elizabethan simile of roses ﬁlled with
snow. Perfect, he, as a lover, might have called them
oﬁ-hand. But no—they were not perfect. And it
was the touch of the imperfect upon the would-be
perfect that gave the sweetness, because it was that
which gave the humanity.

Clare had studied the curves of those lips so many
times that he could reproduce them mentally with
ease: and now, as they again confronted him, clothed
with colour and life, they sent an aura over his ﬂesh,
a breeze through his nerves, which well-nigh produced
a qualm; and actually produced, by some mysterious
physiological process, a prosaic sneeze.

Shethenbecameconsciousthathewaso
her; but she would not show it by any change of
position, though the curious dream-like ﬁxity dis-
appeared, and a. dose eye might easily have discerned
that the rosiness of her face deepened, and thm
fadedtillonlyatingeofitwasleft.

THE RALLY

TheinﬂuencethathadpassedintoClarelikean
excitation from the sky did not die down. Resolu-
tions, reticences, prudences, fears, fell back like a
defeated battalion. He jumped up from his seat, and,
leaving hispailtobekicked overifthemilcherhad
such a mind, went quickly towards the desire of his
eyes, and, kneeling down beside her, clasped her in
his arms.

Tess was taken completely by surprise, and she
yielded to his embrace with unreﬂecting inevitable-
ness. Having seen that it was really her lover who
had advanced, and no one else, her lips parted, and
she sank upon him in her momentary joy, with some-
thing very like an ecstatic cry.

Hehndbeenonthepointofldssingthattootempt-
ing mouth, but he checked himself, for tender con-
science’ sake.

‘ orgive me, Tess dear!’ he whispered. ‘I ought
to have asked. I—did not know what I was doing.
Idonotmeanitasaliberty. Iamdevotedtoyou,
Tessy, dearest, in all sincerity !'

Old Pretty by this time had looked round, puzzled;
and seeing two people crouching under her where, by
immemorial custom, there should have been only one,
lifted her hind leg crossly.

‘She is angry—she doesn’t know what we mean--
she’ll kick over the milk!’ exclaimed Tess, gently
striving to free herself, her eyes concerned with the
quadruped's actions, her heart more deeply concerned
with herself and Clare.

She slipped up from her seat, and they stood to-
gether, his arm still encircling her. Tess’s eyes, ﬁxed
on distance, began to ﬁll.

'Why do you cry, my darling?’ he said.

‘O—I don't know!’ she murmured.

As she saw and felt more clearly the position she
was in she became agitated and tried to withdraw.

‘Well, I have betrayed my feeling, Tess, at last,’
said he, with a curious sigh of desperation. signifying

193

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

unconsciously that his heart had outrun his judgment.
‘That I—love you dearly and truly I need not say.
But I—it shall go no further now—«it distresses you-—
Iamassurprisedasyouame. Youwillnotthinkl
have presumed upon your defencelessness—been too
quick and unreﬂecting, will you?’

‘N'~—I can’t tell.’

Hehadallowedhertofreeherself; andinamin—
uteortwothemilkingofeachwasresumed. No-
body had beheld the gravitation of the two into one;
and when the dairyman came round by that screened
nook a few minutes later there was not a sign to
reveal that the markedly sundered pair were more to
each other than mere acquaintance. Yet in the
interval since Crick’s last view of them something had
occurred which changed the pivot of the universe for
their two natures; something which, had he known
its quality, the dairyman would have despised, as a.
practical man; yet which was based upon a more
stubborn and resistless tendency than a whole heap
of so—caJled practicalities. A veil had been whisked
aside; the tract of each one’s outlook was to have a
new horizon thenceforward—for a short time or for

a long.

END OF PHASE THE THIRD

 

 

PHASE THE FOURTH

THE CONSEQUENCE

XXV

CLARE, restless. went out into the dusk when evening
drew on, she who had won him having retired to her
chamber.

Thenightwasassultryastheday. Therewas
no coolness after dark unless on the grass. Roads,
garden-paths, the house-fronts, the barton-walls were
warm as hearths, and reﬂected the noontide tempera-
ture into the noctambulist’s face.

He sat on the east gate of the dairy-yard, and
knew not what to think of himself. Feeling had
indeed smothered judgment that day. ‘

Since the sudden embrace, three hours before, th
twain had kept apart. She seemed stilled, almost
alarmed, at what had occurred, while the novelty,
unpremeditation, mastery of circumstance disquieted
him—palpitating, contemplative being that he was.
Hecouldhardlyrealizetheirtmerelationstoeach
other as yet, and what their mutual bearing should be
before third parties thenceforward.

Angelhadcomeaspupiltothisdairyintheidea
thathistemporaryexistenceherewastobethe
merestepisodeinhislife,soonpassedthroughand
early forgotten; he had come as to a place from which
as from a screened alcove he could calmly view the
absorbing world without, and, apostrophizing it with
Walt Whitman—

197

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

medsofmenandwcmenatﬁzedintheusualcostuma,
Howcurimsyouuetomel—

resolve upon a plan for plunging into that world anew.
But, behold, the absorbing scene had been imported
hither. What had been the engrossing world had
dissolved into an uninteresting outer dumb-show;
while here, in this apparently dim and unimpassioned
place, novelty had volcanically started up, as it had
never. for him, started up elsewhere.

Every window of the house being open, Clare could
hear across the yard each trivial sound of the retiring
household. That dairy-house, so humble, so insig—
niﬁcant, so purely to him a. place of constrained so-
journ that he had never hitherto deemed it of sufﬁcient
importance to be reconnoitred as an object of any
quality whatever in the landscape; what was it now?
The aged and lichened brick gables breathed forth
‘Stayl’ The windows smiled, the door coaxed and
beckoned, the creeper blushed confederany. A per-
sonality within it was so far-reaching in her inﬂuence
as to spread into and make the bricks, mortar, and
whole overhanging sky throb with a. burning sensi-
Whose was this mighty personality? A ' -
ma: 's.

It was amazing, indeed, to ﬁnd how great a matter
the life of the obscure dairy had become to him. And,
though new love was to be held partly responsible for
this, it was not solely so. Many besides Angel have
learnt that the magnitude of lives is not as to their -
external displacements, but as to their subjective ex-
periences. The impressionable peasant leads a larger,
fuller, more dramatic life than the pechydermatous
king. Looking at it thus, he found that life was to be
seen of the same magnitude here as elsewhere.

Despite his heterodoxy, faults, and weaknesses,
Clare was a man with a conscience. Te$ was no
insigniﬁcant creature to toy with and dismiss; but a.
woman living her precious life—a life which, to herself
who endured or enjoyed it, possessed as great a

198

THE CONSEQUENCE

dimension as the life of the mightiest to himself.
Upon her sensations the whole world depended to
Tess; through her existence all her fellow-creatures
existed, to her. The universe itself only came into
being for Tess on the particular day in the particular
year in which she was born.

This consciousness upon which he had intruded was
the single opportunity of existence ever vouchsafed
to Tess by an unsympathetic First Cause—her all;
her every and only chance. How then should he look
upon her as of less consequence than himself; as a
pretty triﬂe to caress and grow weary of; and not
deal in the greatest seriousness with the aﬂection
which he knew that he had awakened in her—so
fervid and so impressionable as she was under her
reserv? e; in order that it might not agonize' and wreck
her -

To encounter her daily in the accustomed manner
would be to develop what had begun. Living in
such clam relations, to meet meant to fall into en-
dearment; ﬂesh and blood could not resist it; and,
having arrived at no conclusion as to the issue of such
a tendency, he decided to hold aloof for the present
from occupations in which they would be mutually
engaged. As yet the harm done was small.

But it was not easy to out the resolution
never to approach her. He was driven towards her
by every heave of his pulse.

He thought he would go and see his friends. It
might be possible to sound them upon this. In less
than ﬁve months his term here would have ended,
and after a few additional months spent upon other
farms he would be fully equipped in agricultural
knowledge, and in a position to start on his own
account. Would not a farmer want a wife, and should
a farmer's wife be a drawing—room wax-ﬁgure, or a
woman who understood farming? Notwithstanding
the pleasing answer returned to him by the silence he
resolved to go his journey.

199

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES'

One morning when they sat down to breakfast at
Talbothays Dairy some maid observed that she had
not seen anything of Mr. Clare that day.

‘0 no,’ said ‘ Dairyman Crick. ‘Mr. Clare has
gone hworne to Emminster to spend a few days wi’
his kinsfolk.’

For four impassioned ones around that table the
sunshine of the morning went out at a stroke, and the
birds muﬂied their song. But neither girl by word or
gesture revealed her blankness.

‘He’s ge ' g. on towards the end of his time wi'
me,’ added the dairyman, with a phlegm which uncon-
sciously was brutal; ‘and soI supposeheisbeginning
to see about his plans elsewhere.’

'How much longer is he to bide here?‘ asked Izz
Huett, the only one of the gloom-snicken bevy who
could trust her voice with the question.

The others waited for the dairyman's answer as if
their lives hung upon it; Retty, with parted lips,
gazing on the table-cloth, Marian with heat added to
hegaé'sedness, Tess throbbing and looking out at the
m .

‘Well, I can’t mind the exact day without looking
at my memorandum-book,’ replied Crick, with the
same intolerable unconcern. ‘And even that may be
altered a bit. He'll bide to get a little practice in the
calving out at the straw-yard, for certain. He’ll hang
on till the end of the year I should say.’

Fourmonthsorsooftorturingeestasyinhis
society—of ‘pleasure girdled about with pain.’ After
that the blackness of unutterable night.

At this moment of the morning Angel Clare was
riding along a. narrow lane ten miles distant from the
breakfasters, in the direction of his father's Vicarage at
Emminster, carrying, as well as he could, a little bas-
ket which contained some black-puddings and a bottle
of mead, sent by Mrs. Crick, with her kind respects, to
his parents. The white lane stretched before him, an

m

THE CON SEQUENCE

hiseyeswereuponit; but they were staring into next
year, and not at the lane. He loved her; ought he to
member? Daredhetomarryher? Whatwould
his mother and his brothers say? What would he
himself say a couple of years after the event? That
would depend upon whether the germs of staunch
comradeship underlay the temporary emotion, or
whether it were a sensuous joy in her form only, with
no substratum of everlastingness.

His father’s hill-surrounded little town, the Tudor
church-tower of red stone, the clump of trees near. the
Vicarage, came at last into view beneath him, and he
rode down towards the well-known gate. Casting a
glance in the direction of the church before entering
his home, he beheld standing by the vestry door a
group of girls, of ages between twelve and sixteen,
apparently awaiting the arrival of some other one, who
in a moment became visible; 9. ﬁgure somewhat older
than the school-girls, wearing a hmad-bzimmed hat and
highly-starched cambric morning-gown, with a couple
of books in her hand.

Clare knew her well. He could not be sure that
she observed him; he hoped she did not, so as to
render it unnecessary that he should go and speak to
her, blameless creature that she was. An overpower-
ing reluctance to greet her made him decide that she
had not seen him. The young lady was Miss Mercy
Chant, the only daughter of his father’s neighbour and
£riend, whom it was his parents' quiet hope that he
might wed some day. She was great at
and Bible-classes, and was plainly going to hold a class
now. Clare’s mind ﬂew to the impassioned, summer-
steeped heathens in the Var Vale, their rosy faces
court-patched with cow-droppings; and to one the
most impassioned of them all.

It was on the impulse of the moment that he had
resolved to trot over to Emminster, and hence had
not written to apprise his mother and father, aiming,
however, to arrive about the breakfast hour, before

90!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

they should have gone out to their parish duties. He
was a little late, and they had already sat down to the
morning meal. The group at table jumped up to
welcome him as soon as he entered. They were his
father and mother, his brother the Reverend Felix—
curate at a town in the adjoining county, home for the
inside of a. fortnight—and his other brother, the
Reverend Cuthbert, the classical scholar, and Fellow
and Dean of his College, down from Cambridge for
the long vacation. His mother appeared in a cap and
silver spectacles. and his father looked what in fact he
was—an earnest, God—fearing man, somewhat gaunt,
in years about sixty-ﬁve, his pale face lined with
thought and purpose. Over their heads hung the
picture of Angel's sister, the eldest of the family, six-
teenyeaxshissenior,whohadmarriedamissionary
and gone out to Africa.

01d Mr. Clare was a clergyman of a type which,
within the last twenty years, has well-nigh
out of contemporary life. A spiritual descenth in
the direct line from Wycliﬁ, Huss, Luther, Calvin; an
Evangelical of the Evangelicals, a Conversionist, a
man of Apostolic simplicity in life and thought, he had
inhisrawyouth madeuphismindonceforallonthe
deeper questions of existence, and admitted no further
reasoning on them thenceforward. He was regarded
even by those of his own date and school of thinking
as extreme; while, on the other hand, those totally
opposed to him were unwillingly won to admiration
for his thoroughness, and for the remarkable power he
showed in dismissing all question as to principles in
his energy for applying them. He loved Paul of
Tarsus, liked St. John, hated St. James as much as he
dared, and regarded with mixed feelings Timothy,
Titus, and Philemon. The New Testament was less
a Christiad than a Pauliad to his intelligence—less an
argument than an intoxication. His creed of deter-
minism was such that it almost amounted to a vice, and
quite amounted, on its negative side, to a renunciative

202

THE CONSEQUEN CE

philosophy which had cousinship with that of Schopen-
hauer and Leopardi. He despised the Canons and
Rubric, swore by the Articles, and deemed himself
consistent through the whole category—which in a
way he might have been. One thing he certainly was
—sincere.

To the aesthetic, sensuous, pagan pleasure in natural
life and lush womanhood which his son Angel had
lately been experiencing in Var Vale, his temper would
have been antipathetic in a high degree, had he either
by inquiry or imagination been able to apprehend it.
Once upon a time Angel had been so unlucky as to
say to his father, in a moment of irritation, that it
might have resulted far better for mankind if Greece
had been the source of the religion of modern civiliza-
tion, and not Palestine; and his father’s grief was of
that blank description which could not realize that
there might lurk a thousandth part of a truth, much
less a half truth or a whole truth, in such a proposition.
He had simply preached austerer at Angel for some
time after. But the kindness of his heart was such
that he never resented anything for long, and wel-
comedhissontodaywithasmilewhichwasas
candidly sweet as a child's.

Angel sat down, and the place felt like home; yet
he did not so much as formerly feel himself one of the
family gathered there. Every time that he returned
hither he was conscious of this divergence, and since
he had last shared in the Vicarage life it had grown
even more distinctly foreign to his own than usual. Its
transcendental aspirations—still unconsciously based
on the geocentric view of things, a zenitha] paradise,
a nadiral hell—«were as foreign to his own as if they
had been the dreams of people on another planet.
Latterly he had seen only Life, felt only the great
passionate pulse of existence, unwarped, uncontorted,
untrammelled by those creeds which futiler attempt
to check what wisdom would be content to regulate.

Ontheirparttheysawagreatdiﬁerenceinhim,

203

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

a growing divergence from the Angel Clare of former
times. It was chieﬂy a diﬁerence in his manner that
they noticed just now, particularly his brothers. He
was getting to behave like a. farmer; he ﬂung his legs
about: the muscles of his face had grown more expres-
sive; his eyes looked as much information as his
tongue spoke, and more. The manner of the sdiolar
had nearly disappeared; still more the manner of the
drawing-room young man. A prig would have said
that he had lost culture, and a prude that he had
become coarse Such was the contagion of domi-
ciliary fellowship with the Talbothays nymphs and
sw

ems.

After breakfast he walked with his two brothers,
non-evangelical, well-educated, hall-marked young
men, correct to their remotest ﬁbre; such unimpeach-
able models as are turned out yearly by the lathe of a

tie tuition. They were both somewhat short-
sighted, and whenitwasthecustomtowearasingle
eyeglass and string they wore a single eyeglass and
string; when it was the custom to wear a double glass
they wore a double glass; when it was the custom to
wear spectacles they wore spectacles straightway, all
without reference to the particular variety of ddect in
their own vision. When Wordsworth was enthroned
they carried pocket copies; and when Shelley was be-
littled they allowed him to grow dusty on their shelves.
When Correggio’s Holy Families were admired, they
admired Correggio’s Holy Families; when he was de-
cried in favour of Velasquez, they sedulously followed
suit without any personal objection.

If these two noticed Angel’s growing social inept-
ness, he noticed their growing mental limitations.
Felix seemed to him all Church; Cuthbert all College.
His Diocesan Synod and Visitations were the main-
springs of the world to the one; Cambridge to the
other. Each brother candidly recognized that there
were a. few unimportant scores of millions of outsiders
in civilized society, persons who were neither Uni-

204

THE CONSEQUENCE

versity men nor churchmen; but they were to be
tolerated rather than reckoned with and respected.

They were both dutiful and attentive sons, and
were regular in their visits to their parents. Felix,
though an offshoot from a far more recent point in the
devolution of theology than his father, was less self-
sacriﬁcing and More tolerant than his
father of a contradictory opinion, in its aspect as a
danger to its holder, he was less ready than his father
to pardon it as a slight to his own teaching. Cuthbert
was, upon the whole, the more liberal-minded, though,
with greater subtlety, he had not so much heart.

As they walked along the hillside Angel's former
feeling revived in him—that whatever their advan~
tages by comparison with himself, neither saw or set
forth life as it really was lived. Perhaps, as with many
men, their opportunities of observation were not so
good as their opportunities of expression. Neither had
an adequate conception of the complicated forces at
work outside the smooth, and gentle current in which
they and their associates ﬂoated. Neither saw the
diﬁerence between local truth and universal truth;
that what the inner world said in their clerical and
academic hearing was quite a diﬂerent thing from
what the outer world was thinking.

‘I suppose it is farming or nothing for you now,
my dear fellow,’ Felix was saying, among other things,
to his youngest brother, as he looked through his
spectacles at the distant ﬁelds with sad austerity.
‘And, therefore, we must make the best of it. But I
do entreat you to endeavour to keep as much as
possible in touch with moral ideals. Farming, of
course, means roughing it externally; but high think-
ing may go with plain living, nevertheless.’

‘Of course it may,’ said Angel. 'Was it not
proved nineteen hundred years ago—if I may trespass
upon your domain a little? Why should you think,
Felix, thatI mnlikelytodropmyhighthinkingand
my moral ideals?’

9°S

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Well, I fancied, from the tone of your letters and
our conversation-it may be fancy only—that you
were somehow losing intellectual grasp.- Hasn’t it
struck you, Cuthbert?’

‘Now, Felix,’ said Angel drily, ‘we are very good
friends, you know; each of us treading our allotted
circles; but if it comes to intellectual grasp, I think
you, as a contented dogmatist, had better leave mine
alone, and inquire what has become of yours.’

They returned down the hill to dinner, which was
ﬁxed at any time at which their father's and mother’s
morning work in the parish usually concluded. Con-
venience as regarded afternoon callers was the last
thing to enter into the consideration of unselﬁsh Mr.
and Mrs. Clare; though the three sons were suﬁieiently
in unison on this matter to wish that their parents
would conform a little to modern notions.

The walk had made them hungry, Angel in par-
ticular, who was now an outdoor man, accustomed
to the profuse dupes imptq of the dairyman’s some-
what coarsely-laden table. But neither of the old
people had arrived, and it was not till the sons were
almost tired of waiting that their parents entered.
The self-denying pair had been occupied in coaxing
the appetites of some of their sick parishioners, whom
they. somewhat inconsistently, tried to keep impris—
oned in the ﬂesh, their own appetites being quite for-
gotten.

The family sat down to table, and a frugal meal of
cold viands was deposited before them. Angel looked
round for Mrs. Crick's black-puddings, which he had
directedtobenicelygrilled, astheydidthematthe
dairy, and of which he wished his father and mother to
appreciate the marvellous herbal savours as highly as
he did himself.

‘Ah! you are looking for the black-puddings, my
dear boy,’ observed Clare's mother. ‘But I am sure
you will not mind doing without them, as I am sure
your father and I shall not, when you know the reason.

206

THE CONSEQUENCE

I suggested to him that we should take Mrs. Crick’s
kind present to the children of the man who can earn
nothing just now because of his attacks of delirium
tremens; and he agreed that it would be a great
pleasure to them; so we did.’

‘Of course,’ said Angel cheerfully, looking round for
the mead.

‘ I found the mead so extremely alooholic,’ continued
his mother, ‘that it was quite unﬁt for use as a bever-
age, but as valuable as-rum or brandy in an -
gency; so I have put it in my medicine-chest.’

‘We never drink spirits at this table, on principle,’
added his father.

A1331: what shall I tell the dairyman's wife?’ said

‘The truth, of course,’ said his father.

‘I rather wanted to say we enjoyed the mead and
the black-puddings very much. She is a. kind, jolly
sortofbody,andissuretoaskmedirectlyl return.’

‘You cannot, if we did not,’ Mr. Clare answered
lucidly.

‘éh—no; though that mead was a drop of pretty
tipp e.’

'A what?’ said Cuthbert and Felix both.

‘Oh—Jtis an expression they use down at Talbo-
thays,’ replied Angel, blushing. He felt that his
parentswererightintheirpmtioeifwrongintheir
want of sentiment, and said no more. -

m

It was not till the evening, after family prayers, that
Angel found opportunity of broaching to his father one
or two subjects near his heart. He had strung him-
selfuptothepurposewhilelmeelingbehindhis
brothers on the carpet, studying the little nails in the
heels of their walking-boots. When the service was
over they went out of the room with their mother, and
Mr. Clare and himself were left alone.

Theyoungmanﬁxstdiscussedwithﬂieelderhis
plans for'the attainment of his position as a farmer
on an extensive scale—either in England or in the
Coloni. His father then told him that, as he had
notbeenputtotheexpenseofsendingAngelupto
Cambridge, he had felt it his duty to set by a sum of
moneyeveryyeartowardsthepurchaseorleaseof
land for him some day, that he might not feel himself
unduly slighted.

‘As far as worldly wealth goes,’ continued his
father, ‘you will no doubt stand far superior to your
brothers in a few .'

This considerateness on old Mr. Clare’s part led
Angel onward to the other and dearer subject. He
observed to his father that he was then six-and-twenty,
and that when he should start in the farming business
hewouldrequireeyesinthebackofhisheadtoseeto
all matters—some one would be necessary to super-
intend the domestic labours of his establishment whilst
he was aﬁeld. Would it not be well, therefore, for
him to marry?

His father seemed to think this idea not unreason-
able; and then Angel put the question—

208

THE CONSEQUENCE

‘Whatkindofwifedoyouthinkwmldbebestfm'
me as a. thrifty hard-working farmer?’ ‘

‘A truly Christian woman, who will be a help and
acomforttoyouinyourgoings—outandyourcomings—
in. Beyond that, it really matters little. Such an
one can be found; indeed, my earnest-minded friend
and neighbour, Dr. Chant—’

‘But ought she not primarily to be able to milk
cows, churn good butter, make immense cheeses;
know how to sit hens and turkeys, and rear duckens,
to direct a ﬁeld of labourers in an emergency, and
estimate the value of sheep and oalves?’

‘Yes; a farmer’s wife; yes, certainly. It would
be desirable.’ Mr. Clare, the elder, had plainly never
thought of these points before. ‘I was going to add,’
he said, ‘that for a pure and saintlywoman you will
not ﬁnd one more to your true advantage, and certain-
ly not more to your mother’s mind and my own, than
your friend Mercy, whom you used to show a certain
interest in. It is true that my neighbour Chant's
daughter has lately caught up the fashion of the
younger clergy round about us for decorating the
Communion-table—altar, as I was shocked to hear
her call it one day—with ﬂowers and other stulf on
festival occasions. But her father, who is quite as
opposed to such ﬂummery as I, says that can be cured.
It is a mere girlish outbreak which, I am sure, will
not be permanent.’

‘Yes, yes; Mercy is good and devout, I know.
But, father, don't you think that a. young woman
equally pure and virtuous as Miss Chant, but one who,
in place of that lady‘s ecclesiastical accomplishments,
understands the duties of farm life as well as a farmer
himself, would suit me inﬁnitely better?’

His father persisted in his conviction that a. knowl-
edge of a. farmer’s wife’s duties came second to a
Pauline View of humanity; and the impulsive Angel,
wishing to honour his father's feelings and to advance
the cause of his heart at the same time, grew specious.

209

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

He said that fate or Providence had thrown in his way
a woman who possessed every qualiﬁcation to be the
helpmate of an agriculturist, and was decidedly of a.
serious turn of mind. He would not say whether or
not she had attached herself to the sound Low Church
School of his father; but she would probably be open to
conviction on that point; she was a. regular church-goer
of simple faith; honest-hearted, receptive, intelligent,
graceful to a. degree, chaste as a vestal, and, in personal
appearance, exceptionally beautiful.

‘Is she ofafamily suchasyou would caretomarry
into~a lady, in short?’ asked his startled mother,
who had come softly into the study during the con-
versation.

‘She is not what in common parlance is called a
lady,’ said Angel, unﬂinchingly, ‘for she is a cottager's
daughter, as I am proud to say. But she is a lady,
nevertheless—~in feeling and nature.’

‘Mercy Chant is of a very good family.’

‘Pooh l—what's the advantage of that, mother?’
said Angel quickly. ‘How is family to avail the wife
of a. alien who has to rough it as I have, and shall have
to do ’

‘Mercy is accomplished. And accomplishments
have their charm,’ returned his mother, looking at him
through her silver spectacles.

‘As to external accomplishments, what will be the
use of them in the life I am going to lead?—while as
to her reading, I can take that in hand. She’ll be apt
pupil enough, as you would say if you knew her.
She's brim full of poetry—actualized poetry, if I may
use the expression. She lives what paper-poets only
write. . . . And she is an unimpeachable Christian, I
am sure; perhaps of the very tribe, genus, and species
you desire to propagate.’

‘0 Angel, you are mocking!’

‘Mother, I beg pardon. But as she really does
attend Church almost every Sunday morning, and is a.
good Christian girl, I am sure you will tolerate any

“0

THE CON SEQUENCE

social shortcomings for the sake of that quality, and
feel that I may do worse than choose her.‘ Angel
waxed quite earnest on that rather automatic ortho-
doxy in his beloved Tess which (never dreaming that it
mightstandhiminsuchgoodstead)hehadbeen
prone to slight when observing it practised by her and
the other millcmaids, because of its obvious unreality
amid beliefs essentially naturalistic.

In their sad doubts as to whether their son had
himself any right whatever to the title he claimed for
the unknown young woman, Mr. and Mrs. Clare
began to feel it as an advantage not to be overlooked
that she at least was sound in her views; especially
as the conjunction of the pair must have arisen by
an act of Providence; for Angel never would have
made orthodoxy a condition of his choice. They said
ﬁnally that it was better not to act in a. hurry, but that
they would not object to see her.

Angel therefore refrained from declaring more
particulars now. He felt that, single-minded and self-
sacriﬁciug as his parents were, there yet existed certain
latent prejudices of theirs, as middle—class people,
which it would require some tact to overcome. For
though legally at liberty to do as he chose, and though
their daughter-in-law’s qualiﬁcations could make no
practical diﬁerence to their lives, in the probability of
her living far away from them, he wished for aﬁection’s
sake not to wound their sentiment in the most im-
portant decision of his life.

He observed his own inconsistencies in dwelling
upon accidents in Tess’s life as if they were vital
features. It was for herself that he loved Tess; her
soul, her heart, her substance—not for her sldll in the
dairy, her aptness as his scholar, and certainly not for
her simple formal faith-professions. Her unsophisti-
cated open-air existence required no varnish of con-
ventionality to make it palatable to him. He held
that education had as yet but little affected the beats
of emotion and impulse on which domestic happiness

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

depends. It was probable that, in the lapse of ages,
improved systems of moral and intellectual training
would appreciably, perhaps considerably, elevate the
involuntary and even the unconscious instincts of
human nature; but up to the present day culture, as
far as he could see, might be said to have aﬁected only
the mental epiderm of those lives which had been
brought under its inﬂuence. This belief was con-
ﬁrmed by his experience of women, which, having
latterly been extended from the cultivated middle-
class into the rural community, had taught him how
much less was the intrinsic diﬂerence between the good
and wise woman of one social stratum and the good
and wise woman of another social stratum, than be-
tween the good and bad, the wise and the foolish, of
the same stratum or class.

It was the morning of his departure. His brothers
hadalreadyleftthevicaragetoproceedonawalking
tour in the north, whence one was to return to his
college, and the other to his curacy. Angel might
have accompanied them, but preferred to rejoin his
sweetheart at Talbothays. He would have been an
awkward member of the party; for, though the most
appreciative humanist, the most ideal religionist, even
the best-versed Christologist of the three, there was
alienation in the standing consciousness that his
squareness would not ﬁt the round hole that had been
prepared for him. To neither Felix nor Cuthbert had
he ventured to mention Tess.

His mother made him sandwiches, and his father
accompanied him, on his own mare, a little way along
the road. Having fairly well advanced his own aﬁairs,
Angel listened in a. willing silence, as they jogged on
together through the shady lanes, to his father's
account of his parish diﬂiculties. and the coldness of
brother clergymen whom he loved, because of his
strict interpretations of the New Testament by the
light of what they deemed a pernicious Calvinistic

octrine.

211

THE CON SEQUENCE

‘Pernicious!’ said Mr. Clare, with genial scorn;
and he proceeded to recount experiences which would
show the absurdity of that idea. He told of wondrous
conversions of evil livers of which he had been the
instrument, not only amongst the poor, but amongst
the rich and well—to—do; and he also candidly admitted
many failures.

As an instance of the latter, he mentioned the case

of a young upstart squire named d'Urberville, living
some forty miles 06, in the neighbourth of Trant-
ridge.
‘Not one of the ancient d'Urbervilles of Kingsbere
and other places?‘ asked his son. ‘That curiously
historic worn-out family with its ghostly legend of the
coach—and-four?’

‘0 no. The original d’Urbervilles decayed and
disappeared sixty or eighty years ago—at least, I
believeso. ’I’hisseemstobeanewfamilywhichhas
taken the name; for the credit of the former knightly
line I hope they are spurious, I’m sure. But it is odd
to hear you express interest in old families. I thought
you set less store by them even than I.’

‘You misapprehmd me, father; you often do,’
said Angel with a little impatience. ‘Politically I am
sceptical as to the virtue of their being old. Some of
the wise even among themselves “exclaim '
their own succession,” as Hamlet puts it; but lyrically,
dramatically, and even historically, I am tenderly
attached to them.’

This distinction, though by no means a subtle one,
was yet too subtle for Mr. Clare the elder, and he
went on with the story he had been about to relate;
which was that after the death of the senior so-called
d’Urberville the young man developed the most
culpable passions, though he had a blind mother,
whose condition should have made him know better.
A knowledge of his career having come to the ears of
Mr. Clare, when he was in that part of the country
preaching missionary sermons, he boldly took occasion

213

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

to speak to the delinquent on his spiritual state.
Though he was a stranger, occupying another’s pul-
pit, he had felt this to be his duty, and took for his
text the words from St. Luke: ‘Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be required of thee!’ The young man
much resented this directness of attack, and in the
war of words which followed when they met he did
not scruple publicly to insult Mr. Clare, without re-
spect for his grey hairs.

Angel ﬂushed with distress.

‘Dear father,’ he said sadly, ‘I wish you would
not expose yourself to such gratuitous pain from
scoundrels!’

‘Pain?’ said his father, his rugged face shining in
the ardour of self-abnegation. "The only pain to me
was pain on his account, poor, foolish young man.
Do you suppose his incensed words could give me
any pain, or even his blows? “Being reviled we
bless; being persecuted we suﬁer it; being defamed
we entreat; we are made as the ﬁlth of the world,
and as the offscouring of all things unto this day."
Those ancient and noble words to the Corinthians are
strictly true at this present hour.’

‘Not blows, father? He did not proceed to
blows?"

‘No, he did not. Though I have borne blows
from men in a mad state of intoxication.’

‘No!’

‘A dozen times, my boy. What then? I have
saved them from the guilt of murdering their own
ﬂesh and blood thereby; and they have lived to thank
me, and praise God.’

‘May this young man do the same!’ said
fervently. ‘But I fear otherwise. from what you say.’

‘We’ll hope, neverthelesé,’ said Mr. Clare. ‘And
I continue to pray for him, though on this side of the
grave we shall probably never meet again. But,
after all, one of those poor words of mine may spring
upinhisheartasagoodseedsomeday.’

nu

THE CONSEQUENCE

Now. as always, Clare’s father was sanguine as a
child; and though the younger could not accept his
parent’s narrow dogma he revered his practice, and
recognized the hero under the pietist. Perhaps he
revered his father’s practice even more now than ever,
seeing that, in the question of making Tessy his wife,
his father had not once thought of inquiring whether
she were well provided or penniless. The same un-
worldliness was what had necessitated Angel's getting
a living as a farmer, and would probably keep his
brothers in the position of poor parsons for the term
of their activities; yet Angel admired it none the less.
Indeed, despite his own heterodoxy, Angel often felt
thathewasneaxertohisfatheronthehumanside
than was either of his brethren.

XXVII

AN up-hill and down-dale ride of twenty-odd miles
through a. garish mid—day atmosphere brought him in
the afternoon to a detached knoll a mile or two west
of Talbothays, whence he again looked into that green
trough of sappiness and humidity, the valley of the
Var or Froorn. Immediately he began to descend from
the upland to the fat alluvial soil below, the atmos-
phere grew heavier; the languid perfume of the summer
fruits, the mists, the hay, the ﬂowers, formed therein
a vast pool of odour which at this hour seemed to
make the animals, the very bees and butterﬂies,
drowsy. Clare was now so familiar with the spot that
he knew the individual cows by their names when, a
long distance off, he saw them dotted about the meads.
Itwaswithasenseofluxurythatherecognizedhis
power of viewing life here from its inner side, in a
way that had been quite foreign to him in his student-
days; and, much as he loved his parents, he could not
help being aware that to come here, as now, after an
experience of home-life, aﬁected him like throwing oﬂ
splints and bandages; even the one customary curb
on the humours of English rural societies being absent
in this place, Talbothays having no resident landlord.

Not a human being was out-of—doors at the dairy.
The denizens were all enjoying the usual afternoon
nap of an hour or so which the exceedingly early
hours kept in summer—time rendered a. necessity. At
the door the wood~hooped pails, sodden and bleached
by inﬁnite scrubbings, hung like hats on a stand upon
the forked and peeled limb of an oak ﬁxed there for
that purpose; all of them ready and dry for the

216

THE CONSEQUENCE

evening milking. Angel entered, and went

the silent passages of the house to the back quarters,
where he listened for a moment. Sustained snores
came from the cart-house, where some of the men
were lying down; the grunt and squeal of sweltering
pigs arose from the still further distance. The large-
leaved rhubarb and cabbage plants slept too, tha’r
broad limp surfaces hanging in the sun like half-closed
umbrellas.

He unbridled and fed his horse, and as he re—entered
the house the clock struck three. Three was the
afternoon skimming—hour; and, with the stroke, Clare
heard the creaking of the ﬂoor-boards above, and then
the touch of a descending foot on the stairs. It was
Tess’s, who in another moment came down before
his eyes.

She had not heard him enter, and hardly realized
his presence there. She was yawning, and he saw
theredinteriorofhermouthasifithadbeena
snake's. She had stretched one arm so high above
her coiled-up cable of hair that he could see its satin
delicacy above the sunburn; her face was ﬂushed with
sleep, and her eyelids hung heavy over their pupils.
The brim-fulness of her nature breathed from her. It
was a moment when a woman’s soul is more incarnate
than at any other time; when the most spiritual beauty
bespeaks itself ﬂesh; and sex takes the outside place
in the presentation.

Then those eyes ﬂashed brightly through their
ﬁlmy heaviness, before the remainder of her face was
well awake. With an oddly compounded look of
gladness, shyness, and surprise, she exdaimed—

'0 Mr. Clare! How you frightened me——I———’

There had not at ﬁrst been time for her to think
of the changed relations which his declaration had
introduced; but the full sense of the matter rose up in
her face when she encountered Clara’s tender look as
he stepped forward to the bottom stair.

‘Dear, darling Tessy!’ he whispered, putting his

217

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

arm round her, and his face to her ﬂushed cheek.
‘Don’t, for Heaven’s sake, Mister me any more. I
have hastened back so soon because of you!’

Tess’s excitable heart beat against his by way of
reply; and there they stood upon the red-brick ﬂoor
of the entry, the sun slanting in by the window upon
his back, as he held her tightly to his breast; upon
her inclining face, upon the blue veins of her temple,
upon her naked arm, and her neck, and into the depths
of her hair. Having been lying down in her clothes,
she was warm as a sunned cat. At ﬁrst she would
not look straight up at him, but her eyes soon lifted,
and his plumbed the deepness of the ever-varying
pupils, with their radiating ﬁbrils of blue, and black,
and gray, and violet, while she regarded him as
Egg‘m at her second waking might have regarded

‘I've got to go a-sldmming,’ she pleaded, ‘and I
have on’y old Deb to help me to-day. Mrs. Crick is
gone to market with Mr. Crick, and Retty is not well,
and the others are gone out somewhere, and won’t be
home till milking.’

As they retreated to the milk-house Deborah
Fyander appeared on the stairs.

‘I have come back, Deborah,’ said Mr. Clare,
upwards. ‘So I can help Tess with the skimming;
and, as you are very tired, I am sure, you needn't
come down till milking-time.’

Possibly the Talbothays milk was not very thorough-
ly skimmed that afternoon. Tess was in a dream
wherein familiar objects appeared as having light and
shade and podtion, but no particular outline. Every
time she held the skimmer under the pump to cool it
for the work her hand trembled, the ardour of his
aﬁection being so palpable that she seemed to ﬂinch
under it like a plant in too burning a. sun.

Then he pressed her again to his side, and when
she had done running her foreﬁnger round the leads

to cut oil the cream—edge, he cleaned it in nature's
218

THE CONSEQUEN CE

way; for the unconstrained manners of Talbothays
dairy came convenient now.

‘I may as well say it now as later, dearest,’ he
resumed gently. ‘I wish to ask you something of a
very practical nature, which I have been thinking of
ever since that day last week in the meads. I shall
soonwanttomarry,and,beingafarmer,yousee1
shall require for my wife a woman who lmows all
about the management of farms. Will you be that
woman, Tessy?’

He put it in that way that she might not think he
had yielded to an impulse of which his head would
disapprove.

She turned quite careworn. She had bowed to
the inevitable result of proximity, the necessity of
loving him; but she had not mlmﬂated upon this
sudden corollary, which, indeed, Clare had put before
her without quite meaning himself to do it so soon.
With pain‘ that was like the bitterness of dissolution
she murmured the words of her indispensable and
sworn answer as an honourable woman.

‘0 Mr. Clare—I cannot be your wife—I cannot
be!’

The sound of her own decision seemed to break
Tess’s very heart, and she bowed her face in her
grief.
‘But, Tess!’ he said, amazed at her reply, and
holding her still more greedily close. ‘Do you say
no? Surely you love me?’

‘0 yes, yes! And I would rather be yours than
anybody’s in the world.’ returned the sweet and honest
voice of the distressed girl. ‘But I canth
you!’

‘Tess,’ he said, holding her at arm’s length, ‘you
are engaged to marry some one else!’

‘No, no !'

‘Then why do you refuse me?’

‘I don’t want to many! I have not thought of
doing it. I cannot! I only want to love you.’

219

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

'But why?’

Driven to subterfuge, she stammered—

‘Your father is a person, and your mother wouldn’t
likeyoutomanysuchasme. Shewillwantyouto
marry a lady.’

‘Nonsense—I have spoken to them both. That
was partly why I went home.’

‘I feel I cannot—never, never!’ she echoed.

‘Is it too sudden to be asked thus, my Pretty?’

‘Yes—I did not expect it.’

‘If you will let it pass, please, Tesy, I will give
you time,’ he said. ‘ It was very abrupt to come home
and speak to you all at once. I’ll not allude to it again
for a while.’

She again took up the shining skimmer, held it
beneath the pump, and began anew. But she could
not, as at other times, hit the exact under-surface of
the cream with the delicate dexterity required, try as
she might: sometimes she was cutting down into the
milk, sometimes in the air. She could hardly see, her
eyes having ﬁlled with two blurring tears drawn forth
by a grief which, to this her best frimd and dear
advocate, she could never explain. ’

‘I can’t skim—I can't!’ she said, turning away from
him.

Not to agitate and hinder her longer the considerate
Clare began talking in a more general way:

‘You quite misapprehend my parents. They are
the most simple-mannered people alive, and quite
unambitious. They are two of the few remaining
Evangelical sd'iool. Tessy, are you an Evangelical?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘You go to church very regularly, and our parson
here is not very High, they tell me.‘

Tess’s ideas on the views of the parish clergyman,
whom she heard every week, seemed to be rather
rrloar-tlel vague than Clare's, who had never heard him
at .

‘I wish I could ﬁxmy mind on what Ihearthere

22°

THE CONSEQUENCE

more ﬁrmly than I do,’ she remarked as a safe gener-
ality. ‘It is often a great sorrow to me.’

ShespokesounaﬂectedlythatAngelwassurein
his heart that his father could not object to her on
religious grounds, even though she did not know
whether her principles were High, Low, or Broad.
He himself knew that, in reality, the confused beliefs
which she held, apparently imbibed in childhood,
were, it anything, Tractarian as to phraseology, and
Pantheistic as to essence. Confused or otherwise, to
disturb th was his last desire:

Lave thou thy sister, whm she prep,

Her early Heavm, her baggy viewl,
Nor thou with shadow' ‘ t confine
A life that leads melodiom days.

He had occasionally thought the counsel less hon-
est than musical; but he gladly conformed to it
now.

He spoke further of the incidents of his visit, of his

, father's mode of life, of his zeal for his principles; she
grew serener, and the undulations disappeared from
her skimming; as she ﬁnished one lead after another
he followed her, and drew the plugs for letting down
the milk.

‘I fancied you looked a little downcast when you
came in.’ she ventured to observe, anxious to keep
away from the subject of herself.

‘Yes—well, my father has been talking a good deal
to me of his troubles and difﬁculties, and the sub-
ject always tends to depress me. He is so zealous
that he gets many snubs and buﬁetings from people
of a diﬁerent way of thinln'ng from himself, and I don’t
like to hear of such humiliations to a man of his age,
the more particularly as I don't think earnestness does
anygoodwhen carriedsofar. Hehasbeentellingme
of a very unpleasant scene in which he took part quite
recently. He went as the deputy of some missionary
society to preach in the neighbourhood of Trantridge,

231

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

a place forty miles from here, and made it his business
to expostulate with a lax young cynic he met with
somewhere about there—son of some landowner up
that way—and who has a mother aﬂiicted with blind-
ness. My father addressed himself to the gentleman
point-blank, and there was quite a disturbance. It
was very foolish of my father, I must say, to intrude
his conversation upon a stranger when the prob-
abilities were so obvious that it would be useless. But
whatever he thinks to be his duty, that he'll do, in
season or out of season: and, of course, he makes
many enemies, not only among the absolutely vicious,
but among the easy-going, who hate being bothered.
He says he glories in what happened, and that good
may be done indirectly; but I wish he would not so
wear himself out now he is getting old, and would
leave such pigs to their wallowing.‘ ‘

Tess’s look had grown hard and worn, and her
ripe mouth tragical; but she no longer showed any
tremulousness. Clare's revived thoughts of his father
prevented his noticing her particularly; and so they
went on down the white row of liquid rectangles till
they had ﬁnished and drained them OE, when the
other maids returned, and took their pails, and Deb
came to scald out the leads for the new milk. As
ﬁgs; withdrew to go aﬁeld to the cows he said to her
so y—

‘And my question, Tessy?’

‘O no-—no!' replied she with grave hopelessness,
as one who had heard anew the turmoil of her own
get in the allusion to Alec d‘Urberville. ‘It can't

She went out towards the mead, joining the other
milkmaids with a bound, as if trying to make the open
air drive away her sad constraint. All the girls drew
onward to the spot where the cows were grazing in
the further mead, the bevy advancing with the bold
grace of wild anirnals——the reckless unchastened
motion of women accustomed to unlimited Win

222

THE CONSEQUEN CE

which they abandoned themselves to the air as a
swimmer to the wave. It seemed natural enough to
him now that Tess was again in sight to choose a
mate from unconstrained Nature, and not from the
abodes of Art.

XXVIII

Han refusal, though unexpected, did not permanently
daunt Clare. His experience of women was great
enough for him to be aware that the negative often
meant nothing more than the preface to the aﬂirma-
tive; and it was little enough for him not to know
that in the manner of the present negative there lay
a great exception to the dallyings of coyness. That
she had already permitted him to make love to her
he read as an additional assurance, not fully trowing
that in the ﬁelds and pastures to ‘sigh gratis’ is by no
means deemed waste; lovemaking being here more
often accepted inconsiderater and for its own sweet
sake than in the carking anxious homes of the am-
bitious, where a girl's craving for an establishment
parald yzes her healthy thought of a paxion as an
en

‘Tess, why did you say “no” in such a positive
way?’ he asked her in the course of a few days.

She started. ,

‘Don't ask me. I told you why—partly. I am
not good enough—not worthy enough.’

‘How? Not ﬁne lady enough?’

‘Yes—something like that,’ murmured she. ‘Your
friends would scorn me.’

‘ Indeed, you mistake them—my father and mother.
As for my brothers, I don’t care—' He clasped his
ﬁngers behind her back to keep her from slipping
away. ‘Now—you did not mean it, sweetP—I am
sure you did not! You have made me so restless that
I cannot read, or play, or do anything. I am in no
hurry, Tess. but I want to know—to hear from your

224

THE CONSEQUENCE

own warm lips—that you will some day be mine—any
time you may choose; but some day?’

She could only shake her head and look away
from him.

Clare regarded her attentively, conned the char-
acters of her face as if they had been hieroglyphics.
The denial seemed real.

‘Then I ought not to hold you in this way—ought
I? I have no right to you——no right to seek out where
you are, or to walk with you! Honestly, Tess, do
you love any other man?’

‘How can you ask?’ she said, with continued self-
suppression.

‘I almost know that you do not. But then, why
do you repulse me?’

‘I don't repulse you. I like you to—tell me you
love me; and you may always tell me so as you go
about with me—and never oﬁend me.’

‘But you will not accept me as a husband?’

‘Ah—that’s diﬁerent—it is for your good, indeed,
my dearest! 0, believe me, it is only for your sake!
I don’t like to give myself the great happiness 0'
promising to be yours in that way—bmuse—because
I am sure I ought not to do it.’

‘But you will make me happy!’

‘Ah—you think so. but you don’t know!’

At such times as this, apprehending the grounds
of her refusal to be her modest sense of incompe-
tence in matters social and polite, he would say that
she was wonderftu well informed and versatile—-
which was certainly true, her natural quickness, and
her admiration for him, having led her to pick up his
vocabulary, his accent, and fragments of his knowl-
edge, to a surprising extent. After these tender con-
tests and her victory she would go away by herself
under the remotest cow, if at milking-time. or into
the sedge, or into her room, if at a leisure interval, and
mourn silently, not a minute after an apparently
phlegrnatic negative.

225

TESS OF THE D‘URBERVILLES

The struggle was so fearful; her own heart was
so strongly on the side of his—two ardent hearts
against one poor little conscience—that she tried to
fortify her resolution by every means in her power.
She had come to Talbothays with a made-up mind.
On no account could she agree to a step which might
afterwards cause bitter rueing to her husband for his
blindness in wedding her. And she held that what
her conscience had decided for her when her mind
was unbiassed ought not to be overruled now.

‘Why don't somebody tell him all about me?’ she
said. ‘It was only forty miles off—why hasn’t it
reached here? Somebody must know!’

Yet nobody seemed to know; nobody told him.

For two or three days no more was said. She
guessed from the sad countenances of her chamber
companions that they regarded her not only as the
favourite, but as the chosen; but they could see for
themselves that she did not put herself in his way.

Tess had never before lmown a time in which the
thread of her life was so distinctly twisted of two
strands, positive pleasure and positive pain. At the
next cheese-making the pair were again left alone
together. The dairyman himself had been lending a
hand; but Mr. Crick, as well as his wife, seemed
latterly to have acquired a suspicion of mutual interest
between these two; though they walked so circum-
spectly that suspicion was but of the faintest. Any-
how, the dairyman left them to themselves.

They were breaking up the masses of curd before
putting them into the vats. The operation resembled
the act of crumbling bread on a large scale; and amid
the immaculate whiteness of the curds Tess Durhey-
ﬁeld’s hands showed themselves of the pinkness of the
rose. Angel, who was ﬁlling the vats with his hand-
fuls, suddenly ceased, and laid his hands ﬂat upon hers.
Her sleeves were rolled far above the elbow, and
bending lower he kissed the inside vein of her soft

arm
226

THE CONSEQUEN CE

Although the early September weather was sultry,
her arm, from her dabbling in the curds, was as cold
and damp to his mouth as a new-gathered mushroom,
and tasted of the whey. But she was such a sheaf of
susceptibilities that her pulse was accelerated by the
touch, her blood driven to her ﬁnger-ends, and the
cool arms ﬂushed hot. Then, as though her heart had
said, ‘Is coyness longer necessary? Truth is truth
between man and woman, as between man and man,’
she lifted her eyes, and they beamed devotedly into
his, as her lip rose in a tender half-smile.

‘Do you lmow why I did that, Tess?’ he said.

‘Because you love me very much!’

‘Yes, and as a preliminary to a new entrenty.’

‘Not againl’

She looked a sudden fear that her resistance might
break down under her own desire.

‘O, Tessy!’ he went on, ‘I cannot think why you
are so Why do you disappoint me so?
You seem almost like a coquette, upon my life you
do—a coquette of the ﬁrst urban water! They blow
hot and blow cold, just as you do; and it is the very
last sort of thing to expect to ﬁnd in a retreat like
Talbothays. . . . And yet, dearest,’ he quickly added,
observing how the remark had cut her, ‘I know you
to be the most honest, spotless creature that ever lived.
So how can I suppose you a ﬂirt? Tess, why don't
you like the idea of being my wife, if you love me as
you seem to do?’

‘I have never said I don’t like the idea, and I
never could say it; because—it isn't true!’

The stress now getting beyond endurance, her lip
quivered, and she was obliged to go away. Clare was
so pained and perplexed that he ran after and caught
her in the passage.

‘Tell me, tell me!‘ he said, passionately clasping
her, in forgetfulness of his curdy hands: ‘do tell me
that you won't belong to anybody but me!’

‘I will, I will tell you!’ she exclaimed. ‘And I

227

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

will give you a complete answer, if you will let me go
now. I will tell you my experiences—all about my-
self—alll'

‘Your experiences, dear; yes, certainly; any num-
ber.’ He expressed assent in loving satire, looking
into her face. ‘My Tess has, no doubt, almost as
many experiences as that wild convolvulus out there
on the garden hedge, that opened itself this morning
for the ﬁrst time. Tell me anything, but don't use
that wretched expression any more about not being
worthy of me.’

‘I will try-not! And I’ll give you my reasons
tomorrow—next week.’

‘Say on Sunday?’

“Yes, on Sunday.’

At last she got away, and did not stop in her
retreat till she was in the thicket of pollard willows at
the lower side of the barton, where she could be quite
unseen. Here Tess ﬂung herself down upon the
rustling undergrowth of spear-grass, as upon a bed,
and remained crouching in palpitating misery broken
by momentary shoots of joy, which her fears about
the ending could not altogether suppress.

In reality, she was drifting into acquiescence.
Every seeosaw of her breath, every wave of her blood,
every. pulse singing in her ears, was a voice that joined
with nature in revolt against her scrupulousness.
Reckless, inconsiderate acceptance of him; to close
with him at the altar, revealing nothing, and chancing
discovery; to snatch ripe pleasure before the iron teeth
of pain could have time to shut upon her: that was
what love counselled; and in almost a terror of
Tess divined that, despite her many months of lonely
self-chastisement, wrestlings, communings, schemes
to lead a future of austere isolation, love's counsel
would prevail.

The afternoon adVanced, and still she remained
among the willows. She heard the rattle of taking

down the pails from the forked stands; the ‘waow-
2:8

THE CONSEQUENCE

waow!’ which accompanied the getting together of
the cows. But she did not go to the They
would see her agitation; and the dairyman, ' ' g
the cause to be love alone, would good-naturedly
tease her; and that harassment could not be borne.

Her lover must have guessed her overwrought state,
and invented some excuse for her non-appearance, for
no inquiries were made or calls given. At half-past
six the sun settled down upon the levels, with the
aspect of a. great forge in the heavens, and presently a
monstrous pumpkin-like moon arose on the other
hand. The pollard willows, tortured out of their
natural shape by incessant choppings, became spiny-
hairedmonstersastheystoodupagainstit. She
went in, and upstairs without a light.

It was now Wednesday. Thursday came, and
Angel looked thoughtfully at her from a distance, but
intruded in no way upon her. The indoor milkmaids,
Marian and the rest, seemed to guess that something
deﬁnite was afoot, for they did not force any remark
upon her in the bedchamber. Friday passed; Satur-
day. Toomortow was the day.

‘I shall give way—I shall say yes— I shall let my-
self marry him—I cannot help it !' she jealously panted,
with her hot face to the pillow that night, on hearing
one oftheothergirlssighhisnameinhersleep. ‘I
can’t bear to let anybody have him but me! Yet it is
awrongtohim,andmayk:illhimwhenheknowsl
O my heart—0——0——Ol’

XXIX

‘Now, who mid ye think I've heard news 0' this
morning?’ said Dairyman Crick, as he sat down to
breakfast next day, with a ﬁddling gaze round upon
the munching men and maids. ‘Now, just who mid
ye think?’

One guessed, and another guessed. Mrs. Crick did
not guess, because she knew already.

‘Well,’ said the dairyman, "tis that slack-twisted
’hore’s-bird of a feller, Jack Dollop. He’s lately got
married to a widow-woman.’

‘Not 'Jack Dollop? A villain—to think 0’ that!’
said a milker.

The name entered quickly into Tess Durbeyﬁeld’s
consciousness, for it was the name of the lover who
had wronged his sweetheart, and had afterwards been
so roughly used by the young woman’s mother in the
butter-chum.

‘And has he married the valiant matron's daughter,
as he promised?’ asked Angel Clare absently, as he
turned over the newspaper he was reading at the little
table to which he was always banished by Mrs. Crick,
in her sense of his gentility.

‘Not be, sir. Never meant to,’ replied the dairy-
man. ‘As I say, ’tis a widow-woman, and she had
money, it seems—ﬁfty poun' a year or so; and that
was all he was after. They were married in a great
hurry; and then she told him that by marrying she
had lost her ﬁfty poun' a year. Just fancy the state 0’
my gentleman’s mind at that news! Never such a.
cat-and-dog life as they've been leading ever since!
Serves him well beright. But onluckily the poor
woman gets the worst o’t.’

230

THE CONSEQUENCE

‘Well, the silly body should have told en sooner
that the ghost of her ﬁrst man would trouble him,’
said Mrs. Crick. \

‘Ay; ay,’ responded the dairyman indecisively.
‘Still, you can see exactly how 'twas. She wanted a
home, and didn't like to run the risk of losing him.
Don’t ye think that was something like it, maidens?

He glanced towards the row of girls.

‘She ought to ha’ told him just before they went
to church, when he could hardly have backed out.’
exclaimed Marian.

‘Yes, she ought,’ agreed 122.

‘She must have seen what he was after, and should
ha.’ refused him.’ cried Retty spasmodically.

‘And what do you say, my dear?’ asked the dairy-
man of Tess.

‘I think she ought—to have told him the true state
of things—or else refused him—I don’t know,’ replied
Tess, the bread-and-butter choking her.

‘Be cust if I’d have done either o’t,’ said Beck
Knibbs, a. married helper from one of the cottages.
‘All’s fair in love and war. I’d [13' married en just as
she did, and if he’d said two words to me about not
telling him beforehand anything whatsomdever about
my ﬁrst chap that I hadn’t chose to tell, I’d ha’
knocked him down wi' the rolling-pin——a scram little
feller like he! Any woman could do it.’ ‘

The laughter which followed this sally was supple-
mented only by a sorry mile, for form’s sake, from
Tess. What was comedy to them was tragedy to her;
and she could hardly bear their mirth. She soon rose
from table, and, with an impression that Clare would
follow her, went along a little wriggling path, now
stepping to one side of the channels, and
now to the other, till she stood by the main stream of
the Vet. Men had been cutting the water—weeds
higher up the river, and masses of them were ﬂoating
pest her—moving islands of green crow-foot, whereon
she might almost have ridden; long loels of which»

231

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

weedhadlodgedagainstthepilesdriventokeepthe
cows crossing.

Yes, there was the pain of it. This question of a
woman telling her story—the heaviest of crosses to
herself—seemed but amusement to others. It was as
if people should laugh at martyrdom.

‘Tessy!’ came from behind her, and Clare sprang
across the gully, alighting beside her feet. ‘My wife
——soon!’

‘No, no; I cannot. For your sake, 0, Mr. Clare;
for your sake, I say no!’

‘Tess !'

‘Still I say no!’ she repeated.

Not expecting this, he had put his arm lightly round
her waist the moment after speaking, beneath her
hanging tail of hair. (The younger dairymaids, in-
cluding Tess, breakfasted with their hair loose on
Sunday mornings before building it up extra high for
attending church, a style they could not adopt when
milking with their heads against the cows.) If she
had said ‘Yes' instead of ‘No' he would have kissed
her; it had evidently been his intention; but her de-
termined negative deterred his scrupulous heart.
Their condition of domiciliary comradeship put her, as
the woman, to such disadvantage by its enforced in-
tercourse that he felt it unfair to her to exercise any
pressure of blandishment which he might have honestly
employed had she been better able to avoid him. He
released her momentarily imprisoned waist, and with-
held the kiss.

Italltumedonthatrelease. Whathadgivenher
strength to refuse him this time was solely the tale of
the widow told by the dairyman;,and that would have
been overcome in another moment. But Angel said
no more; his face was perplexed; he went away.

Day after day they met——-somewhat less constantly
than before; and thus two or three weeks went by.
The end of September drew near, and she could see
in his eye that he might ask her again.

532

THE CONSEQUENCE

His plan of procedure was diﬁerent now-as though
he had made up his mind that her negatives were,
after all, only ooyness and youth startled by the
novelty of the proposal. The ﬁtful evasiveness of her
manner when the subject was under discussion coun-
tenanced the idea. So he played a more coaxing
game; and while never going beyond words, or at-
tempting the renewal of caresses, he did his utmost

y.

In this way Clare persistently wooed her in under-
tones like that of the purling milk—at the cow’s side,
at skimmings, at butter-makings, at cheese-makings,
among broody poultry, and among farrowing pigs—as
no milkmaid was ever wooed before by such a man.

Tess knew that she must break down. Neither
ateligimissensecfacertainmoralvalidityinthe
previous union nor a conscientious wish for candour
could hold out against it much longer. She loved him
so passionately, and he was so godlike in her eyes;
and being, though untrained, instinctively reﬁned, her
nature cried for'his tutelary guidance. And thus,
though Tess kept repeating to herself, 'I can never
be his wife,’ the words were vain. A proof of her
weakness lay in the very utterance of what calm
strength would not have taken the trouble to formu-
late. Every sound of his voice beginning on the old
subject stirred her with a terrifying bliss. and she
coveted the recantation she feared.

His manner was—what man's is not?-—so much
that of one who would love and cherish and defend
her under any conditions, changes, charges, or revela-
tions, that her gloom lessened as she basked in it.
The season meanwhile was drawing onward to the
equinox, and, though it was still ﬁne, the days were
much shorter. The dairy had again worked by
morning candle-light for a long time; and a fresh
renewal of Clare’s pleading occurred one morning
between three and four.

Shehadrunupinherbedgowntohisdoortomll

933

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

himasusual;thenhadgonebackwdxesandcall
the others; and in ten minutes was walking to the
head of the stairs with the candle in her hand. At
the same moment he came down his steps from above
in his shirt-sleeves and put his arm across the stair-
way.
‘Now, Miss Flirt, before you go down,’ he said
peremptorily. ‘It is a fortnight since I spoke, and
this won’t do any longer. You must tell me what you
mean, or I shall have to leave this house. My door
was ajar just now, and I saw you. For your own
safety I must go. You don’t know. Well? Is it to
be yes at last?’

‘I am only just up, Mr. Clare, and it is too early
to take me to task!’ she pouted. ‘You need not call
me Flirt. ’Tis cruel and untrue. Wait till by-and-
by. Please wait till by-and-by! I will really think
seriously about it between now and then. Let me go
downstairs !'

She looked a little like what he said she was as,
holding the candle sideways, she tried to smile away
the seriousness of her words.

‘Call me Angel, then, and not Mr. Clare.’

1 Angel‘r

‘Angel dearest—why not?’

"Twould mean that I agree, wouldn't it?’

‘It would only mean that you love me, even if you
cannotmarryme;andyouweresogoodastoown
that long ago.’

‘Very well, then, “Angel dearest," if I must,‘ she
murmured, looking at her candle, a roguish curl coming
upon her mouth, notwithstanding her suspense.

Clare had resolved never to kiss her until he had
obtained her promise; but somehow, as Tess stood
there in her prettin tucked-up milking gown, her hair
carelessly heaped upon her head till there should be
leisure to arrange it when skimming and milking were
done, he broke his resolve, and brought his lips to her
cheek for one moment. She passed downstairs very

'34

THE CONSEQUENCE

quickly, never looking back at him or saying another
word. The other maids were already down, and the
subject was not pursued. Except Marian they all
looked wistfully and suspiciously at the pair, in the
sad yellow rays which the morning candles emitted
in contrast with the ﬁrst cold signals of the dawn
without.

When skimming was done—which, as the milk
diminished with the approach of autumn, was a lessen
ing process day by day—~Retty and the rest went out.
The lovers followed them.

‘Our tremulous lives are so different from theirs,
are they not?’ he musineg observed to her, as he
regarded the three ﬁgures tripping before him through
the frigid pallor of opening day.

‘Not so very diﬁerent, I think,’ she said.

‘Why do you think that?’

‘There are very few women’s lives that are not—
tremulous,’ Tess replied, pausing over the new word
as if it impressed her. ‘There’s more in those three
than you think.’

‘What is in them?’

‘Almost either of ’em,’ she began, ‘would W
perhaps would make—a properer wife than I. And
perhaps they love you as well as I—almost.’

‘0, Tessyl’

There were signs that it was an exquisite relief to
her to hear the impatient exclamation, though she had
resolved so intrepidly to let generosity make one bid
against herself. That was now done, and she had not
the power to attempt self-immolation a second time
then. They were joined by a milker from one of the
cottages, and no more was said on that which con-
cerned them so deeply. But Tess knew that this day
would decide it.

In the afternoon several of the dairyman’s house-
hold and assistants went down to the meads as usual,
3 long way from the dairy, where many of the cows
were milked without being driven home. The supply

’35

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

was getting less as the animals advanced in calf. and
the supemumerary milkers of the lush green season
had been dismissed.
The work progressed leisurely. Each pailful was
intotallcamthatstoodinalaxgespring-
waggon which had been brought upon the scene; and
when they were milked the cows trailed away.
Dairyman Crick, who was there with the rest, his
wrapper gleaming mix-anxiously white against a leaden
evening sky, suddenly looked at his heavy watch.
‘Why, ’tis later than I thought,’ he said. ‘Begaxll
We shan't be soon enough with this milk at the
station, if we don't mind. There’s no time today to
take it home and mix it with the bulk afore sending
off. It must go to station straight from here. Who’ll
drive it across?’ .
Mr. Clare volunteered to do so, though it was none
of his business, asking Tess to accompany him. The
evening, though sunless, had been warm and muggy
for the season, and Tess had come out with her milk-
ing-hood only, naked-armed and jacketless; certainly
not dressed for a drive. She therefore replied by
glancing over her scant habiliments; but Clare gently
urged her. She assented by relinquishing her pail and
stool to the dairyman to take home; and mounted the
spring-waggon beside Clare.

XXX

IN the diminishing daylight they went along the level
roadway through the meads, which stretched away
into gray miles, and were backed in the extreme edge
of distance by the swarthy and abrupt slopes of Egdon
Heath. On its summit stood clumps and stretches of
ﬁr—trees, whose notched tips appeared like battle.-
mented towers crowning black-fronted castles of en-
chantment.

They were so absorbed in the sense of being close
to each other that they did not begin talking for a
long while, the silence being broken only by the
ducking of the milk in the tall cans behind them.
The lane they followed was so solitary that the hazel-
nuts had remained on the boughs till they slipped
from their shells, and the blackberries hung in heavy
clusters. Every now and then Angel would ﬂing the
lash of his whip round one of these, pluck if oﬁ, and
give it to his companion.

Thedullskysoonbegantotellitsmeaningby
sending down herald-drops of rain, and the stagnant
air of the day changed into a ﬁtful breeze which played
about their faces. The quicksilvery glaze on the
rivers and pools vanished; from broad mirrors of
light they changed to lustreless sheets of lead, with a.
surface like a rasp. But that spectacle did not affect
her preoccupation. Her countenance, a natural carna-
tion slightly embrowned by the season, had deepened
its tinge with the beating of the rain-drops; and
her hair, which the pressure of the cows’ ﬂanks had,
as usual, caused to tumble down from its fastenings
and stray beyond the curtain of her calico bonnet,

’37

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

was made clammy by the moisture, till it hardly was
better than seaweed.

‘I ought not to have come, I suppose,’ she mur-
mured, looking at the sky.

‘I am sorry for the rain,’ said be. ‘But how glad
I am to have you here!‘

Remote Egdon disappeared by degrees behind the
liquid gauze. The evening grew darker, and, the
roads being crossed by gates, it was not safe to drive
gismterthanatawalldngpace. Theairwasrather
‘I am so afraid you will get cold, with nothing
upon your arms and shoulders,’ he said. ‘Creep
close to me, and perhaps the drizzle won’t hurt you
much. I should be sorrier still if I did not think that
the rain might be helping me.’

She imperceptibly crept closer, and he wrapped
round them both a large piece of sail-cloth, which
was sometimes used to keep the sun of! the milk-cans.
Tess held it from slipping oﬁ him as well as herself,
Clare’s hands being occupied.

‘Now we are all right again. Ah—no, we are
not! It runs down into my neck a little, and it must
still more into yours. That's better. Your arms are
like wet marble, Tess. Wipe them in the cloth. Now,
if you stay quiet, you will not get another drop. Well,
dear—about that question of mine—that long-stand-
ing question?’

The only reply that he could hear for a little while
was the smack of the horse’s boots on the moistening
road, and the duck of the milk in the cans behind them.

‘Do you remember what you said?’

‘I do,’ she replied.

‘Before we get home, mind.’

(I'll try:

He said no more then. As they drove on the
fragment of an old manor house of Caroline date rose
against the sky, and was in due course passed and
left behind.

238

THE OONSEQUENCE

‘That,’ he observed, to entertain her. ‘is an in-
teresting old place—one of the several seats which
belonged to an ancient Norman family formerly of
great inﬂuence in this country, the d’Urbervilles. I
never pass one of their residences without thinking of
them. There is something very sad in the extinction
of a family of renown, even if it was ﬁerce, domineer-
ing, feudal renown.’

‘Yes,’ said Tess.

They crept along towards a point in the expanse
of shade just at hand at which a feeble light was

‘ ’ to assert its presence. a spot where. by
day, a ﬁtful white streak of steam at intervals upon
the dark green background denoted intermittent
moments of contact between their secluded world and
modern life. Modern life stretched out its steam
feeler to this point three or four times a day, touched
the native existences, and quickly withdrew its feeler
again. as if what it touched had been uncongenial.

They reached the feeble light, which came from
the smoky lamp of a little railway station; a poor
enough terrestrial star, yet in one sense of more
importance to Talbothays Dairy and mankind than
the celestial ones to which it stood in such humiliating
contrast. The cans of new milk were unladen in the
rain, Tess getting a little shelter from a neighbouring
holly-tree.

Then there was the hissing of a train, which drew
up almost silently upon the wet rails, and the milk
was rapidly swung can by can into the truck. The
light of the engine ﬂashed for a second upon Tess
Durbeyﬁeld's ﬁgure, motionless under the great holly—
tree. No object could have looked more foreign
to the gleaming cranks and wheels than this un-
sophisticated girl, with the round bare arms, the rainy
face and hair, the suspended attitude of a friendly
leopard at pause, the print gown of no date or fashion,
and the cotton bonnet drooping on her brow.

She mounted again beside her lover, with a mute

a39

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

obedience characteristic of impassioned natures at
times, and when they had wrapped themselves up
over head and ears in the sail—cloth again, they
plunged back into the now thick night. Tess was so
receptive that the few minutes of contact with the
whirl of material progress lingered in her thought.

‘Londoners will drink it at their breakfasts to.
marrow, won't they?’ she asked. ‘Strange people
that we have never seen.’

‘Yes—I suppose they will. Though not as we
send it. When its strength has been lowered. so that
it may not get up into their heads.’

‘Noble men and noble women, ambassadors and
centurions, ladies and tradeswomen, and babies who
have never seen a cow.’

‘Well, yes; perhaps; particularly centurions.’

‘W'ho don’t know anything of us, and where it
comes from; or think how we two drove miles across
the moor to-night in the rain that it might reach ’em
in time?’

‘We did not drive entirely on account of these
precious Londoners; we drove a little on our own—
on account of that anxious matter which you will, I
am sure, set at rest, dear Tess. Now, permit me to
put it in this way. You belong to me already, you
know; your heart, I mean. Does it not?’

‘You know as well as I. O yes—yes!’

‘Then, if your heart does, why not your hand?‘

‘My only reason was on account of you—on
account of a question. I have something to tell
you—4

‘But suppose it to be entirely for my happiness,
and my worldly convenience also?’

‘0 yes; if it is for your happiness and worldly
convenience. But my life before I came here—J
want—'

‘Well, it is for my convenience as well as my
happiness. If I have a very large farm, either English

or colonial, you will be invaluable as a wife to me;
240

THE CON SEQUENCE

betterthanawomanoutofthelargestmansioninthe
country. So please—please, dear Tessy, disabuse
yourmindofthefeelingthatyouwillstandinmy
way.’

‘But my history. I want you to know it—you
must let me tell you—you will not like me so well !'

‘Tell it if you wish to, dearest. This precious
history, then. Yes, I was born at so and so, Anno
Domini—’

‘I was born at Marlott,’ she said, catching at his
words as a. help, lightly as they were spoken. 'And I
grew up there. And I was in the Sixth Standard
when I left school, and they said I had great aptness,‘
and should make a good teacher, so it was settled that
I should be one. But there was trouble in my family;
father was not very industrious, and he drank a little.’

‘Yes, yes. Poor child! Nothing new.’ He pressed
her more closely to his side.

‘And then—there is something very unusual about
it—about me. 1—1 was—4 ,1

Tess’s breath quickened.

‘Yes, dearest. Never mind.’

‘I—I—am not a Durbeyﬁeld, but a d'Urberville
——-a descendant of the same family as those that
owned the old house we passed. And—we are all
gone to nothing!’

‘A d'Urbervillel—Indeed! And is that all the
trouble, dear Tess?’

‘Yes,’ she answered faintly.
thi‘sgllell—why should I love you less after knowing

‘ was told by the dairyman that you hated old
families.’

He laughed.

‘Well, it is true, in one sense. I do hate the
aristocratic principle of blood before everything, and
do think that as reasoners the only pedigrees we ought
to respect are those spiritual ones of the wise and
virtuous, without regard to corporeal paternity. But

24!

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

I am extremely interested in this news-you can have
no idea how interested I am! Are not you interested
yourself in being one of that well-known line?’

‘No. I have thought it sad—especially since
coming here, and knowing that many of the hills and
ﬁelds I see once belonged to my father's people. But
other hills and ﬁelds belonged to Retty's people, and
perhaps others to Marian’s, so that I don’t value it
particularly.’

‘Yes—it is surprising how many of the present
tillers of the soil were once owners of it, and I some-
times wonder that a certain school of politicians don't
make capital of the circumstance; but they don't
seem to know it. . . . I wonder that I did not see
the resemblance of your name to d’Urberville, and
trace the manifest corruption. And this was the
carldng secret!‘

She had not told. At the last moment her courage
had failed her, she feared his blame for not telling
him sooner; and her instinct of self-preservation was
stronger than her candour.

'Of course,’ continued the unwitting Clare, ‘1
should have been glad to know you to be descended
exclusively from the long-suﬁering, dumb, unrecorded
rank and ﬁle of the English nation, and not from the
self-seeking few who made themselves powerful at the
expense of the rest. But I am corrupted away from
that by my affection foi- you, Tess [he laughed as he
spoke], and made selﬁsh likewise. For your own sake
I rejoice in your descent. Society is hopelessly snob-
bish,andthisfactofyourextraetionmaymakean
appreciable difference to its acceptance of you as
my wife, after I have made you the well-read woman
that I mean to make you. My mother too, poorsoul,
willthinksomuchbetterofyouonaecountofit.
Tess, you must spell you name correctly—d'Utber-
ville—from this very day.’

‘I like the other way rather best.’

‘But you must, dearest! Good heavens, why, dams

242

THE CONSEQUEN CE

of mushroom would jump at such a pos-
session! By the bye, there's one of that kidney who
has taken the name—where have I heard of him?—
Up in the neighbourhood of The Chase, I think.
Why, he is the very man who had that rumpus
with my father I told you of. What an odd 00-
incidence!’

‘Angel, I think I would rather not take the name!
It is unlucky, perhaps!’

She was agitated.

‘Now then, Mistress Teresa d’Urberville, I have
you. Take my name, and so you will escape yours!
The secret is out, so why should you any longer refuse
me ’

‘If it is sure to make you happy to have me as
your wife, and you feel that you do wish to marry me,
very, very much—’

‘I do, dearest, of course!’

‘I mean, that it is only your wanting me very
much, and being hardly able to keep alive without
me, whatever my oﬁences. that would make me feel
I ought to say I will.’

‘You will—you do say it. I know! You will be
mine for ever and ever.’

’ 1%? clasped' her close and lnssed' her.

6 es.)

She had no sooner said it than she burst into a dry
hard sobbing, so violent that it seemed to rend her.
Tex was not a. hysterical girl by any means, and he
was surprised.

‘Why do you cry, dearest?’

‘I can’t tell—quitel—I am so glad to think—of
being yours, and making you happy!’

‘But this does not seem very much like gladness,
my Tessy!’

‘I mean—I cry because I have broken down in
my vow! I said I would die unmarried!’

‘But if you love me you would like me to be your
husband?’

’43

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Yes, yes, yes! But 0, I sometimes wish I had
never been born!’

‘Now, my dear Tess, if I did not know that you
are very much excited, and very inexperienced, I
should say that remark was not very complimentary.
How came you to wish that if you care for me? Do
you care for me? I wish you would prove it in some
way.’

‘How can I prove it more than I have done?’
she cried, in a distraction of tenderness. ‘Will this
prove it more?’

She clasped his neck, and for the ﬁrst time Clare
learnt what an impassioned woman’s kisses were like
upon the lips of one whom she loved with all her heart
and soul, as Tess ‘loved him.

‘There——now do you believe?’ she asked. ﬂushed,
and wiping her eyes.

‘Yes. I never really doubted—never, nevetl'

So they drove on through the gloom, forming one
bundle inside the sail-cloth, the horse going as he
would, and the rain driving against them. She had
consented. She might as well have agreed at ﬁrst.
The ‘appetite for joy’ which pervades all creation,
that tremendous force which sways humanity to its
purpose, as the tide sways the helpless weed, was not
tolhe controlled by vague lucubrations over the social‘
ru me.

‘I must write to my mother,’ she said. ‘You
don't mind my doing that?’

‘Oi course not, dear child. You are a child to me,
Tess, not to know how very proper it is to write to
your mother at such a time, and how wrong it would
be in me to object. Where does she live?’

‘At the same place—Marlott. 0n the further side
of Blackmoor Vale.’

‘Ah. then I have seen you before this summer-——’

'Yes; at that dance on the green; but you would
not dance with me. O, I hope that is of no ill—omen
for us now !'

244

XXXI

TESS wrote a most touching and urgent letter to her
mother the very next day, and by the end of the week
a response to her communication arrived in Joan
Durbeyﬁeld’s wandering last-century hand.

anTzss,—J write these few lines H ' theywill ﬁnd you
wdl,sstheyleaverneatPresent,ﬂmnkGod it. Denr'l‘ess,weare
nllgladtol-Iearthatymmgoingreaﬂyfobemnniedsoon. But
with respect to your question, Tes, I say betwem ourselvu, quite
' tebutverystrong,thatounosmutdoymsayawordofymr
ygone Trouble to him. Jdid not tell everything to your Father, he
being so Proud on aeomxnt of his Repeatability, which, I your
Intendedisthe same. Manyawomnn—eomeofthe tmthe
Land—have had In Trouble in their time; and why should you Trumpet
ywmwhmathersdon't Trumpet theirs? No girl wouldbemch aFool,
' yasitisso sgo,andnotyourFoultntull. Jshsllantwer
emmeifyouaskme times. Besides, mostbearinmind that,
ha ‘ ittobeyourChildish Naturetote all that’sin ourheart—
Ionimp l—Jmndeyoupromisemenevertoletitmtby ordorDeed,
having your Welfare in in Mind; and you most solemnly did promise
itgoing from this Door. {have notnnmed either that Questionoryour
coming marriage to your Father, as he would blah it everywhere, poor
Simple ¥am Sp and d H
Dear ess,keepupyour irits, wemeantosen you: We
head of Cyder for your Wedding. knowing thae is not much in your
parts,andthinSourStuﬁwhntthereis. Sonomoreatpresmt,nnd
with kind love to your Young Mam—From your nﬁectte. Mother,
1. Datum.

‘0, mother, mother!‘ murmured Tess.

She was recognizing how light was the touch 0
events the most oppressive upon Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld’s
elastic spirit, Her mother did not see life as Tess
saw it. That haunting episode of‘bygone days was
to her mother but a passing accident. But perhaps
her mother was right as to the course to be followed,

245

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

whatever she might be in her reasons. Silence seemed,
on the face of it, best for her adored one’s happiness:
silence it should be.

Thus steadied by a. command from the only person
in the world who had any shadow of right to control
her action, Tess grew calmer. The responsibility was
shifted, and her heart was lighter than it had been for
weeks. The days of declining autumn which followed
her assent, beginning with the month of October,
formed a season through which she lived in spiritual
altitudes more nearly approaching ecstasy than any
other period of her life.

Therewashardlyatouchofearthinherlovefor
Clare. To her sublime trustfulness he was all that
goodness could be——knew all that a. guide, philosopher,
and friend should know. She thought every line in
the contour of his person the perfection of masculine
beauty, his soul the soul of a saint, his intellect that of
a seer. The wisdom of her love for him, as love, sus-
tained her dignity; she seemed to be wearing a crown.
The compassion of his love for her, as she saw it, made
her lift up her heart to him in devotion. He would
sometimes catch her large, worshipful eyes, that had
no bottom to them, looking at him from their depths,
as if she saw something immortal before her.

She dismissed the past—trod upon it and put it
out, as one treads on a coal that is smouldering and
dangerous.

She had not known that men could be so dis-
interested, chivalrous, protective, in their love for
women as he. Angel Clare was far from all that she
thought him in this respect; absurdly far, indeed; but
he was, in truth, more spiritual than animal; he had
himself well in hand, and was singularly free from
grossness. Though not cold-natured, he was rather
bright than hotaless Byronic than Shelleyan; could
love desperately, but with a love more especially in-
clined to the imaginative and ethereal; it was a fastid-

ious emotion which could jealously guard the loved
246

THE OONSEQUENCE

one against his very self. This amazed and enrapt-
ured Tess, whose slight experiences had been so in-
felicitous till now; and in her reaction from indig-
nation against the male sex she swerved to excess
of honour for Clare.

They unaﬂectedly sought each other’s company; in
her honest faith she did not disguise her desire to be
with him. The sum of her instincts on this matter,
if clearly stated, would have been that the elusive
quality in her sex which attracts men in general might
bedistastefultosoperfectamanafteranavowal
of love, since it must in its very nature carry with it
a suspicion of art.

The country custom of unreserved comradeship
out-of-doors during betrothal was the only custom she
knew, and to her it had no strangeness; though it
seemed oddly anticipative to Clare till he saw how
normal a thing she, in common with all the other
dairy-folk, regarded it. Thus, during this October
month of wonderful afternoons they roved along the
meads by creeping paths which followed the brinks of
trickling tributary brooks, hopping across by little
wooden bridges to the other side, and back again.
They were never out of the sound of some purling
weir, whose buzz accompanied their own murmuring,
while the beams of the sun, almost as horizontal as the
mead itself, formed a pollen of radiance over the
landscape. They saw tiny blue fogs in the shadows
of trees and hedges, all the time that there was bright
sunshine elsewhere. The sun was so near the ground,
and the swand so ﬂat, that the shadows of Clare and
Tess would stretch a quarter of a mile ahead of them,
like two long ﬁngers pointing afar to when the green
alluvial reaches abutted against the sloping sides of
the vale.

Men were at work here and there—for it was the
season for ‘taking up' the meadows, or digging the
little waterways clear for the winter irrigation, and
mending their banks where trodden down by the

247

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

cows. The shovelfuls of loam, black as jet, brought
there by the river when it was as wide as the whole
valley, were an essence of soils, pounded champaigns
of the past, steeped, reﬁned, and subtilized to extraor—
dinary richness, out of which came all the fertility of
the mead, and of the cattle grazing there.

Clare hardin kept his arm round her waist in sight
of these watermen, with the air of a man who was
accustomed to public dalliance, though actually as shy
as she, who, with lips parted and eyes askance on
thﬁa11 labourers, wore the look of a wary ammal’ the
w e.

‘You are not ashamed of owning me as yours
before them!’ she said gladly

‘0 no!’

‘But if it should reach the cars of your friends at
Emmins’oer that you are walldng about like this with
me, a milkmaid—’

‘The most bewitching milkrnaid ever seen.’

‘They might feel it a hurt to their dignity.’

‘My dear girl-a. d’Urberville hurt the dignity of
a Clare! It is a grand card to play—that of your
belonging to such a family, and I am reserving it for
a grand effect when we are married, and have the
proofs of your descent from Parson Tringham. Apart
from that, my future is to be totally foreign to my
family—it will not effect even the surface of their
lives. We shall leave this part of England—perhaps
England itself—and what does it matter how peo-
- ple ?rega.rd us here? You will like going, will you
not ’

She could answer no more than a. bare afﬁrmative,
so great was the emotion aroused in her at the thought
of going through the world with him as his own
familiar friend. Her feelings almost ﬁlled her ears
like a babble of waves, and surged up to her eyes.
She put her hand in his, and thus they went on to
a place where the reﬂected sun glared up from the
river, under a. bridge, with a molten-metach glow that

248

THE CON SEQUENCE

dazzled their eyes, though the sun itself was hidden
by the bridge. They stood still, whereupon little
furred and feathered heads popped up from the
smooth surface of the water; but, ﬁnding that the
disturbing presences had paused, and not passed by,
they disappeared again. Upon this river-brink they
ﬁngered till the fog began to close round them—which
was very early in the evening at this time of the year
——settling on the lashes of her eyes, where it rested
like crystals, and on his brows and hair.

They walked later on Sundays, when it was quite
dark. Some of the dairy-people, who were also out-
of-doors on the ﬁrst Sunday evening after their en-
gagement, heard her impulsive speeches, ecstasized to
fragments, though they were too far 03 to hear the
words discoursed; noted the spasmodic catch in her
remarks, broken into syllables by the leapings of her
heart, as she walked leaning on his arm; her con-
tented pauses, the occasional little laugh upon which
her soul seemed to ride—the laugh of a. woman in
company with the man she loves and has won from
all other women—unlike anything else in nature.
They marked the buoyancy of her tread, like the
skim of a bird which has not quite alighted.

Her affection for him was now the breath and life
of Tess’s being; it enveloped her as a photosphere.
irradiated her into forgetfulness of her past sorrows,
keeping back the gloomy spectres that would persist
in their attempts to touch. her~—doubt, fear, moodi-
ness, care, shame. She knew that they were waiting
like wolves just outside the circumscribing light, but
she had long spells of power to keep them in hungry
subjection there.

A spiritual forgetfulness (to-existed with an intel-
lectual remembrance. She walked in brightness, but
she knew that in the background those shapes of dark-
ness were always spread. They might be receding,
or they might be approaching, one or the other, a little
every day.

249

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

One evening Tess and Clare were obliged to sit
indoors keeping house, all the other occupants of the
domicile being away. As they talked she looked
thoughtftu up at him, and met his two appreciative
eyes.

‘I am not worthy of you—no, I am not!’ she burst
out, jumping up from her low stool as though appalled
at his homage, and the fulness of her own joy thereat.

Clare, deeming the whole basis of her excitement to
be that which was only the smaller part of it, said—

‘I won’t have you speak like it, dear Tess! Dis-
tinction does not consist in the facile use of a con-
temptible set of conventions, but in being numbered
among those who are true, and honest, and just, and
pure, and lovely, and of good report—as you are, my
Tess.’

She struggled with the sob in her throat. How
often had that string of excellenees made her young
heart ache in church of late years, and how strange
that he should have cited them now.

‘Why didn’t you stay and love me when I—was
sixteen; living with my little sisters and brothers,
and you danced on the green? 0, why didn't you,
mdﬁdn't you!’ she said, impetuously clasping her

s.

Angelbegantoeomfortandreassureher,thinldng
to himself, truly enough, what a creature of moods she
was, and how careful he would have to be of her when
she depended for her happiness entirely on him.

‘Ah—why didn’t I stay!’ he said. ‘That is just
what I feel. If I had only known! But you must not
be so bitter in your regret—why should you be?’

With the woman’s instinct to hide she diverged
hastily—

‘I should have had four years more of your heart
than I can ever have now. Then I should not have
wasted my time as I have done—I should have had so
much longer happiness!’

Itwasnomaturewomanwithalongdarkvistaof

250

THE CONSEQUENCE

intrigue behind her who was tormented thus; but a
girl of simple life, not yet one-and-twenty, who had
been caught during her days of immaturity like a
birdinaspringe. Tocalmherselfthe more com-
pletely she rose from her little stool and left the
room, overturning the stool with her skirts as she
went. '

He sat on by the cheerful ﬁreﬁght thrown from a
bundle of green ash-sticks laid across the dogs; the
sticks snapped pleasantly, and hissed out bubbles of
sap from their ends. When she came back she was
herself again.

‘ Do you not think you are just a wee bit capricious,
ﬁtful, Tess?‘ he said, good-humouredly, as he spread a
cushion for her on the stool, and seated himself in the
settle beside her. ‘I wanted to ask you something,
and just then you ran away.’

‘Yes, perhaps I am capricious,’ she murmured.
She suddenly approached him, and put a hand upon
each of his arms. ‘No, Angel, I am not really so—by
Nature, I mean!’ The more particularly to assure
him that she was not, she placed herself close to him
in the settle, and allowed her head to ﬁnd a resting-
plaee against Clare’s shoulder. ‘What did you want
to ask me—I am sure I will answer it,’ she continued
humbly.

‘Well, you love me, and have agreed to marry me,
and hence there follows a thirdly, “When shall the
day be?"1

‘I like living like this.’

‘But,, I must think of starting in business on my
own hook with the new year, or a little later. And
before I get involved in the multifarious details of
my new position I should like to have secured my
partner.’

‘But,’ she timidly answered, ‘to talk quite practi—
cally, wouldn’t ‘it be best not to marry till after all
thatP—Though I can’t bear the thought 0’ your going
away and leaving me here!’

25!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Of course you cannot—and it is not best in this
case. I want you to help me in many ways in making
my start. When shall it be? Why not a fortnight
from now?’

‘No,’ she said, becoming grave; ‘I have so many
things to think of ﬁrst.’

‘But—’

He drew her gently nearer to him.

The reality of marriage was startling when it
loomed so near. Before discussion of the question
had proceeded further there walked round the corner
of the settle into the full ﬁreﬁght of the apartment
Mr. Dairyman Crick. Mrs. Crick, and two of the
milkmaids.

Tessspranglikeanelasticballﬁ‘omhissideto
her feet, while her face ﬂushed and her eyes shone in
the ﬁrelight.

‘I knew how it would be if I sat so close to him!’
she cried, with vexation. ‘I said to myself, they are
suretocome and catch us! Butlwasn'treallysitting
on his knee, though it might ha' seemed as if I was
almost!’

‘Well—if so be you hadn’t told us. I am sure we
shouldn't ha’ noticed that ye had been sitting anywhere
at all in this light,’ replied the dairyman. He con-
tinued to his wife, with the stolid mien of a man who
understood nothing of the emotions relating to matri-
mony——‘Now, Christianer, that shows that folks
should never fancy other folks be supposing things
when they bain't. 0 no, I should never ha’ thought a
word of where she was a sitting to, if she hadn't told
rue—not I.’

‘We are going to be married soon,’ said Clare,
with improvised phlegm.

‘Ah—and be ye! Well, I am truly glad to hear
it, sir. I’ve thought you mid do such a thing for some
time. She's too good for a. dairymaid—I said so the
very ﬁrst day I zid her—and a prize for any man; and

what’s more, a wonderful woman for a. gentleman-
252

THE CONSEQUENCE

farmer’s wife; he won‘t be at the mercy of his baily
wi’ her at his side.’

Somehow Tess disappeared. She had been even
more struck with the look of the girls, who followed
Crick, than abashed by Crick's blunt praise.

After supper, when she reached her bedroom, they
were all present. A light was burning, and each
damsel was sitting up whitely in her bed, awaiting
Tess, the whole like a row of avenging ghosts.

But she saw in a few moments that there was no
malice in their mood. They could scarcely feel as a
loss what they had never expected to have. Their
condition was objective, contemplative.

‘He’s going to her!’ murmured Retty,
never taking eyes 05 Tess. ‘How her face do show
it.’

‘You be going to marry him?’ asked Marian.

‘Yes,’ said Tess.

‘When?’

“Some day.’

They thought that this was evasivenem only.

/ ‘ Yes—going to marry him—a gentlemanl' repeated
Izz Huett.

And by a sort of fascination the three girls, one
after another, crept out of their beds, and came and
stood barefooted round Tess. Retty put her hands
upon Tess's shoulders, as if to realize her friend’s
corporeality after such a miracle, and the other two
laid their arms round her waist, all looking into her
face.

‘How it do seem! Almost more than I can think
of!’ said 122 Huett.

Marian kissed Tess. ‘Yes,’ she murmured as she
withdrew her lips.

‘Was that because of love for her, or because other
lips have touched there by now?’ continued Izz drily
to Marian.

‘I wasn’t thinking 0’ that,‘ said Marian simply. ‘I
was on’y feeling all the strangeness o't—that she is to

253

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

be his wife, and nobody else. I don't say may to it,
not either of us, because we did not think of it——only
loved him. Still, nobody else is to marry'n in the
world—no ﬁne lady, nobody in silks and satins; but
she who do live like we.'

‘Are you sure you don’t dislike me for it?’ said
Tess in a low voice.

They hung about her in their white nightgowns
before replying, as if they considered their answer
might lie in her look.

‘I don’t know—I don’t lcnow,’ murmured Retty
Priddle. ‘I want to hate ’ee; but I cannot!’

‘That's how I feel,’ echoed In and Marian. ‘I
can’t hate her. Somehow she hinders mel’

‘ﬁmgght to marry one of you,’ murmured Tess.

l y 1

‘You are all better than I.’

‘We better than you?’ said the girls in a low, slow
whisper. ‘No, no, dear Tessl’

‘You are!’ she contradicted impetuously. And
suddenly tearing away from their clinging arms, she
burst into a hysterical ﬁt of tears, bowing herself on
the chest of drawers and repeating incessantly, ‘ 0 yes,
yes, yes!'

Havingonoegivenway,sheoouldnotstopherweeping.

‘He ought to have had one of you!’ she cried. ‘I
thinkI oughttomakehimeven now! Youwouldbe
getter for him than—I don’t lmow what I'm saying!

! 01’

They went up to her and clasped her round, but
still her sobs tore her.

‘Get some water,’ said Marian. ‘She's upset by
us, poor thing, poor thing!’

They gently led her back to the side of her bed.
where they kissed her warmly.

‘You are best for'n,’ said Marian. ‘More ladylike,
and a better scholar than we, especially since he has
taught ’ee so much. But even you ought to be proud.
You be proud, I’m sure!’

:54

THE CONSEQUENCE

‘Yes, I am,’ she said; ‘and I am ashamed at so
brealdng down!’

When they were all in bed, and the light was out,
Marian whispered across to her——

“You will think of us when you be his wife, Tess,
and of how we told ’ee that we loved him, and how we
tried not to hate you, and did not hate you, and could
not hate you, because you were his choice, and we
never hoped to be chose by him.’

They were not aware that, at these words, salt,
stinging tears trickled down upon Tess’s pillow anew,
and how she resolved, with a buxsting heart, to tell all
her history to Angel Clare, despite her mother's com-
mand—to let him for whom she lived and breathed
despise her if he would, and her mother regard her as
a fool, rather than preserve a silence which might be
deemed a. treachery to him, and which somehow
seemed a wrong to these.

XXXII

Tms penitential mood kept her from naming the
wedding-day. The beginning of November found its
date still in abeyanoe, though he asked her at the most
tempting times. But Tess's desire seemed to be for
a perpetual betrothal in which everything should
remain as it was then.

The meads were changing now; but it was still
warm enough in early afternoons before milking to
idle there awhile, and the state of dairy-work at this
time of year allowed a spare hour for idling. Looking
over the damp sod in the direction of the sun, 9.
glistening ripple of gossamer webs was visible to their
eyes under the luminary, like the track of moonlight
on the sea. Gnats, knowing nothing of their brief
gloriﬁcation, wandered across the shimmer of this
pathway, irradiated as if they bore ﬁre within them,
then passed out of its line, and were quite extinct. In
the presence of these things he would remind her that
the date was still the question.

Or he would ask her at night, when he accompanied
her on some mission invented by Mrs. Crick to give
him the opportunity. This was mostly a journey to
the farmhouse on the slopes above the vale, to inquire
how the advanced cows were getting on in the straw-
barton to which they were relegated. For it was a
time of the year that brought great changes to the
world of kine. Batches of the animals were sent away
daily to this lying-in hospital, where they lived on
straw till their calves were born, after which event,
and as soon as the calf could walk, mother and off-

spring were driven back to the dairy. In the interval
256

THE CONSEQUEN CE

which elapsed before the calves were sold there was, of
course, little milking to be done, but as soon as the
calf had been taken away the milkmaids would have
to set to work as usual.

Rettu-ning from one of these dark walks they
reached a great gravel-cliff immediately over the levels,
where they stood still and listened. The water was
now high in the streams, squirting through the weirs.
and tinkling under culverts; the smallest gullies were
all full; there was no taking short cuts anywhere. and
foot-passengers were compelled to follow the penna-
nent ways. From the whole extent of the invisi-
ble vale came a multitudinous intonation; it forced
upon their fancy that a great city lay below them,
- and that the murmur was the vociferation of its

‘It seems like tens of thousands of them,’ said
Tess 5 ‘holding public-meetings in market-places,
argumzypreaqhmg.quaﬂelhng.sobbmg.gwanmg.pray-
mg, and cursmg.’

Clare was not particularly heeding.

‘ Did Crick speak to you today, dear, about his not
wagging much assistance during the winter months?’

o.’

‘The cows are going dry rapidly.’

‘Yes. Six or seven went to the straw-barton
yesterday, and three the day before, making nearly
twenty in the straw already. Ah—is it that the farmer
don’t want my help for the calving? O, I am not
wanted here any more! And I have tried so hard
tol

‘Crick didn’t exactly say that he would no longer
require you. But, knowing what our relations were,
he said in the most good-natured and respectful man-
ner possible that he supposed on my leaving at Christ-
mas I should take you with me, and on my asldng
what he would do without you he merely observed
that, as a matter of fact, it was a time of year when he
could do with a very little female help. I am afraid I

257

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

was sinner enough to feel rather glad that he was in
this way forcing your hand.’

‘I don’t think you ought to have felt glad, Angel.
Because ’tis always mournful not to be wanted, even
if at the same time ’tis convenient.’

‘Well, it is convenient—you have admitted that.’
He put his ﬁnger upon her cheek. ‘Ahl’ he said.

‘What?’

‘I feel the red rising up at her having been caught!
But why should I triﬂe so! We will not triﬂe—life is
too serious.’

‘It is. Perhaps I saw that before you did.’

She was seeing it then. To decline to marry him
after all—in obedience to her emotion of last night—
and leave the dairy, meant to go to some strange place, .
not a dairy; for milkmaids were not in request now
calving-time was coming on; to go to some arable
farm where no divine being like Angel Clare was.
She hated the thought, and she hated more the thought
of going home.

‘So that, seriously, dearest Tess,’ he continued,
‘since you will probably have to leave at Christmas,
it is in every way desirable and convenient that I
should carry you oﬁ then as my property. Besides,
if you were not the most uncalculating girl in the
world you would know that we could not go on like
this for ever.’

‘I wish we could. That it would always be sum-
mer and autumn, and you always courting me, and
always thinking as much of me as you have done
through the past summer-time?

‘I always shall.’

‘0, I know you will!’ she cried, with a sudden
fervour of faith in him. ‘Angel, I will ﬁx the day
when I will become yours for always!’

Thus at last it was arranged between them, during
that dark walk home, amid the myriads of liquid voices
on the right and left.

When they reached the dairy Mr. and Mrs. Crick
258

THE CON SEQUEN CE

were promptly told—with injunctions to secrecy; for
each of the lovers was desirous that the marriage
should be kept as private as possible. The dairyman,
though he had thought of her soon, now
made a great concern about losing her. What should
he do about his skimming? Who would make the
ornamental butter-pats for the Anglebury and Sand~
bourne ladies? Mrs. Crick congratulated Tess on the
shilly-shallying having at last come to an end, and
said that directly she set eyes on Tess she divined that
she was to be the chosen one of somebody who was no
common outdoor man; Tess had looked so superior
asshewalkedacrossthebartononthatafternoonof
her arrival; that she was of a good family she could
have sworn. In point of fact Mrs. Crick did remem-
ber thinking that Tess was graceful and good-looking
as she approached; but the superiority might have
been a growth of the imagination aided by subse-
quent knowledge.

Tess was now carried along upon the wings of the
hours, without the sense of a will. The word had
been given; the number of the day written down. Her
naturally bright intelligence had begun to admit the
fatalistic convictions common to ﬁeld—folk and those
who associate more extensively with natural phenom-
ena than with their fellow-creatures; and she ac-
cordingly drifted into that passive responsiveness to
all things her lover suggested, characteristic of the
frame of mind.

But she wrote anew to her mother, ostensibly to
notify the wedding-day; really to again implore her
advice. It was a. gentleman who had chosen her,
which perhaps her mother had not sufﬁciently con-
sidered. A post-nuptial explanation, which might be
accepted with a light heart by a rougher man, might
not be received with the same feeling by him. But
this communication brought no reply from Mrs.
Durbeyﬁeld.

Despite Angel Clara's plausible representations to

959

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

himself and to Tess of the practical need for their im-
mediate marriage. there was in truth an element of
precipitancy in the step, as became apparent at a later
date. He loved her dearly, though perhaps rather
ideally and fancifully than with the impassioned
thoroughness of her feeling for him. He had enter-
tained no notion, when doomed as he had thought to
an unintellectual bucolic life, that such charms as he
beheld in this idyllic creature would be found behind
the scenes. Unsophistication was a thing to talk of ;
but he had not known how it really struck one until
he came here. Yet he was very far from seeing his
future track clearly, and it might be a year or two
before he would be able to consider himself fairly
started in life. The secret lay in the tinge of reck-
lessness imparted to his career and diameter by the
sense that he had been made to miss his true destiny
through the prejudices of his family.

‘ Don’t you think ’twould have been better for us to
wait till you were quite settled in your midland farm?’
she once asked timidly. (A midland farm was the
idea just then.)

‘To tell the truth, my Tess, I don’t like you to be
left anywhere away from my protection and sympathy.’

The reason was a good one, so far as it went. His
inﬂuence over her had been so marked that she had
caught his manner and habits, his speech and phrases,
his likings and his aversions. And to leave her in
farmland would be to let her slip back again out of
accord with him. He wished to have her under his
charge for another reason. His parents had naturally
desired to see her once at least before he carried her
03 to a distant settlement, English or colonial; and as
no opinion of theirs was to be allowed to change his
intention, he judged that a couple of months' life with
him in lodgings whilst seeking for an advantageous
opening would be of some social assistance to her
at what she might feel to be a trying ordeal—her

presentation to his mother at the Vicarage.
260

THE CONSEQUENCE

Next, he wished to see a little of the working of a
ﬂour-mill, having an idea that he might combine the
use of one with oomogrowing. The proprietor of a
large old water-mill at Wellbridge—onoe the mill of
an Abbey—had oﬁered him the inspection of his time-
honoured mode of procedure, and a hand in the opera-
tions for a few days, whenever he should choose to
come. Clare paid a visit to the place, some few miles
distant, one day at this time, to inquire particulars,
and returned to Talbothays in the evening. She found
him determined to spend a short time at the Well-
bridge ﬂour-mills. And what had determined him?
Less the opportunity of an insight into grinding and
bolting than the casual fact that lodgings were to be
obtained in that very farmhouse which, before its
mutilation, had been the mansion of a branch of the
d'Urberville family. This was always how Clare
settled practical questions; by a sentiment which had
nothing to do with them. They decided to go im-
mediately after the wedding, and remain for a fort-
night, instead of journeying to towns and inns.

‘ThenwewillstartoﬁtOexaminesomefarmson
the other side of London that I have heard of,’ he said,
‘andbyMamhorAprilwewileayavisittomy
father and mother.’

Questions of procedure such as these arose and
passed, and the day, the incredible day, on which she
was to become his, loomed large in the near future.
The thirty—ﬁrst of December, New Year's Eve, was
the date. His wife, she said to herself. Could it ever
be? Their two selves together, nothing to divide
them, every incident shared by them; why not? And
yet why?

One Sunday morning In Huett returned from
church, and spoke privately to Tess.

‘You was not called home1 this morning.’

‘What?’

‘It should ha’ been the ﬁrst time of asking to-day,’

“Calledhome'—loenlphiueforpubliclﬁonofbnnns.
261

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

she answered, looking quietly at Tess. ‘You meant
to be married New Year's Eve, deary?’

The other returned a quick aﬂiimative.

‘And there must be three times of asking. And
now there be only two Sundays left between.’

Tess felt her cheek paling; Izz was right; of course
there must be three. Perhaps he had forgotten! If
so, there must be a week's postponement, and that
was unlucky. How could she remind her lover? She
who had been so backward was suddenly ﬁred with
impatience and alarm lest she should lose her dear
pnze.

A natural incident relieved her anxiety. In men-
tioned the omission of the banns to Mrs. Crick, and
Mrs. Crick assumed a matron’s privilege of speaking
to Angel on the point.

‘Have ye forgot 'em, Mr. Clare? The banns, I
mean.’

‘No, I have not forgot 'em,’ says Clare.

As soon as he caught Tess alone he assured her:

‘Don’t let them tease you about the banns. A
licence will be quieter for us, and I have decided on a
licence without consulting you. So if you go to
church on Sunday morning you will not hear your
own name, if you wished to.’

‘I didn't wish to hear it, dearest,’ she said proudly.

But to lcnow that things were in train was an
immense relief to Tess notwithstanding, who had well-
nigh feared that somebody would stand up and forbid
the banns on the ground of her history. How events
were favouring her!

‘I don't feel easy,’ she said to herself. ‘All this
good fortune may be scourged out of me afterwards
by a lot of ill. That’s how Heaven mostly does. I
wish I could have had common banns!’

But everything went smoothly. She wondered

, whether he would like her to be married in her present

best white frock, or if she ought to buy a new one.
The question was set at rest by his forethought, dis-

262

THE CON SEQUENCE

elm by the arrival of some large packages addressed
to her. Inside them she found a whole stock of
clothing, from bonnet to shoes, including a perfect
morning costume, such as would well suit the simple
wedding they planned. He entered the house shortly
after the arrival of the packages, and heard her up-
stairs undoing them.

A minute later she came down with a ﬂush on her
face and tears in her eyes.

‘How thoughtful you’ve been!’ she murmured, her
cheek upon his shoulder. ‘Even to the gloves and
handkerchief! My own love—how good, how kind !’

‘No, no, Tess; just an order to a tradeswoman in
London—nothing more.‘

And to divert her from thinking too highly of him
he told her to go upstairs, and take her time, and see
if it all ﬁtted; and, if not, to get the village sanpstress
to make a few alterations.

She did return upstairs, and put on the gown.
Alone, she stood for a moment before the glass looking
at the eﬁect of her silk attire; and then there came
into her head her mother’s ballad of the mystic robe—

That never would become that wife
That had once done amiss,

which Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld had used to sing to her as a
child, so blithely and so archly, her foot on the cradle,
which she rocked to the tune. Suppose this robe
should betray her by changing colour, as her robe had
betrayed Queen Guénever. Since she had been at
the dairy she had not once thought of the lines till
now.

XXXIII

ANGEL felt that he would like to spend a day with
her before the wedding. somewhere away from the
dairy, as a last jaunt in her company while they were
yet mere lover and mistress; a romantic day, in
circumstances that would never be repeated; with
that other and greater day beaming close ahead of
them. During the preceding week, therefore, he
suggestedmaldngafewpurchasesinthenearest
town, and they started together.

Clare’slifeatthedairyhadbeenthstofarecluse
in respect to the world of his own class. For months
he had never gone near a town, and, requiring no
vehicle, had never kept one, hiring the dairyman's
cob or gig if he rode or drove. They went in the gig
that day.

And then for the ﬁrst time in their lives they
shopped as partners in one concern. It was Christmas
Eve, with its load of holly and mistletoe, and the
town was very full of strangers who had come in from
all parts of the country on account of the day. Tess
paid the penalty of walking about with happiness
superadded to beauty on her countenance by being
much stared at as she moved amid them on his arm.

In the evening they returned to the inn at which
they had put up, and Tess waited in the entry while
Angel went to see the horse and gig brought to the
door. The general sitting-room was full of guests,
who were continually going in and out. As the door
opened and shut each time for the passage of these,
the light within the parlour fell full upon Tess's face.
Two men came out and passed by her among the

264

THE CONSEQUEN CE

zest. Oneofthemhadstaredherupanddownin
surprise, and she fancied he was a. Trantridge man,
though that village lay so many miles ad that Trant-
ridge folk were ratiﬁes here.

‘A comely maid that,’ said the other.

‘True, comely enough. But unless I make a great
mistake-——’ And he negatived the remainder of the
deﬁnition forthwith.

Clare had just returned from the stable-yard, and,
confronting the man on the threshold, heard the
words, and saw the shrinking of Tess. The insult
to her stung him to the quick, and before he had
considered anything at all he struck the man on the
chinwiththefullforceofhisﬁst,sendinghimstagger-
ing backwards into the passage.

The num recovered himself, and ed inclined
to come on, and Clare, stepping outside the door, put
himself in a posture of defence. But his opponent
began to think better of the matter. He looked anew
at Tess as he passed her, and said to CW

‘I beg pardon, sir; 'twas a complete mistake. I
1tlhought she was another woman forty miles from

ete.’

Clare, feeling then that he had been too hasty,
and that he was, moreover, to blame for leaving her
standing in an inn-passage, did what he usually did in
such cases, gave the man ﬁve shillings to plaster the
blow; and thus they parted, bidding each other a
paciﬁc good-night. As soon as Clare had taken the
reins from the ostler, and the young couple had driven
OK, the two men went in the other direction.

‘And was it a mistake?’ said the second one.

‘Not a bit of it. But I didn’t want to hurt the
gentleman’s feelings—not I.’

In the meantime the lovers were driving onward.

‘Could we put oﬂ our wedding till a little hter?’
Tess askedinadry,dullvoice. ‘Imeanifwe
wished?’

‘No, my love. Calm yourself. Do you mean that

265

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

the fellow may have time to summon me for assault?I
he asked goodhumouredly.

‘ No—I only meant—if it should have to be put
oﬁ.’

What she meant was not very clear, and he directed

her to dismiss such fancies from her mind, which she '

obediently did as well as she could. But she was
grave, very grave, all the way home; till she thought,
‘We shall go away, a very long distance, hundreds
ofmilesfromtheseparts, andsuchasthiscannever
happen again, and no ghost of the past reach there.’

They parted tenderly that night on the landing,
and Clare ascended to his attic. Tess sat up getting
on with some little requisites, lest the few remaining
days should not aﬁord sufﬁcient time. While she
sat she heard a noise in Angel's room overhead, 3
sound of thumping and struggling. Everybody else
in the house was asleep, and in her anxiety lest Clare
should be ill she ran up and knocked at his door, and
asked him what was the matter.

‘Oh, nothing, dear,’ he said from within. ‘1 am
sosorryldisturbedyou! Butthereasonisratheran
amusing one: I fell asleep and dreamt that I was
ﬁghting that fellow again who insulted you and the
noise you heard was my pummelling away with my
ﬁsts at my portmanteau, which I pulled out to-day for

' g. I am occasionally liable to these freaks in
my sleep. Go to bed and think of it no more.’

This was the last drachm required to turn the
scale of her indecision. Declare the past to him by
word of mouth she could not; but there was another
way. She sat down and wrote on the four pages of
a note-sheet a succinct narrative of those events of
three or four years ago, put it into an envelope, and
directed it to Clare. Then, lest the ﬂesh should again
be weak, she crept upstairs without any shoes and
ﬂipped the note under his door.

Her night was a brokm one, as it well might be,

and she listened for the ﬁrst faint noise overhead.
266

THE CONSEQUEN CE

It (name, as usual; he descended, as usual. She
descended. He met her at the bottom of the stairs
and kissed her. Surely it was as warmly as ever!

He looked a little disturbed and worn, she thought.
But he said not a word to her about her revelation,
even when they were alone. Could he have had it?
Unless he began the subject she felt that she could
say nothing. So the day passed, and it was evident
that whatever he thought he meant to keep to himself.
Yet he was frank and aﬁectionate as before. Could it
be that her doubts were childish? that he forgave her;
that he loved her for what she was, just as she was,
and smiled at her disquiet as at a foolish nightmare?
Had he really received her note? She glanced into
his room. and could See nothing of it. It might be
that he forgave her. But even if he had not received
it she had a sudden enthusiastic trust that he surely
would forgive her.

Every morning and night he was the same, and
thus New Year’s Eve broke—the wedding-day.

The lovers did not rise at milldng~time, having
through the whole of this last week of their sojourn at
the dairy been accorded something of the position of
guests, Tess being honoured with a room of her own.
When they arrived downstairs at breakfast—time they
were surprised to see what effects had been produced
in the large kitchen for their glory since they had last
beheld it. At some unnatural hour of the morning
the dairyman had caused the yawning chimney-comer
to be whitened, and the brick hearth reddened, and
a blazing yellow damask blower to be hung across
the arch in place of the old grimy blue cotton one
with a black sprig pattern which had formerly done
duty here. This renovated aspect of what was the
focus indeed of the room on a dull winter morning
threw a smiling demeanour over the whole apart-
ment.

‘1 was determined to do summat in honour o’t,’
said the dairyman. ‘And gs you wouldn't hear of my

3 7

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

gieing a rattling good randy wi’ ﬁddles and bas-viols
complete, as we should ha’ done in old times, this was
all I could think 0’ as a noiseless thing.’

T ess's friends lived so far oﬁ that none could con-
veniently have been present at the, ceremony, even
had any been asked; but as a fact nobody was invited
from Marlott. As for Angel’s family, he had written
and duly informed them of the time, and assured them
that he would be glad to see one at least of them there
for the day if he would like to come. His brothers
had not replied at all, seeming to be indignant with
him; while his father and mother had written a rather
sad letter, deploring his precipitancy in rushing into
marriage, but making the best of the matter by saying
that, though a. dairywoman was the last daughter-in-
law they could have expected, their son had arrived at
andéeage at which he might be supposed to be the best
311 .

This coolness in his relations distressed Clare less
than it would have done had he been without the
grand card with which he meant to surprise th ere
long. To produce Tess, fiesh from the dairy, as a
d’Urberville and a lady, he had felt to be ternerarious
and risky; hence he had concealed her lineage till
such time as, familiarized with worldly ways by a few
months’ travel and reading with him, he could take
her on a visit to his parents, and impart the knowledge
while triumphantly producing her as worthy of such an
ancient line. It was a. pretty lover's dream, if no more.
Perhaps Tess ’s lineage had more value for himself
than for anybody in the world besides.

Her perception that Angel's bearing towards her
still remained in no whit altered by her own communi-
cation rendered Tess guiltin doubtful if he could have
received it. She rose from breakfast before he had
ﬁnished, and hastened upstairs. It had occurred to
her to look once more into the queer gaunt room which
had been Clare’s den, or rather eyrie, for so long, and
climbing the ladder she stood at the open door of the

268

THE CON SEQUENCE

apartment, regarding and pondering. She stooped to
the threshold of the doorway, where she had pushed
in the note two or three days earlier in such excite-
ment. The carpet reached close to the sill, and under
the edge of the carpet she discerned the faint white
margin of the envelope containing her letter to him,
which he obviously had never seen, owing to her
having in her haste thrust it beneath the carpet as
well as beneath the door.

With a feeling of faintness she withdrew the letter.
There it was—sealed up, just as it had left her hands.
The mountain had not yet been removed. She could
not let him read it now, the house being in full bustle
of preparation; and descending to her own room she
destroyed the letter there.

She was so pale when he saw her again that he
felt quite anxious. The incident of the misplaced
letter she had jumped at as if it prevented a con-
fession; but she knew in her conscience that it need
not; there was still time. Yet everything was in a
stir; there was coming and going; all had to dress,
the dairyman and Mrs. Crick having been asked
to accompany them as witnesses; and reﬂection or
deliberate talk was well-nigh impossible. The only
minute Tess could get to be alone with Clare was
when they met upon the landing.

‘I amsoanxioustotalktoyou—I wanttoconfess
all my faults and blunders!’ she said with attempted
lightness.

‘No, no—we can’t have faults talked of—you must
be deemed perfect to-day at least, my Sweet!’ he cried.
‘We shall have plenty of time, hereafter, I hope, to
talk over our failings. I will confess mine at the same
time.’

‘But it would be better for me to do it now, I
think, so that you could not say—’

‘Well, my quixotic one, you shall tell me anything
———say, as soon as we are settled in our lodging; not
now. I, too, will tell you my faults then. But do not

269

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES ‘

let us spoil the day with them; they will be excellent
matter for a. dull time.’

‘Then you don’t wish me to, dearest?’

‘I do not, Tessy, really.’

The hurry of dressing and starting left no time
for more than this. Those words of his seemed to
reassure her on further reﬂection. She was whirled
onward through the next couple of critical hours by
the mastering tide of her devotion to him, which closed
up further meditation. Her one desire, so long re-
sisted,«to make herself his, to call him her lord, her
own—then, if necessary, to die—had at last lifted her
up from her plodding reﬂective pathway. In dressing,
she moved about in a mental cloud of many-coloured
idealities, which eclipsed all sinister contingencies by
its brightness.

The church was a long way oil, and they were
obliged to drive, partictdarly as it was winter. A close
carriage was ordered from a roadside inn, a vehicle
which had been kept there ever since the old days of
post-chaise travelling. It had stout wheel-spokes, and
heavy felloes, a. great curved bed, immense straps and
springs, and a pole like a battering-ram. The postilion
was a venerable ‘boy’ of sixty—a martyr to rheumatic
gout, the result of excessive exposure in youth, counter-
acted by strong liquors—who had stood at inn—doors
doing nothing for the whole ﬁve-and-twenty years that
had elapsed since he had no longer been required to
ride professionally, as if expecting the old times to
come back again. He had a permanent '
wound on the outside of his right leg, originated by
the constant bruisings of aristocratic carriage-poles
during the many years that he had been in regular
employ at the King's Arms, Casterbridge.

Inside this cumbrous and creaking structure, and
behind this decayed conductor, the panic carrée took
their seats—the bride and bridegroom and Mr. and
Mrs. Crick. Angel would have liked one at least of
his brothers to be present as groomsman, but their

270

THE CONSEQUENCE

silence after his gentle hint to that effect by letter had
signiﬁed that they did not care to come. They disap-
proved of the marriage, and could not be to
countenance it. Perhaps it was as well that they could
not be present. They were not worldly young fellows,
but fraternizing with dairy—folk would have struck
unpleasantly upon their biassed niceness, apart from
their views of the match.

Upheld by the momentum of the time, Tess knew
nothing of this; did not see anything; did not know
the road they were taking to the church. She knew
thatAngelwasclosetoher;alltherestwasaluminous
mist. Shemasortofeelestialperson,whoowed
her being to poetry—one of those classical divinities
Clare was accustomed to talk to her about when they
took their walks together. ‘

The marriage beingby licence,therewereonlya
dozenorsoofpeopleinthechurch;hadtherebeena
thousand they would have produced no more eﬁect
upon her. They were at stellar distances from her
present world. In the ecstatic solemnity with which
she swore her faith to him the ordinary sensibilities of
sex seemed a ﬂippancy. At a pause in the service,
while they were kneeling together, she unconsoiously
inclined herself towards him, so that her shoulder
touched his arm; she had been frightened by a passing
thought, and the movement had been automatic, to
assure herself that he was really there, and to fortify
her belief that his ﬁdelity would be proof against all

Clare knew that she loved him—every curve of her
form showed that—but he did not know at that time
the full depth of her devotion, its single-mindedness,
its meekness; what long-suffering it guaranteed, what
honesty, what endurance, what good faith.

As they me out of church the ringers swung the
bells off their tests, and a modest peal of three notes
broke forth—that limited amount of expression having
been deemed sufﬁcient by the church builders for the

271

TESS OF THE D‘URBERVILLES

joys of such a small parish. Passing by the tower
with her husband on the path to the gate she could
feel the vibrant air humming round th from the
louvred belfry in a circle of sound, and it matched the
ﬁighly charged mental atmosphere in which she was

vmg.
' condition of mind, wherein she felt gloriﬁed
by an irradiation not her own, like the angel whom
St. John saw in the sun, lasted till the sound of the
church-bells had died away and the emotions of the
wedding-service had calmed down. Her eyes could
dwell upon details more clearly now, and Mr. and
Mrs. Crick having directed their own gig to be sent
for them, to leave the carriage to the young couple,
she observed the build and character of that con-
veyance for the ﬁrst time. Sitting in silence. she
regarded it long.

‘I fancy you seem oppressed, Tessy,’ said Clare.

‘Yes,’ she answered, putting her hand to her brow.
‘I tremble at many things. It is all so serious, Angel.
AmongotherthingsIseemtohaveseenthismr-xiage
before, to be very well acquainted with it. It is very
odd—I must have seen it in a. dream.’

‘Oh—you have heard the legend of the d’Urber-
ville Coach—that well-known superstition of this
county about your family when they were very popular
here; and this lumbering old thing reminds you of it.’

‘I have never heard of it to my knowledge,’ said
she. ‘What is the legend—may I know it?’

‘Well—I would rather not tell it in detail just now.
A certain d’Urberville of the sixteenth or seventeenth
oenturycommittedadreadftﬂcrimeinhisfamily
coach; and since that time members of the family see
or hear the old coach whenever— But I'll tell you
another day—it is rather g! y. Evidently some
dim knowledge of it has been brought back to your
mind by the sight of this venerable caravan.’

‘ I don’t remember hearing it before,’ she murmured.
‘Is it when we are going to die, Angel. tint members

:72

THE CONSEQUENCE

of my family see it, or is it when we have committed
a crime?"

‘Now, Tess!’

He silenced her by a kiss. .

By the time they reached home she was contrite
and spiritless. She was Mrs. Angel Clare, indeed,
but had she any moral right to the name? Was she
not more truly Mrs. Alexander d’Urberville? Could
intensity of love justify what might be considered in
upright souls as culpable reticence? She knew not
what was expected of women in such cases; and she
had no counsellor.

However, when she found herself alone in her room
for a few minutesuthe last day this on which she was
ever to enter it—she knelt down and prayed. She
tried to pray to God, but it was her husband who really
had her supplication. Her idolatry of this man was
such that she herself almost feared it to be ill-omened.
She was conscious of the notion expressed by Friar
Laurence: ‘These violent delights have violent ends.’
It might be too desperate for human conditions—too
rank, too wild, too deadly.

‘0 my love, my love, why do I love you so!’ she
whispered there alone; ‘for she you love is not my real
self, but one in my image; the one I might have been !'

Afternoon came, and with it the hour for departure.
They had decided to fulﬁl the plan of going for a few
days to the lodgings in the old farmhouse near Well-
bridge Mill, at which he meant to reside during his
investigation of ﬂour processes. At two o'clock there
was nothing left to do but to start. All the servantry
of the dairy were standing in the red-brick entry to see

,them go out, the dairyman and his wife following to
the door. Tess saw her three chamber-mates in a. row
against the wall, pensiver inclining their heads. She
had much questioned if they would appear at the part-
ing moment; but there they were, stoical and staunch
to the last. She knew why the delicate Retty looked
so fragile, and 122 so tragically sorrowful, and Marian

173

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

so blank; and she forgot her own dogging shadow for
a. moment in contemplating theirs.

She impulsively whispered to him—

‘Will you kiss ’em all, once, poor things, for the
ﬁrst and last time?’

Clare had not the least objection to such a farewell
formality—which was all that it was to him—and as
he passed them he kissed them in succession where
they stood, saying ‘Good—bye’ to each as he did so.
When they reached the door Tess femininer glanced
back to discern the eﬂect of that kiss of charity; there
was no triumph in her glance, as there might have
been. If there had it would have disappeared when
she saw how moved the girls all were. The kiss had
obviously done harm by awakening feelings they were
trying to subdue.

Of all this Clare was unconscious. Passing on to
the wicket-gate, he shook hands with the dairyman and
hiswife,andexpressedhislastthankstothemfor
their attentions; after which there was a moment of
silence before they had moved 03. It was interrupted
by the crowing of a cock. The white one with the
rose comb had come and settled on the palings in front
of the house, within a few yards of them, and his notes
thrilled their ears through, dwindling away like echoes
down a valley of rocks.

‘Oh?' said Mrs. Crick. ‘An afternoon crow!’

Two men were standing by the yard gate, holding
it open.

‘That's bad.’ one murmured to the other, not
thinking that the words could be heard by the group
at the door-wicket.

The cock crew again—straight towards Clare.

‘Well!’ said the dairyman.

‘I don't like to hear him!‘ said Tess to her hus-
band. ‘Tell the man to drive on. Good-bye, good—

’74

THE CONSEQUENCE

neck!’ said the dairyman with some irritation, turning
wthebirdanddxivinghimaway. Andtohiswife
as they went indoors: ‘Now, to think 0’ that just
to-dayl I've not heard his crow of an afternoon all
the year aiore.’

‘It only means a. change in the weather,’ said she;
‘not what you think: ’tis imDOSSibleP

XXXIV

THEY drove by the level road along the valley to a
distance of a few miles, and, reaching Wellbridge,
turned away from the village to the left, and over the
great Elizabethan bridge which gives the place half
its name. Immediately behind it stood the house
wherein they had engaged lodgings, whose exterior
features are so well known to all travellers through
the Froom Valley; once portion of a. ﬁne manorial
residence, and the property and seat of a. d'Urber-
ville, but since its partial demolition a farmhouse.

‘Weloome to one of your ancestral mansions !’
said Clare as he handed her down. But he regretted
the pleasantry; it was too near a satire.

On entering they found that, though they had
only engaged a couple of rooms, the farmer had taken
advantage of their proposed presence during the com-
ing days to pay a New Year’s visit to some friends,
leaving a woman from a neighbouring cottage to
minister to their few wants. The absoluteness of
possession pleased them, and they realized it as the
ﬁrst moment of their experience under their own ex-
clusive roof-tree.

But he found that the mouldy old habitation some-
what depressed his bride. When the carriage was
gone they ascended the stairs to wash their hands, the
charwoman showing the way. On the landing Tess
stopped and started.

‘What’s the matter?’ said he.

‘Those horrid women!’ she answered, with a
smile. ‘How they frightened me.‘

He looked up, and perceived two life-size portraits

276

THE CON SEQUENCE

onpanelsbuiltintothemasonry. Asallvisitorsto
the mansion are aware, these paintings represent
women of middle age, of a date some two hundred
years ago, whose lineaments once seen can never be
forgotten. The long pointed features, narrow eye,
and smirk of the one, so suggestive of merciless
treachery; the bill-hook nose, large teeth, and bold
eye of the other, suggesting arrogance to the point
of ferocity, haunt the beholder afterwards in his
dreams.

‘Whose portraits are those?’ asked Clare of the
charwoman.

‘I have been told by old folk that they were ladies
of the d’UrberviJle family, the ancient lords of this
manor,’ she said. ‘Owing to their being builded into
the wall they can't be moved away.’

The unpleasantness of the matter was that, in
addition to their eﬁect upon Tess, her ﬁne features
~ were unquestionably traceable in these exaggerated
forms. He said nothing of this, however, and, re-
gretting that he had gone out of his way to choose the
house for their bridal time, went on into the adjoining
room. The place having been rather hastily prepared
for them, they washed their hands in one basin. Clare
touched hers under the water.

‘Which are my ﬁngers and which are yours?’ he
said, looking up. ‘They are very much mixed.’

'They are all yours,’ said she, very prettily, and
endeavoured to be gayer than she was. He had not
been displeased with her thoughtfulness on such an
occasion; it was what every sensible woman would
show: but Tess knew that she had been thoughtful to
excess, and struggled against it.

The sun was so low on that short last afternoon of
the year that it shone in through a small opening and
formed a golden staﬂ which stretched across to her
skirt, where it made a spot like a paint-mark set upon
her. They went into the ancient parlour to tea, and
here they shared their ﬁrst common meal alone. Such

277

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

was their childishness, or rather his, that he found it
interesting to use the same bread—and-butter plate as
herself, and to brush crumbs from her lips with his
own. He wondered a. little that she did not enter
into these frivolities with his own zest.

Looking at her silently for a long time; ‘She is a
dear, dear Tess,’ he thought to himself, as one deciding
on the true construction of a. diﬂicult passage. ‘Do I
realize solemnly enough how utterly and irretrievably
this little womanly thing is the creature of my good
or bad taith and fortune? I think not. I think I could
not,unlesstereawomnnmyse1f. WhatIamin
worldly estate, she is. What I become, she must
become. What I cannot be, she cannot be. And
shall I ever neglect her or hurt her, or even forget
to consider her? God forbid such a crime!’

They sat on over the tea-table waiting for their
luggage, which the dairyman had promised to send
before it grew dark. But evening began to close in,
and the luggage did not arrive, and they had brought
nothing more than they stood in. With the d
ofthesunthecalmmood ofthewinterdaychanged.
Out-of-doors there began noises as of silk smartly
rubbed; the restful dead leaves of the preceding
autumn were stirred to irritated resurrection, and
whirled about unwillingly, and tapped against the
shutters. It soon began to rain.

‘That cock knew the weather was going to change,’
said Clare.

The woman who had attended upon them had
gone home for the night, but she had placed candles
upon the table, and now they lit them. Each candle-
ﬂame drew towards the ﬁreplace.

'These old houses are so draughty,’ continued
Angel, looking at the ﬂames, and at the grease gut-
tering down the sides. ‘ I wonder where that luggage
is. We haven’t even a brush and comb.’

'I don't know.’ she answered, absent-minded.

‘Tess, you are not a bit cheerful this evening——
278

THE CONSEQUENCE

notatallasyouusedtobe. Thoseharridansonthe
panels upstairs have unsettled you. I am sorry I
brought you here. I wonder if you really love me,
after all?’

He knew that she did, and the words had no
serious intent; but she was surcharged with emotion,
and winced like a wounded animal. Though she tried
not to shed tears, she could not help showing one or
two.

‘I did not mean it!’ said he, sorry. ‘You are
worried at not having your things, I know. I cannot
think why old Jonathan has not come with them.
Why, it is seven o'clock? Ah, there he is!’

A knock had come to the door, and, there being
nobody else to answer it, Clare went out. He returned
totheroomwithasmallpackageinhishand.

'It is not Jonathan, after all,’ he said.

‘How vexing? said Tess.

The packet had been brought by a special mes-
senger, who had arrived at Talbothays from Em-
minster Vicarage immediately after the departure
of the married couple, and had followed them hither,

' under injunction to deliver it into nobody’s
hands but theirs. Clare brought it to the light. It
was less than a foot long, sewed up in canvas, sealed
in red wax with his father’s seal, and directed in his
£ather’s hand to ‘Mrs. Angel Clare.’

‘It is a little wedding-present for you, Tess,’ said
he, handing it to her. ‘How thoughtful they ate!’

Tess looked a little ﬂustered as she took it.

‘I think I would rather have you open it, dearest,’
said she, turning over the parcel. ‘I don't like to
break those great seals; they 109k so serious. Please
open it for me!’

He undid the parcel. Inside was a case of morocco
leather, on the top of which lay a note and a key.

The note was for Clare, in the following words:

MY DEAR SON,—Possi'bl ha forgottm that the death of
your godmother, Mrs. Htriyeyzwwhmwyou were a lad,°:he—vain kind

279

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

wommthatshewas—Idttomeaporﬁoncfthecontmisofherjewel-
caseintmstforyourwife,ifyoushmddeverhaveone,asamarkofher
aﬁecﬁon for yonandwhomsoeveryoushwld choose. ThistrustI
have fulﬁlled, and the diamonds have been locked up at my banker’s
eversince. 'l‘houghlfedittobeasomewhatincongluamactinthe
dmumstmm,lam,asyouwillsee,boundtohandoverthearticlesto
thewomantowhomtheuseofthemforherlifetimewillnow ' tly
mmnd thcegarethereforepmmptlystgit. Theg'fbecomeJ 'eée,
d: ms,rtri yspealn‘ng,aword.ing' to etenm godmoth s
wilL 'Ihepredsewmdsofthedausethatréastoymthismatterm

‘I do remember,’ said Clare; ‘but I had quite for-
gotten.’

Unlocldng the case, they found it to contain a
necklace, with pendant, bracelets, and earrings; and
also some other small ornaments.

Tess seemed afraid to touch them at ﬁrst, but her
eyes sparkled for a moment as much as the stones
when Clare spread out the set.

‘Are they mine?’ she. asked ineredulously.

‘They are, certainly,’ said he.

He looked into the ﬁre. He remembered how,
when he was a lad of ﬁfteen. his godmother, the
Squire's wife—the only rich person with whom he had
ever come in contact—had pinned her faith to his
success; had prophesied a wondrous career for him.
There had seemed nothing at all out of keeping with
such a. conjectured career in the storing up of these
showy ornaments for his wife and the wives of her
descendants. They gleamed somewhat ironically now.
‘Yet why?’ he asked himself. It was but a. question
of vanity throughout; and if that were admitted into
one side of the equation it should be admitted into the
other. His wife was a. d'Urberville: whom could they
become better than her?

Suddenly he said With enthusiasm—

‘Tess, put them on—put them on!’ And he turned
from the ﬁre to help her.

But as if by magic she had already donned them——
necklace, earrings, bracelets, and all.

‘But the gown isn’t right, Tess,’ said Clare. ‘It

280

THE CON SEQUENCE

oughttobealowonefora setofbrilliantslike
that.’

IOught it?’ said Tess.

‘Yes,’ said he.

He suggested to her how to tuck in the upper edge
of her bodice, so as to make it roughly approximate to
the cut for evening wear; and when she had done this,
and the pendant to the necklace hung isolated amid the
whiteness of her throat, as it was designed to do, he
stepped back to survey her.

‘My heavens,’ said Clare, ‘how beautiful you are!’

As everybody knows, ﬁne feathers make ﬁne birds;
a peasant girl but very moderately prepossessing to
the casual observer in her simple condition and attire
will bloom as an amazing beauty if clothed as a woman
of fashion with the aids that Art can render; while the
beauty of the midnight crush would often cut but a
sorry ﬁgure if placed inside the ﬁeld-woman’s wrapper
upon a monotonous acreage of turnips on a dull day.
He had never till now estimated the artistic excellence
of Tess’s limbs and features.

‘If you were only to appear in a ball-room? he
said. ‘But no—no, dearest; I think I love you best
in the wing-bonnet and cotton-frock—yos, better than
in this, well as you support these dignities.’

Tess’s sense of her striking appearance had given
her a ﬂush of excitement, which was yet not happiness.

'I’ll take them oﬁ,’ she said, ‘in case Jonathan
should see me. They are not ﬁt for me, are they?
They must be sold, I suppose?’

‘Let them stay a few minutes longer. Sell them?
Never. It would be a. breach of faith.’

Inﬂuenced by a second thought, she readily obeyed.
She had something to tell, and there might be help in
these. She sat down with the jewels upon her; and
they again indulged in conjectures as to where Jona-
than could possibly be with their baggage. The ale
they had poured out for his consumption when he
came had gone ﬂat with long standing.

28:

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Shortly after this they began supper, which was
already laid on a side—table. Ere they had ﬁnished
there was a jerk in the ﬁre-smoke, the rising skein of
which bulged out into the room, as if some giant had
laid his hand on the chimney-top for a moment. It
had been caused by the opening of the outer door. A
heavy step was now heard in the passage, and Angel
went out.

‘I couldn’ make nobody hear at all by knocldng,’
apologized Jonathan Kail, for it was he at last; ‘and
as’t was raining out I opened the door. I’ve brought
the things, sir.’

‘Iamverygladtoseethem. Butyouarevery
late.’
‘Well, yes, sir.’

There was something subdued in Jonathan Kail’s
tone which had not been there in the day, and lines of
concern were ploughed upon his forehead in addition
to the lines of years. He continued—

‘We've all been gallied at the dairy at what might
ha’ been a most terrible aﬂliction since you and your
Mis'ess—so to name her now—left us this afternoon.
Perhaps you ha’nt forgot the cook’s afternoon cmw?’

‘Dear me ;-——what-—'

‘Well some says it do mane one thing, and some
another; but what's happened is that poor little Retty
Priddle hev tried to drown herself.’

‘No! Really! Why, she bade us good-bye with
the rest-*4

‘Yes. Well, sir, when you and your Mis’ess—so
to name what she lawful is—when you two drove away,
as I say, Retty and Marian put on their bonnets and
went out; and as there is not much doing now, being
New Year's Eve, and folks mops and brooms from
what's inside ’ern, nobody took much notice. They
went on to Lew-Everard, where they had summut to
drink, and then on they vamped to Dreearmed Cross,
and there they seemed to have parted, Retty striking

across the water-meads as if for home, and Marian
:8:

THE CONSEQUENCE

going on to the next village, where there's another
public-house. Nothing more was zeed or heard 0'
Retty till the waterman, on his way home, noticed
something by the Great Pool; 'twas her bonnet and
shawl packed up. In the water he found her. He
and another man brought her home, thinking ’a was
dead; but she fetched round by degrees.’

Angel, suddenly reeollecting that Tess was over-
heating this gloomy tale, went to shut the door betwoen
the passage and the ante-room to the inner parlour
where she was; but his wife, ﬂinging a shawl round
her,hadcometotheouterroom andwaslisteningto
the man’s narrative, her eyes resting absently on the
luggage and the drops of rain glistening upon it.

‘And, more than this, there’s Marian; she's been
found dead drunk by the withy-bed—a girl who hev
never been known to touch anything before except
shilling ale; though, to be sure, ’a was always a good
trencher—woman, as her face showed. It seems as if
the maids had all gone out 0' their minds!’

‘And Izz?’ asked Tess.

‘Izz is about house as usual; but 'a do say 'a can
guess how it happened; and she seems to be very low
in mind about it, poor maid, as well she mid be. And
so you see, sir, as all this happened just when we was
packing your few traps and your Mis'ess’s night—rail
and dressing things into the cart, why, it belated me.’

‘Yes. Well, Jonathan, will you get the trunks
upstairs, and drink a cup of ale, and hasten back as
soon as you can, in case you should be wanted?’

Tess had gone back to the inner parlour, and sat
down by the ﬁre, looking wistftu into it. She heard
Jonathan Kail's heavy footsteps up and down the
stairs till he had done placing the luggage, and heard
him express his thanks for the ale her husband took
out to him, and for the gratuityhe received. Jonathan’s
footsteps then died from the door, and his cart
creaked away.

Angel slid forward the massive oak bar which

283

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

secured the door, and, coming in to where she sat over
the hearth, pressed her cheeks between his hands from
behind. He expected her to jump up gain and un-
pack the toilet-gear that she had been so anxious
about, but as she did not rise he sat down with
ha- in the ﬁrelight, the candles on the supper-table
bfing too thin and glimmering to interfere with its
g ow.

‘Iamsosorryyoushmﬂdhaveheardthissad
story about the girls,’ he said. ‘Still, don't let it
depress you. Retty was naturally morbid, you know.’

“Without the least cause,’ said Tess. ‘While they
who have cause to be, hide it, and pretend they are
not.’

This incident had turned the scale for her. They
were simple and innocent girls on whom the unhappi-
ness of unrequited love had fallen; they had deserved
better at the hands of Fate. She had deserved worse
——yet she was the chosen one. It was wicked of her
to take all without paying. She would pay to the
uttermost farthing; she would tell, there and then.
This ﬁnal determination she came to when she looked
into the ﬁre, be holding her hand.

A steady glare from the now ﬂameless embers
painted the sides and back of the ﬁreplace with its
colour, and the well-polished andirons, and the old
brass tongs that would not meet. The underside of
the mantel-shelf was flushed with the high—coloured
light, and the legs of the table nearest the ﬁre. Tess’s
face and neck reﬂected the same warmth, which each
gem turned into an Aldebaian or a Sirius—a constella~
tion of white, red, and green ﬂashes, that interchanged
their hues with her every pulsation.

‘Do you remember what we said to each other this
morning about telling our faults?’ he asked abruptly,
ﬁnding that she still remained immovable. ‘We
spoke lightly perhaps, and you may well have done so.
But for me it was no light promise. I want to make

a confession to you, Love.’
284

THE OONSEQUENCE

This, from him, so unexpectedly apposite, had the
eﬁect upon her of a Providential interposition.

‘You have to confess something?’ she said quickly,
and even with gladness and relief.

“You did not expect it? Ali—you thought too
highly of me. Now listen. Put your head there,
because I want you to forgive me, and not to be
indignant with me for not telling you before, as
perhaps I ought to have done.’

How strange it was! He seemed to be her double.
She did not speak, and Clare went on—

‘I did not mention it because I was afraid of
endangering my chance of you, darling, the great
prize of my life—my Fellowship I call you. My
brother's Fellowship was won at his college, mine at
Talbothays Dairy. Well, I would not risk it. I was
going to tell you a month ago—at the time you agreed
to be mine, but I could not; I thought it might
frighten you away from me. I put it off; then I
thought I would tell you yesterday, to give you a
chance at least of escaping me. But I did not. And
I did not this morning, when you proposed our con-
fessing our faults on the landing—the sinner that I
was! But I must, now I see you sitting there so
solemnly. I wonder if you will forgive me?’

‘0 yes! I am sure that—4

‘Well, I hope so. But wait a minute. I You don't
know. To begin at the Though I imag-
ine my poor father fears that I am one of the eternally
lost for my doctrines, I am of course, a believer in
good morals, Tess, as much as you. I used towish
to be a teacher of men, and it was a great disappoint-
ment to me when I found I could not enter the Church.
I admired spotlessness, even though I could lay no
claim to it, and hated impurity, as I hope I do now.
Whatever one may think of plenary inspiration, one
must heartily subscribe to these words of Paul: “Be
thou an example—in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.” It is the only

285

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

safeguard for us poor human beings. “Integer vi ,”
says a Roman poet, who is strange company for St.
Paul——
'l‘hemanofuprightliqummhilﬁsfree,
StandsnotinneedofMou-iahnpenrorbow.

Well, a certain place is paved with good intentions,
and having felt all that so strongly, you will see what
a terrible remorse it bred in me when, in the midst of
my ﬁne aims for other people, I myself fell.’

He then told her of that time of his life to which
allusion has been made when, tossed about by doubts
and difﬁculties in London, like a cork on the waves,
he plunged into eight-and-forty hours’ dissipation with
a stranger.

‘Happily I awoke almost immediately to a sense
of my folly,’ he continued. ' I would have no more to
say to her, and I came home. I have never repeated
the oﬁenoe. But I felt I should like to treat you with
perfect frankness and» honour, and I could not do so
without telling this. Do you forgive me?’

She pressed his hand tightly for an answer.

‘Then we will dismiss it at once and for ever!—
too painful as it is for the occasion—and talk of some-
thing lighter.’

‘0 Angel—I am almost glad—because now you
can forgive me! I have not made my confession. I
have a confession, too—remembm', I said so.’

‘Ah, to be sure! Now th for it, wicked little
one.’

‘Perhaps, although you smile, it is as serious as
yours, or more so.’

‘It can hardly be more serious, demest.’

‘It cannot—O no, it cannot!’ She jumped up
joyfully at the hope. ‘No, it cannot be more serious,
certainly,’ she cried, 'because 'tis just the same! I
will tell you now.’

She sat down again

Their hands were still joined. The ashes under
286

THE CONSEQUEN CE

the grate were lit by the ﬁre vertically, like a. tom'd
waste. Imagination might have beheld a. Last Day
luridness in this red-coaled glow, which fell on his face
and hand, and on hers, peering into the loose hair
about her brow, and ﬁring the delicate skin underneath.
A large shadow of her shape rose upon the wall and
She bent forward, at which each diamond on
her neck gave a sinister wink like a toad's; and,
pressing her forehead against his temple, she entered
on her story of her acquaintance with Alec d’Urber—
ville and its results, murmuring the words without
ﬂinching, and with her eyelids drooping down.

END 0!" PHASE THE FOURTH

 

 

 

PHASE THE FIFTH

TUB WOMAN PA YS

XXXV

HER narrative ended; even its rem-lions and
secondary explanations were done. Tess's voice
throughout had hardly risen higher than its opening
tone; there had been no exculpatory phrase of any
kind, and she had not wept.

But the complon even of external things seemed
to suffer transmutation as her announcement pro-

. The ﬁre in the grate looked impish—
demoniacally funny, as if it did not care in the least
about her strait. The fender grinned idly, as if it
too did not care. The light from the water-bottle
wasmerelyengagedinachromaticproblem. All
material objects around announced their irresponsi-
bility with terrible iteration. And yet nothing had
changed since the moments when he had been kissing
her; or rather, nothing in the substance of things.
But the essence of things had changed.

When she ceased, the auricular impressions from
their previous endearments seemed to hustle away into
the corners of their brains, repeating themselves as
echoes from a. time of supremely purblind foolishness.

Clare performed the irrelevant act of stirring the
ﬁre; the intelligence had not even yet got to the
bottom of him. After stirring the embers he rose to
his feet; all the force of her disclosure had imparted
itself now. His face had withered. In the strenuous-

:91

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

ness of his concentration he treadled ﬁtfully on the
ﬂoor. He could not, by any contrivanoe, think closely
enough; that was the meaning of his vague movement.
When he spoke it was in the most inadequate, oom-
monplace voice of the many varied tones she had
heard from him.

‘Tess!’

‘Yes, dearest.’

‘Am I to believe this? From your manner I am
to take it as true. 0 you cannot be out of your mind!
You ought to be! Yet you are not. . . . My wife,
my Tess—nothing in you warrants such a supposition
as that?’

‘I am not out of my mind,’ she said.

‘And yet———' He looked vacantly at her, to
resume with dazed senses: ‘Why didn’t you tell me
before? Ah, yes, you would have told me, in a way
—-but I hindered you, I remember!’

These and other of his words were nothing but the

ctory babble of the surface while the depths
remained paralyzed. He turned away, and bent over
a chair. Tess followed him to the middle of the room
where he was, and stood there staring at him with eyes
that did not weep. Presently she slid down upon her
knees beside his foot, and from this position she
crouched in a heap.

‘In the name of our love, forgive me!’ she whis-
pered with a dry mouth. ‘I have forgiven you for
the same!’

And, as he did not answer, she said again—

‘Forgive me as you are forgiven! I forgive you,
Angel.’

‘You—yes, you do.’

‘But you do not forgive me?’

‘0 Tess, forgiveness does not apply to the case!
You were one person; now you are another. My
God—how can forgiveness meet such a grotesque—~—
prestidigitation as that!’

He paused. contemplating this deﬁnition; then

292

THE WOMAN PAYS

suddenly broke into horrible laughter—as unnatural
and ghastly as a laugh in hell.
‘Don't—don't! It kills me quite, that!’ she
shrieked. ‘0 have mercy upon me-have mercy!’
He did not answer; and, sickly white. she jumped

up.

‘Angel, Angel! what do you mean by that laughP'
she cried out. ‘Do you know what this is to me?’

He shook his head.

‘I have been hoping, longing, praying, to make
you happy! I have thought what joy it will be to do
it, what an unworthy wife I shall be if I do not!
That’s what I have felt, Angel!’

‘I know that.’

‘I thought, Angel, that you loved nae—me, my
veryselfl IfitisI you dolove, Ohowcanitbethat
you look and speak so? It frightens me! Having
begun to love you, I love you for ever—in all changes,
inalldisgraces, becauseyouareyourself. Iaskno
more. Then how can you, O my own husband, stop
loving me?’

‘I repeat, the woman I have been loving is not
you.’

‘But who?’

‘Another woman in your shape.’

She perceived in his words the realization of her
own apprehensive foreboding in former times. He
looked upon her as a species of impostor; a guilty
woman in the guise of an innocent one. Terror was
upon her white face as she saw it: her cheek was
ﬂaccid, and her mouth had almost the aspect of a
round little hole. The horrible sense of his view of
her so deadened her that she staggered; and he stepped
forward, thinking she was going to fall.

‘Sit down, sit down,’ he said gently.
ill; and it is natural that you should be.’

She did sit down. without lmowing where she was,
that strained look still upon her face, and her eyes
such as to make his ﬂesh creep.

293

‘You are

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘I don't belong to you any more, then; do I, Angeli"
she asked helplessly. ‘It is not me, but another
woman like me that he loved, he says.’

The image raised caused her to take pity upon
herself as one who was ill-used. Her eya ﬁlled as
she regarded her position further; she turned round
and burst into a ﬂood of self-sympathetic tears.

Clare was relieved at this change, for the effect on
her of what had happened was beginning to be a
twubletohimonlyless thanthewoeofthedisclosure
itself. He waited patiently, apathetically, till the
violence of her grief had worn itself out, and her rush
of weeping had lessened to a catching gasp at intervals.

‘Angel,’ she said suddenly, in her natural tones,
the insane, dry voice of terror having left her now.
‘Angel,ameowickedforyouandmetolive
together?’

‘I have not been able to think what we can do.’

‘I shan’t ask you to let me live with you, Angel,
because I have no right to! I shall not write to
mother-andsisterstosaywebemanied,aslsaid1
would do; and I shan’t ﬁnish the good-hussif’ I cut
out and meant to make while we were in lodgings.’

‘Shan’t you?’

‘No, I shan’t do anything. unless you order me to;
and if you go away from me I shall not follow ’ee; and
ifyouneverspeaktomeanymorelshallnotask
why, unless you tell me I may.’

‘And if I do order you to do anything?’

‘I will obey you like your wretched slave, even if
it is to lie down and die.’

‘You are very good. But it strikes me that there
is awant ofharmony between your ptesentmoodof
self-sacriﬁce and your past mood of self-preservation!

These were the ﬁrst words of antagonism. To
ﬂing elaborate sarcasms at Tess, however, was much
likeﬂingingthematadogorcat. Thechatmsof
their subtlety passed by her unappreciated, and she
only received them as sounds which meant

294

THE WOMAN PAYS

that anger ruled. She remained mute, not knowing
that he was smothering his affection for her. She
hardly obmved that a tear descended slowly upon his
cheek,atearsolargethatitmagniﬁedtheporesof
the skin over which it rolled, like the object lens of
a microscope. Meanwhile reillumination as to the
terrible and total change that her confession had
wrought in his life, in his universe, returned to him,
and he tried desperately to advance among the new
conditions in which he stood. Some consequent action
was necessary; yet what?

‘Tess,’ he said, as gently as he could speak, ‘I
cannot stay—in this room—just now. I will walk out
a. little way.’ '

He quietly left the room, and- the two glasses of
wine that he had poured out for their supper—one for
her, one for him—remained on the table untasted.
This was what their Agape had come to. At tea, two
or three hours earlier, they had, in the freakiﬂmess of
aﬂection, drunk from one cup.

The closing of the door behind, gently as it had
been pulled to, roused Tess from her stupor. He
was gone; she could not stay. Hastily ﬂinging her
cloak around her, she opened the door and followed,
putting out the candles as if she were never coming
back. The rain was over, and the night was now
clear.

She was soon close at his heels, for Clare walked
slowly and without purpose. His form beside her
light grey ﬁgure looked black, sinister, and forbidding,
and she felt as sarcasm the touch of the jewels of
which she had been momentarily so proud. Clare
turned at hearing her footsteps. but his recognition of
her presence seemed to make no diﬂerence in him,
and he went on over the ﬁve yawning arches of the
great bridge in front of the house.

Thecowandhorsetranksintheroadwerefullof
water, the rain having been enough to charge them,
but not enough to wash them away. Across thee:

a95

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

minute pools the reﬂected stars ﬂitted in a quick
transit as she passed; she would not have known they
were shining overhwd if she had not seen them themh-
the vastest things of the universe imaged in objects
so mean.

The place to which they had travelled to-day was
in the same valley as Talbothays, but some miles
lower down the river; and the surroundings being
open, she kept easily in sight of him. Away from the
house the road wound through the mearls, and along
these she followed Clare without any attempt to come
upwithhimortoattraethim,butwithdumband
vacant ﬁdelity.

At last, however, her listless walk brought her up
alongside him, and still he said nothing. The cruelty
of fooled honesty is often great after enlightenment,
and it was mighty in Clam now. The outdoor air
had apparently taken away from him all tendency to
act on impulse; she knew that he saw her without
irradiation—in all her bareness; that Time was chant-
inghissatiricpsalmatherthen—

Behold,whmthyfamismadehare,hethatlovedtheelhlﬂm;
Thyiaceahallbenomoretairatﬂietallofthytate.
Forthylifeshallfallasaleafandheshedastherain;
Andtheveilofthineheadshallbegﬁel,andthemnhallhepain.

He was still intently thinking, and her companion-
ship had now insuﬂicient power to break or divert the
strain of thought. What a weak thing her presence
must have become to him! She could not help
addressing Clare.

‘What have I done—what have I done! I have
not told of anything that interferes with or belies my
love for you. You don't think I planned it, do you?
Itisinyourownmindwhatyouareangryat,Angel;
it is not in me. 0, it is not in me, and I am not that
deceitful woman you think me!‘

‘H’m—well. Not deceitful, my wife; but not the
same. No, not the same. But do not make me rev

296

THE WOMAN PAYS

proach you. I have sworn that I will not; and I will
do everything to avoid it.’

But she went on pleading in her distraction; and
perhaps said things that would have been better left
to silence.

‘Angell—Angel! I was a child—~21 child when it
happened! I knew nothing of men.’

‘You were more sinned against than sinning, that
I admit.’ ~

'Then will you not forgive me?’

‘I do forgive you, but forgiveness is not all.’

‘And love me?’

To this question he did not answer.

‘0 Angel—my mother says that it sometimes
happens sch—she knows several cases where they
were worse than I, and the husband has not minded
it much—has got over it at least. And yet the
woman has not loved him as I do you!’

‘Don't, Tess; don't argue. Diﬁerent societies,
diﬁetent manners. You almost make me say you are
an unapprehending peasant woman, who have never
been initiated into the proportions of social things.
You don't know what you say.‘

‘I am only a peasant by position, not by nature!’

She spoke with an impulse toanger, butitwentas
it came.

‘Somuchtheworseforyou. Ithinkthatparson
who unearthed your pedigree would have done better
if he had held his tongue. I cannot help associating
your decline as a family with this other fact—of your
want of ﬁrmness. Dectepit families imply decrepit
wills, decrepit conduct. Heaven, why did you give
me a handle for despising you more by informing me
of your descent! Here was I thinking you a new-
sprung child of nature; there were you, the belated
seedling of an eﬁete adstoa-acy!’

‘Lots of families are as bad as, mine in that!
Retty's family were once large landowners, and so
were Dairyman Billett’s. And the Debbyhouses, who

397

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

now are carters, were once the De Bayeux family.
You ﬁnd such as I everywhere; 'tis a feature of our
county, and I can't help it.’

‘So much the worse for the county.‘

She took these reproaches in their bulk simply,
not in their particulars; he did not love her as he
had loved her hitherto, and to all else she was in-
diﬁerent.

They wandered on again in silence. It was said
afterwards that a cottager of Wellbridge, who went
out late that night for a doctor, met two lovers in the
pastures, walking very slowly, without converse. one
behind the other, as in a funeral procession, and the
glimpse that he obtained of their faces seemed to
denote that they were anxious and sad. Returning
later, he passed them again in the same ﬁeld, progress-
ing just as slowly, and as regardless of the hour and
of the cheerless night as before. It was only on
account of his preoccupation with his own aﬂaixs, and
theillnessinhishouse,thathedidnotbearinmind
the curious incident, which, however, he recalled a
long while after.

During the interval of the cottager’s going and
coming, she had said to her husband—

‘I don’t see how I can help being the cause of
much misery to you all your life. The river is down
there. Icanputanendtomyselfinit. Iamnot
afraid.’

‘I don't wish to add murder to my other follies,’
he said.

‘I will leave something to show that I did it mywlf
—-on account of my shame. They will not blame
you then.’

‘Don't speak so absurdly—I wish not to hear it.
It is nonsense to have such thoughts in this kind of
case, which is rather one for satirical laughter than for
tragedy. You don’t in the least understand the
quality of the mishap. It would be viewed in the

light of a. joke by nine-tenths of the world if it were
:98

THE WOMAN PAYS

known. Please oblige me by returning to the house
and going to bed.’

‘I will,’ said she dutifully.

They had rambled round by a road which led to
the well‘known ruins of the Cistercian abbey behind
the mill, the latter having, in centuries past, been
attached to the monastic establishment. The mill
still worked on, food being a perennial necessity;
the abbey had perished, creeds being transient. One
continually sees the ministration of the temporary
outlasting the ministration of the eternal. Their walk
having been circuitous, they were still not far from the
house, and in obeying his direction she only had to
reach the stone bridge acres the main river
and follow the road for a few yards. When she got
back everything remained as she had left it, the ﬁre
being still burning. She did not stay downstairs for
more than a minute, but proceeded to her chamber,
whither the luggage had been taken. Here she sat
down on the edge of the bed, looking blankly around,
and presently began to undress. In removing the
light towards the bedstead its rays fell upon the
tester of white dimity; something was hanging be-
neath it, and she lifted the candle to see what it
was. A bough of mistletoe. Angel had put it there;
she knew that in an instant. This was the explanation
of that mysterious parcel which it had been so diﬂicult
to pack and bring; whose contents he would not
explain to her, saying that time would soon show her
the purpose thereof. In his zest and his gaiety he
had hung it there. How foolish and inopportune that
mistletoe looked now.

Having nothing more to fear, having scarce any-
thing to hope, for that he would relent there seemed
no promise whatever, she lay down dully. When
sorrow ceases to be speculative sleep sees her oppor-
tunity. Among so many happier moods which forbid
repose this was a mood which welcomed it, and in
a few minutes the lonely Tess forgot existence

599

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

surrounded by the aromatic stillness oi the chamber
that had once, possibly, been the bride-chamber of
her own ancestry.

LateronthatnightCIarealsoretracedhissteps
to the house. Entering softly to the sitting-room, he
obtained a light, and with the manner of one who had
consideredhiscoursehespreadhisrugsupontheold
horse-hair sofa which stood there, and roughly shaped
it to a sleeping-couch. Before lying down he crept
shoeless upstairs, and listened at the door of her
apartment. Her measured breathing told that she
was sleeping profoundly.

'Thank God!’ murmured Clare; and yet he was
conscious of a pang of bitterness at the thought—
approximately true, though not wholly so—that hav-
ing shifted the burden of her life to his shoulders she
was now reposing without care.

He turned away to descend; then. irresolute, faced
round to her door again. In the act he caught sight
of one of the d’Urberville dames, whose portrait was
immediately over the entrance to Tess's bedchamber.
In the candlelight the painting was more than un-
pleasant. Sinister design lurked in the woman’s
features, a concentrated purpose of revenge on the
other sex—so it seemed to him then. The Caroline
bodice of the portrait was low—precisely as TCS'S
had been when he tucked it in to show the necklace;
and again he experienced the distressing sensation of
a resemblance between them.

The check was suﬁicient. He resumed his retreat
and descended.

Iﬁsairremainedcalmandoold,hissmallcom~
pressed mouth indexing his powers of self-control;
his face wearing still that terribly sterile expression
which had spread thereon since her disclosure. It
was the face of a man who was no longer passion’s
slave, yet who found no advantage in his enfranchise~
ment. He was simply regarding the harrowing con-
tingencies of human experience, the unexpectedness of

300

THE WOMAN PAYS

things. Nothing so‘pure, so sweet, so virginal as
Tess had seemed possible all the long while that he
had adored her, up to an hour ago; but

The little less, and what worlds away!

He argued erroneously when he said to himself that
her heart was not indexed in the honest freshness of
her face: but Tess had no advocate to set him right.
Could it be possible, he continued, that eyes which as
they gazed never expressed any divergence from what
the tongue was telling, were yet ever seeing another
world behind her ostensible one, discordant and
contrasting.

He reclined on his couch in the sitting-room, and
extinguished the light. The night came in, and took
up its place there, unconcerned and indiﬂerent; the
night which had already swallowed up his happiness,
and was now digesting it listlessly; and was ready to
swallow up the happiness of a thousand other people
with as little disturbance or change of mien.

XXXVI

CLARE-arose in the light of a dawn that was ashy
and furtive, as though associated with crime. The
ﬁreplace confronted him with its extinct embers; the
spread supper table, whereon stood the two full glasses
of untested wine, now ﬂat and ﬁlmy; her vacated seat
and his own; the other articles of furniture, with their
eternal look of not being able to help it, their intoler-
able inquiry what was to be done? From above there
was no sound; but in a few minutes there came a
knock at the door. He remembered that it would be
the neighbouring cottager’s wife. who was to minister
to their wants while they remained here.

Thepresenceofathirdpersoninthehousewould
be extremely awkward just now, and, being already
dressed, he opened the window and informed her that
they could manage to shift for themselves that morn-
ing. She had a. milk-can in her hand, which he told
her to leave at the door. When the dame had gone
away he searched in the back quarters of the house
for fuel, and speedily lit a ﬁre. There was plenty of
eggs. butter, bread, and so on in the larder, and Clare
soon had breakfast laid, his experiences at the dairy
having rendered him facile in domestic preparations.
The smoke of the kindled wood rose from the chimney
without like a lotus-headed column; local people who
were passing by saw it, and thought of the newly-
married couple, and envied their happiness.

Angel cast a ﬁnal glance round, and then, going to
the foot of the stairs, called in a conventional voice——

‘Breakfast is ready!’

He opened the front door, and took a few steps in

304

THE WOMAN PAYS

the morning air. When, after a short space, he came
back, she was already in the sitting-room, mechanical-
ly readjusting the breakfast things. As she was fully
attired, and the interval since his calling her had been
but two or three minutes, she must have been dressed,
or nearly so, before he went to summon her. Her
hairwastwistedupinalargeroundmassattheback
of her head, and she had put on one of the new frocks
—-a. pale blue woollen garment with neck-{ﬁllings of
white. Her hands and face appeared to be cold, and
she had possibly been sitting dressed in the bedroom
a long time without any ﬁre. The marked civility of
Clare's tone in calling her seemed to have inspired
her, for the moment, with a. new glimmer of hope.
But it soon died when she looked at him.

The pair were, in truth, but the ashes of their
former ﬁres. To the hot sorrow of the previous
night had succeeded heaviness; it seemed as if nothing
could kindle either of them to fervour of sensation any
more.

He spoke gently to her, and she replied with a
like undemonstmtiveness. At last she came up to
him, looking in his sharply deﬁned face as one who
had no consciousness that her own formed a visible
object also.

‘Angel!’ she said, and paused, touching him with
her ﬁngers lightly as a breeze, as though she could
hardlybelievetobethereintheﬂeshthemanwho
was once her lover. Her eyes were bright; her pale
cheek still showed its wonted roundness, though half-
dried tears had left glistening traces thereon; and the
usuallyriperedmouthwasalmostaspalessher
cheek. Throbbineg alive as she was still, under the
stress of her mental grief the life beat so brokenly
thatalittlefurtherpulluponitwouldcausereal
illness, dull her characteristic eyes, and make her
mouth thin.

She looked absolutely pure. Nature, in her fan-
tastic trickery, had set such a. seal of maidenhood

303

\

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

upon Tess’s countenance that he gazed at her with a.
stupeﬁed air.

‘ ! Say it is not true! No, it is not true!’

‘It is true.’

‘Every word?’

‘Every word.’

He looked at her imploriugly, as if he would will-
ineg have taken a lie from her lips, knowing it to
be one, and have made of it, by some sort of sophistry,
a valid denial. Howeva', she only repeated—

‘It is true.’

‘Is be living?’ Angel then asked.

‘The baby died.’

‘But the man?’

‘He is alive.’

A last despair passed over Clare’s face.

‘Is he in England?’

'Yes.’

He took a few vague steps. .

‘My position—is this,’ he said abruptly. ‘I
thought—any man would have thought—that by
giving up all ambition to win a. wife with social
standing, with fortune, with knowledge of the world,
Ishouldsecurerusticinnocenceassurelyaslshould
secure pink cheeks; but— However, I am no
man to reproach you, and I will not.’

Tess felt his position so entirely that the remainder
had not been needed. Therein lay just the distress of
it; she saw that he had lost all round.

‘Angel—I should not have let it go on to marriage
with you if I had not lmown that, after all, there was
a. last way out of it for you; though I hoped you
would never—'

Her voice grew husky.

‘A last way?’

‘I mea.n,to get rid of me. You can get rid of
me.’

‘How?’

‘By divorcing me.’

304

THE WOMAN PAYS

‘Good heavens—how can you be so simple! How
can I divorce you?’

‘Can't you—now I have told you? I thought my
confession would give you grounds for that.’

‘0 Tex—you are too, too—«childish—unformed—
crude, I suppose! I don't know what you are. You
don’t understand the law—you don’t understand!’

‘What—you cannot?’

' ‘Indeed I cannot.’

A quick shame mixed with the misery upon his
listener’s face.

‘I thought—I thought,’ she whispered. ‘0, now
I see how wicked I seem to you! Believe me—
believe me, on my soul, I never thought but that you
could! I honed you would not; yet I believed,
without a doubt, that you could cast me of! if you
were determined,. and didn’t love me at—at—all!’

‘You were mistaken,’ he said.

‘0, then I ought to have done it, to have done it
last night! But I hadn’t the courage. That’s just
like me!’

‘The courage to do what?’

As she did not answer, he took her by the hand.

'What were you thinking of doing?’ he inquired.

‘Of putting an end to myself.’

‘When?’ *

She writhed under this inquisitorial manner of his.
‘Last night,’ she answered.

‘W'here?’

‘Under your mistletoe.’

‘My good—! How?’ he asked sternly.

‘I’ll tell you, if you won’t be angry with me!’ she
said, shrinking. ‘It was with the cord of my box.
But I could not—do the last thing! I was afraid
that it might cause a scandal to your name.’

The unexpected quality of this confession, wrung
from her, and not volunteered, shook him perceptibly.
But he still held her, and, letting his glance fall from
her face downwards, he said—

305

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Now, listen to this. You must not dare to think
of such a. horrible thing! How could you! You will
promise me as your husband to attempt that no
more.’

‘I am ready to promise. I saw how wicked it
was.’

‘Wicked! The idea was unworthy of you beyond
description.’

‘But, Angel.’ she pleaded, enlarging her eyes in
calm unconcern upon him, ‘it was thought of entirely
on your account—~to set you free without the scandal
of the divorce that I thought you would have to get.
I should never have dreamt of doing it on mine.
However, to do it with my own hand is too good for
me, after all. It is you, my ruined husband, who
ought to strike the blow. I think I should love you
more, if that were possible, if you could bring yourself
to do it, since there's no other way of escape for ’ee.
I feel I am so utterly worthless! So very greatly in
the way!’

I Issh !’ ‘

‘Well, since you say no, I won’t. I have no wish
opposed to yours.’

He knew this to be true enough. Since the dos-
peration of the night her activities had dropped to
zero, and there was no further rashnesstobe feared.

Tess tried to busy herself again over the breakfast
table with more or less success, and they sat down
both on the same side, so that their glances did not
meet. There was at ﬁrst something awkward in
hearing each other eat and drink, but this could not
be escaped; moreover, the amount of eating done was
small on both sides. Brealdast over, he rose, and,
telling her the hour at which he might be expected to
dinner, went off to the miller's in a mechanical pur-
suance of the plan of studying that business, which
had been his only practical reason for coming here.

When he was gone Tess stood at the window, and
presently saw his form crossing the great stone bridge

3

THE WOMAN PAYS

which conducted to the mill premises. He sank be-
hind it, crossed the railway beyond, and disappeared.
Then, without a sigh, she turned her attention to the
room, and began clearing the table and setting it in
order. '

The charwoman soon came. Her presence was at
ﬁrst a strain upon Tess, but afterwards an alleviation.
At half-past twelve she left her assistant alone in the
ldtchen, and, returning to the sitting-room, waited for
the reappearance of Angel’s form behind the bridge.

About one he showed himself. Her false ﬂushed,
although he was a quarter of a mile 03. She ran to
the kitchen to get the dinner served by the time he
should enter. He went ﬁrst to the room where they
had washed their hands together the day before, and
as he entered the sitting-room the dish-covers m
from the dishes as if by his own motion.

‘How punctual!’ he said.

Sh‘Yes. I saw you coming over the bridge,’ said

e.

The meal was passed in commonplace talk of what
he had been doing during the morning at the Abbey
Mill, of the methods of bolting and the old-fashioned
machinery, which he feared would not enlighten him
greatly on modern improved methods, some of it
seeming to have been in use ever since the days it
ground for the monks in the adjoining conventual
buildings—now a heap of ruins. He left the house
again in the course of an hour, coming home at dusk,
and occupying himself through the evening with his
papers. She feared she was in the way, and, when
the old woman was gone, retired to the kitchen, where
she made herself busy as Well as she could for more
than an hour. .

Clare's shape appeared at the door.

‘You must not work like this,’ he said. ‘You are
not my servant; you are my wife.’

She raised her eyes, and brightened somewhat.
‘I may think myself that—indeed? she murmured,

307

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

in piteous raillery. ‘You mean in name! Well, I
don’t want to be anything more.’

‘You may think so, Tess! You are. What do
you mean?’

‘I don’t know,’ she said hastily, with tears in her
accents. ‘ I thought I—bemuse I am not respectable,
I mean. I told you I thought I was not respectable
enough long ago-and on that account I didn't want
to marry you, only—only you urged me!‘

She broke into sobs, and turned her back to him
It would almost have won round any man but Angel
Clare. Within the remote depths of his constitution,
so gentle and aﬁectionate as he was in general, there
lay hidden a hard logical deposit, like a vein of metal in
a soft loam, which turned the edge of everything that
attempted to traverse it. It had blocked his accept-
ance of the Church; it blocked his acceptance of
Tess. Moreover, his affection itself was less ﬁre than
radiance, and, with regard to the other sex, when he
ceased to believe he ceased to follow: contrasting in
this with many impressionable natures, who remain
sensuously infatuated with what they intellectually
despise. He waited till her sobbing ceased.

‘I wishhalf the women in England were asrespect-
able as you,’ he said, in an ebullition of bitterness
against womanln'nd in general. ‘ It isn’t a question of
respectability, but one of principle 1’

He spoke such things as these and more of a kin-
dred sort to her, being still swayed by the anti-
pathetic wave which warps direct souls with such
persistence when once their vision ﬁnds itself mocked
by appearances. There was, it is true, underneath, a
back current of sympathy through which a woman of
the world might have conquered him. But Tess did
not think of this; she took everything as her deserts,
and hardly opened her mouth. The ﬁrmness of he:
devotion to him was indeed almost pitiful; quick-
tempered as she naturally was, nothing that he could.

say made her unseemly; she sought not her own; was
308

THE WOMAN PAYS

not provoked; thought no evil of his treatment of her.
She might just now have been Apostolic Charity her-
self returned to a Self-seeming modern world.

This evening. night, and morning were passed
preciselyasthepreeedingoneshadbeenpassed. On
one, and only one, occasion did she—the formerly £ree
and independent Tess—venture to make any advances.
It wason the third occasion of his starting, after a meal,
to go out to the ﬂour-mill. As he was leaving the
table he said ‘Good-bye,‘ and she replied in the same
words, at the same time her mouth in the
way of his. He did not avail himself of the invitation,
saying, as he turned hastily aside—

‘I shall be home punctually.’

Tessshrankintoherselfasifshehadbeenstruck.
Often enough had he tried to reach those lips against
her consent—often had he said gaily that her mouth
and breath tasted of the butter and eggs and milk and
honey on which she mainly lived, that he drew sus—
tenance from them, and other follies of that sort. But
he did not care for them now. He observed her
sudden shrinking, and said gently—

‘You know, I have to think of a course. It was
imperative that we should stay together a little while,
to avoid the scandal to you that would have resulted
from our immediate parting. But you must see it is
only for form's sake.’

‘Yes,’ said Tess absently.

He went out, and on his way to the mill stood still,
and wished for a moment that he had responded yet
more kindly, and kissed her once at least.

Thus they lived through this despairing day or
two; in the same house, truly; but more widely apart
than before they were lovers. It was evident to her
that he was, as he had said, living with paralyzed
activities, in his endeavour to think of a plan of
procedure. She was awe-stricken to discover such

determination under such apparent ﬂexibility. His
consistency was, indeed, too cruel. She no longer
309

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

forgiveness now. More than once she
thought of going away from him during his absence at
the mill; but she feared that this, instead of beneﬁting
him, might be the means of hampering and humiliat-
ing him yet more if it should become known.
Meanwhile Clare was meditating, verily. His
thought had been unsuspended; he was becoming ill
with thinking; eaten out with thinking, withered by
thinking; scourged out of all his former pulsating
ﬂexuous domesticity. He walked about saying to
himself, ‘What’s to be done—what’s to be done?’ and
by chance she overheard him. It caused her to break
3:1 eEroserve about their future which had hitherto pre-
‘I suppose—you are not going to live with ink
long, are you, Angel?’ she asked, the sunk corners of
her mouth betraying how purely mechanical were the
means by which she retained that expression of
chastened calm upon her face.
\ ‘I cannot,‘ he said, ‘without despising myself, and
what is worse, perhaps, despising you. I mean, of
course, cannot live with you in the ordinary sense.
At present, whatever I feel, I do not despise you.
And, let me speak plainly, or you may not see all my
difﬁculties. How can we live together while that man
lives?—he being your husband in Nature, and not I.
If he were dead it might be different. . . . Besides.
that’s not all the difﬁculty; it lies in another considera-
tion—one bearing upon the future of other people than
ourselves. Think of years to come, and children being
born to us, and this past matter getting known—for it
must get known. There is not an uttermost part of
theearthbutsomebodyoomesfromitorgoestoit
from elsewhere. Well, think of wretches of our ﬂesh
and blood growing up under a taunt which they will
gradually get to feel the full force of with their ex-
panding years. What an awakening for than! What
a prospect! Can you honestly say Remain, after
contemplating this contingency? Don’t you think

310

THE WOMAN PAYS

wehadbetterendure theillswehavethanﬂyto
others?’

Her eyelids, weighted with trouble, continued
drooping as before.

‘I cannot say Remain,’ she answered. ‘I cannot;
I had not thought so far.’

Tess’s feminine hope—shall we confes it—had
been so obstinater recuperative as to revive in her
surreptitious visions of a domiciliary intimacy con-
tinued long enough to break down his coldness even
against his judgment. Though unsophisticated in the
usual sense, she was not incomplete; and it would have
denoted deﬁciency of womanhood if she had not
instinctively known what an argument lies in pro-
pinquity. Nothing else would serve her, she knew,
if this failed. It was wrong to hope in what was of
the nature of strategy, she said to herself: yet that
sort of hope she could not extinguish. Hislastrep-
resentation had now been made, and it was, as she
said, a new view. She had truly never thought so
far as that, and his lucid picture of possible oﬁspring
who would scorn her was one that brought deadly
conviction to an honest heart which was humanitarian
to its centre. Sheer experience had already taught
her that, in some circumstances, there was one thing
betterthantoleadagoodlife,andthatwastobe
saved from leading any life whatever. Like all who
have been previsioned by suﬁering, she could, in the
words of M. Sully-Prudhomme, hear a penal sentence
inthe ﬁat, ‘Youshallbebom,’particularlyifaddressed
to potential issue of hers.

Yet such is the vulpine slyness of Dame Nature
that, till now, Tess had been hoodwinked by her love
for Clare into forgetting it might result in vitalizations
that would inﬂict upon others what she had bewailed
as a misfortune to herself.

She therefore could not withstand his argument.
But with the self-combating proclivity of the super-
sensiﬁmananswertheretoaroseinClare’sown

3!!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

mind, and he almost feared it. It was based on her
exceptional physical nature; and she might have used
it promisingly. She might have added besides: ‘On
an Australian upland or Texan plain, who is to know
or care about my misfortunes. or to reproach me or
you?‘ Yet, like the majority of women, she accepted
the momentary presentment as if it were the inevitable.
And she may have been right. The intuitive heart of
woman knoweth not only its own bitterness, but its
husband’s, and even if these assumed reproaches were
not likely to be addressed to him or to his by strangers,
they might have reached his ears from his own fas-
tidious brain.

It was the third day of the estrangement. Some
might risk the odd paradox that with more animalism
he would have been the noble: man. We do not say
it. Yet Clare’s love was doubtless ethereal to a fault,
imaginative to impracticability. With these natures,

presence is sometimes less appealing than
corporeal absence; the latter creating an ideal pres-
ence that conveniently drops the defects of the real.
She found that her personality did not plead her cause
so forcibly as she had anticipated. The ﬁgurative
phrase was true: she was another woman than the
one who had excited his desire.

‘I have thought over what you say,’ she remarked
to him1 moving her foreﬁnger over the tablecloth, her
other hand, which bore the ring that mocked than
both, supporting her forehead. ‘It is quite true,
all of it; it must be. You must go away from me.’

‘But what can you do?’

‘I can go home.’

Clare had not thought of that.

‘Are you sure?’ he inquired.

‘Quite sure. We ought to part, and we may as
well get it past and done. You once said that I was
apt to win men» against their better judgment; and if
I am constantly before your eyes I may cause you to
change your plans in opposition to your reason and

3m

THE WOMAN PAYS

wish; and afterwards your repentance and my sorrow
will be terrible.’

‘And you would like to go home?’ he asked.

‘I want to leave you. and go home.’

‘Then it shall be so.’

Though she did not look up at him, she started.
There was a. diﬁerenee between the proposition and
the covenant, which she had felt only too quickly.

‘I feared it would come to this,’ she murmured,
her countenance meekly ﬁxed. ‘I don’t complain,
Angel. I—I think it best. What you said has quite
convinced me. Yes, though nobody else should re-
proach me if we should stay together, yet somewhen,
years hence, you might get angry with me for any
ordinary matter, and knowing what you do of my
bygones you yourself might be tempted to say words,
and they might be overheard, perhaps by my own
children. 0, what only hurts me now would torture
and kill me then! I will go—to-morrow.’

‘And I shall not stay here. Though I didn’t like

to initiate it, I have seen that it was advisable we
should part—at least for a while, till I can better see
the shape that things have taken, and can write to
you.’
Tess stole a glance at her husband. He was pale,
even tremulous; but, as before, she was appalled by
the determination revealed in the depths of this gentle
being she had married—the will to subdue the grosser
to the subtler emotion, the substance to the concep-
tion, the ﬂesh to the spirit. Propensities, tendencies,
habits, were as dead leaves upon the tyrannous wind
of his imaginative ascendancy.

He may have observed her look, for he explained—

‘I think of people more kindly when I am away
from them’; adding cynically, ‘God knows; perhaps
we shall shake down together some day, for weatiness;
thousands have done it!’

That day he began to pack up, and she went up-
stairsandbegantopackalso. Bothknewthatitwas

313

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

in their two minds that they might part the next
morning for ever, despite the gloss of ‘
conjectures thrown over their proceeding because they
were of the sort to whom any parting which has an
air of ﬁnality is a torture. He knew, and she knew,
that, though the fascination which each had exercised
over the other—on her part independently of accom-
plishments—wmxld probably in the ﬁrst days of their
separation be even more potent than ever, time must
attenuate that eﬁect; the practical arguments against
accepting her as a housemate might pronounce them-
selves more strongly in the boreal light of a remoter
view. Moreover, when two people are once parted—
have abandoned a. common domicile and a common
environment—new growths insensiny bud upward to
ﬁll each vacated place: unforeseen accidents hinder
intentions, and old plans are forgotten.

\.

XXXVII

MIDNIGHT came and passed silently, for there was
nothing to announce it in the Valley of the Froom.

Not long after one o’clock there was a slight creak
in the darkened farmhouse once the mansion of the
d'Urbervilles. Tess, who used the upper chamber,
heard it and awoke. It had come from the corner
step of the staircase, which, as usual, was loosely
nailed. She saw the door of her bedroom open. and
the ﬁgure of her husband crossed the stream of moon-
lightwithacuriouslycarefultread. Hewasinhis
shirt and trousers only, and her ﬁrst ﬂush of joy died
, when she perceived that his eyes were ﬁxed in an
unnatural stare on vacancy. When he reached the
middle of the room he stood still and murmured, in
tones of indescribable sadness—

‘Dead! dead! dead!’

Under the inﬂuence of any strongly disturbing force
Clare would occasionally walk in his sleep, and even
perform strange feats, such as he had done on the
night of their return from market just before their
marriage, whenhere—enactedinhisbedroomhiscom-
bat with the man who had insulted her. Tess saw
that continued mental distress had wrought him into
that somnambulistic state now.

Her loyal conﬁdence in him lay so deep down in
her heart that, awake or asleep, he inspired her with
nosortofpersonalfear. Ifhehadenteredwitha.
pistol in his hand he would scarcely have disturbed
her trust in his protectiveness.

Clare came close, and bent over ha. ‘Dead, dead,
dead !’ he murmured.

315

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

After ﬁxedly regarding her for some moments with
the same gaze of unmeasurable woe he bent lower,
enclosed her in his arms, and rolled her in the sheet as
in a shroud. Then lifting her from the bed with as
much respect as one would show to a dead body, he
carried her across the room, mumuring—

‘My poor, poor Tess—~my dearest, darling Tess!
So sweet, so good, so true!’

The words of endearment, withheld so severely in
his waking hours, were inexpressibly sweet to her
forlorn and hungry heart. If it had been to save her
weary life she would not, by moving or struggling,
have put an end to the position she found herself in.
Thus she lay in absolute stillness, scarcely venturing
to breathe, and. wondering what he was going to do
with her, suﬁened herself to be borne out upon the
landing.

‘My wife—dead, dead !’ he said.

He paused in his labours for a moment to lean with
her against the banister. Was he going to throw her
down? Self-solicitude was near extinction in her, and
in the knowledge that he had planned to depart on
the mom-ow, possibly for always, she lay in his arms
in this precarious position with a sense rather of
luxury than of terror. If they could only fall to-
gether, and both be dashed to pieces, how ﬁt, how
desirable.

However, he did not let her fall, but took advantage
of the support of the handrail to imprint a kiss upon
her lips—lips in the daytime scorned. Then he clasped
her with a renewed ﬁrmness of hold, and descended
the staircase. The creak of the loose stair did not
awaken him, and they reached the ground - ﬂoor
safely. Freeing one of his hands from his grasp of
her for a moment. he slid back the door-bar and passed
out, slightly striking his stockinged toe against the
edge of the door. But this he seemed not to mind,
and, having room for extension in the open air, he
lifted her against his shoulder, so that he could carry

316

THE WOMAN PAYS

her with ease, the absence of clothes taking much from
his burden. Thus he bore her off the premises in the
direction of the river a few yards distant.

His ultimate intention, if he had any, she had not
yet divined; and she found herself conjecturing on the
matter as a third might have done. So ease-
fully had she delivered her whole being up to him that
itpleasedhertothinkhewasregardingherashis
absolute possession, to dispose of as he should choose.
It was consoling, under the hovering terror of to-
morrow's separation, to feel that he really recognized
her now as his wife Tess, and did not cast her 03, even
if in that recognition he went so far as to arrogate to
himself the right of banning her.

Ah! now she knew what he was dreaming of—that
Sunday morning when he had borne her along through
the water with the other dairymaids, who had loved
him nearly as much as she, if that were possible, which
Tess could hardly admit. Clare did not cross the
bridge with her, but proceeding several paces on the
same side towards the adjoining mill, at length stood
still on the brink of the river.

Its waters, in creeping down these miles of meadow-
land, frequently divided, serpentining in purposeless
curves, looping themselves around little islands that
had no name, returning and re-embodying themselves
as a broad main stream further on. Opposite the spot
to which he had brought her was such a general con-
ﬂuence, and the river was proportionately voluminous
and deep. Across it was a. narrow foot-bridge; but
now the autumn ﬂood had washed the handrail away,
leaving the bare plank only, which, lying a few inches
above the speeding current, formed a giddy pathway
for even steady heads; and Tess had noticed from
the window of the house in the daytime young men
walking across upon it as a feat in balancing. Her
husband had possibly observed the same performance;
anyhow, he now mounted the plank, and, sliding One
foot forward. advanced along it.

3‘7

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Was he going to drown her? Probably he was.
The spot was lonely, the river deep and wide enough
to make such a purpose easy of accomplishment. He
might drown her if he would; it would be better than
parting to-morrow to lead severed lives.

The swift stream raced and gyrated under them,
tossing, distorting, and splitting the moon’s reﬂected
face. Spots of froth travelled past, and intercepted
weeds waved behind the piles. If they could both fall
together into the current now, their arms would be so
tightly clasped together that they could not be saved;
they would go out of the world almost painlessly, and
there would be no more reproach to her, or to him for
marrying her. His last half-hour with her would have
been a loving one, while if they lived till he awoke his
daytime aversion would return, and this hour would
remain to be contemplated only as a transient dream.

The impulse stirred in her, yet she dared not indulge
it, to make a movement that would have precipitated
th both into the gulf. How she valued her own life
had been proved; but his—she had no right to tamper
with it. He reached the other side with her in safety.

Here they were within a plantation which formed
the Abbey grounds, and, taking a new hold of her, he
went onward a few steps till they reached the ruined
choir of the Abbey-church. Against the north wall
was the empty stone cofﬁn of an abbot, in which every
tourist with a turn for grim humour was accustomed
to stretch himself. In this Clare carefully laid Tess.
Having kissed her lips a second time, he breathed
deeply, as if a greatly desired end were attained.
Clare then lay down on the ground alongside, when
he immediately fell into the deep dead slumber of
exhaustion, and remained motionless as a log. The
spurt of mental excitement which had produced the
eﬂort was now over.

Tess sat up in the cofﬁn. The night, though dry
and mild for the season, was more than sufﬁciently

coldtomakeit dangerousforhimtoremainherelong,
318

THE WOMAN PAYS

in his half-clothed state. If he were left to himself he
would in all probability stay there till the morning,
and be chilled to certain death. She had heard of
such deaths after sleep-walking. But how could she
dare to awaken him, and let him know what he had
been doing, when it would mortify him to discover his
folly in respect of her? Tess, however, stepping out
of her stone conﬁne, shook him slightly, but was unable
to arouse him without being violent. It was indispen-
sable to do something, for she was beginning to shiver,
the sheet being but a poor protection. Her excite-
ment had in a measure kept her warm during the few
minutes' adventure; but that beatiﬁc interval was
over.

It suddenly occurred to her to try persuasion; and
accordingly she whispered in his ear, with as much
ﬁrmness and decision as she could summon-—

‘Let us walk on, darling,’ at the same time taking
him suggestiver by the arm. To her relief, he
unresistingly acquiesced; her words had apparently
thrown him back into his dream, which thenceforward
seemed to enter on a new phase, wherein he fancied
shehadrisenasaspirit,andwasleadinghimto
Heaven. Thus she conducted him by the arm to the
stone bridge in front of their residence, crossing which
they stood at the manor—house door. Tess’s feet were
quite bare, and the stones hurt her, and chilled her to
the bone; but Clare was in his woollen stockings, and
appeared to feel no discomfort.

There was no further difﬁculty. She induced him
to lie down on his own sofa bed, and covered him up
warmly, lighting a temporary ﬁre of wood, to dry any
dampness out of him. The noise of these attentions
she thought might awaken him, and secretly wished
that they might. But the exhaustion of his mind and
body was such that he remained undisturbed.

As soon as they met the next morning Tess divined
that Angel knew little or nothing of how far she had
been concerned in the night’s excursion, though, as

3‘9

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

regarded himself, he may have been aware that he' had
not lain still. In truth, he had awakened that morn-
ing from a sleep deep as annihilation; and during those
ﬁrst few moments in which the brain, like a Samson
shaldnghimself,istryingitssttengthhehadsome
dim notion of an unusual nocturnal proceeding. But
the realities of his situation soon displaced conjecture
on the other subject.

He waited in expectancy to discern some mental
pointing; he knew that if any intention of his, con-
cluded over-night, did not vanish in the light of
morning, it stood on a basis approximating to one of
pure reason, even if initiated by impulse of feeling;
that it was so far, therefore, to be trusted. He thus
beheld in the pale morning light the resolve to separate
from her; not as a hot and indignant instinct, but
denuded of the passionateness which had made it
scorch and burn; standing in its bones: nothing but a
skeleton, but none the less there. Clare no longer
hesitated.

At brealdast, and while they were packing the few
remaining articles, he showed his weariness from the
night's effort so unmistakably that Tess was on the
point of revealing all that had happened; but the
reﬂection that it would anger him, grieve him, stultify
him, to know that he had instinctively manifested a
fondness for her of which his common-sense did not
approve; that his inclination had compromised his
dignity when reason slept, again deterred her. It was
too much like laughing at a man when sober for his
erratic deeds during intoxication.

It just crossed her mind, too, that he might have a
faint recollection of his tender vagary, and was disin-
clined to allude to it from a conviction that she would
take amatory advantage of the opportunity it gave her
of appealing to him anew not to go.

He had ordered by letter a vehicle from the nearest
town, and soon after breakfast it arrived. She saw in

it the beginning of the end—the temporary end, at
32°

'THE WOMAN PAYS

least, for the revelation of his tenderness by the inci-
dent of the night raised dreams of a possible future
with him. The luggage was put on the top, and the
man drove them off, the miller and the old waiting-
woman expressing some surprise at their precipitate
departure, which Clare attributed to his discovery that
the mill~work was not of the modern kind which he
wished to investigate, a statement that was true so
far as it went. Beyond this there was nothing in the
manner of their leaving to suggest a ﬁasco, or that they
were not going together to visit friends.

Their route lay near the dairy from which they had
started with such solemn joy in each other a few days
back, and, as Clare wished to wind up his business
with Mr. Crick, Tess could hardly avoid paying Mrs.
Crick a call at the same time, unless she would excite
suspicion of their unhappy state.

To make the call as unobtrusive as possible they left
the carriage by the wicket leading down from the high
road to the dairy—house, and descended the track on
foot, side by side. The withy-bed had been cut, and
they could see over the stumps the spot to which Clare
had followed her when he pressed her to be his wife;
to the left the enclosure in which she had been fasci-
nated by his harp; and far away behind the cowstalls
the mead which had been the scene of their ﬁrst
embrace. The gold of the summer picture was now '
grey, the colours mean, the rich soil mud, and the
river cold.

Over the barton-gate the dairyman saw them, and
came forward. throwing into his face the kind of
jocularity deemed appropriate in Talbothays and its
vicinity on the reappearance of the newly married.
Then Mrs. Crick emerged from the house, and several
others of their old acquaintance, though Marian and
Retty did not seem to be there.

Tess valiantly bore their sly attacks and friendly
humours, which affected her far otherwise than they
supposed. In the tacit agreement of husband and

321

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

wife to keep their estrangement a secret they behaved
as would have been ordinary. And then, although
she would rather there had been no word spoken on
the subject, Tess had to hear in detail the story of
Marian and Retty. The latter had gone home to her
father’s, and Marian had left to look for employment
elsewhere. They feared she would come to no good.

To dissipate the sadness of this recital Tess wen
and bade all her favourite cows good-bye, touching
each of them with her hand, and as she and Clare
stood side by side at leaving, as if united body and
soul, there would have been something peculiarly sorry
in their aspect to one who should have seen it truly;
two limbs of one life, as they outwardly were, his arm
touching hers, her skirts touching him, facing one way,
as against all the dairy facing the other, speaking in
their adieux as ‘we,’ and yet sundered like the poles.
Perhaps something unusually stiﬁ and embarrassed in
their attitude, some awkwardness in acting up to their
profession of unity, diﬁerent from the natural shyness
of young couples, may have been apparent, for when
they were gone Mrs. Crick said to her husband—

‘How onnatural the brightness of her eyes did
seem, and how they stood like waxen images and
talked as if they were in a dream! Didn't it strike
’ee that 'twas so? Tess had always sommat strange
in her, and she’s not now quite like the proud young
bride of a well-be—doing man.’

They re-entered the vehicle, and were driven along
the roads towards Weatherbury and Stagfoot Lane,
till they reached the Lane inn, where Clare dismissed
the ﬂy and man. They rested here a while, and,
entering the Vale, were next driven onward towards
her home by a stranger who did not know their
relations. At a midway point, when Nuttlebury had
been passed, and where there were cross-roads, Clare
stopped the conveyance and said to Tess that if she
meant to return to her mother’s house it was here
that he would leave her. As they could not talk with

322

THE WOMAN PAYS

freedom in the driver’s presence, he asked her to
accompany him for a few steps on foot along one of
the branch roads; she assented, and directing the man
to wait a few minutes, they strolled away.

‘Now. let us understand each other,’ he said
gently. ‘There is no anger between us, though
there is that which I cannot endure at present. I
will try to bring myself to endure it. I will let you
lmowwherelgotoassoonasIknowmyself. And
if I can bring myself to bear it—-if it is desirable,
possible—I will come to you. But until I come to
you it will be better that you should not try to come
to me.’

The severity of the decree seemed deadly to Tess;
she saw his view of her clearly enough; he could
regard her in no other light than that of one who had
practised gross deceit upon him. Yet could a woman
who had done even what she had done deserve all
this? But she could contest the point with him no
further. She simply repeated after him his own
words.

‘UntilyoucometomeImustnottrytocometo
you?’

‘Just so.’

‘May I write to you?’

‘O yes—if you are ill, or want anything at all. I
hope that will not be the case; so that it may happen
that I write ﬁrst to you.’

‘I agree to the conditions, Angel; because you
know best what my punishment ought to be; only—
only—don’t make it more than I can bear!’

That was all she said on the matter. If Tess had
been artful, had she made a scene, fainted, wept
hysterically. in that lonely lane. notwithstanding the
fury of fastidiousness with which he was possessed, he
would probably not have withstood her. But her
mood of long-suffering made his way easy for him,
and she herself was his best advocate. Pride, so,
entered into her submission—which perhaps was a

3’3

TESS 0F THED'URBERVILLES

symptom of that reckless acquiescence in chance so
apparent in the whole d’Urberville family—~and the
many effective chords which. she could have stirred
by an appeal were left untouched.

The remainder of their discourse was on practical
matters only. He now handed her a packet contain-
ing a fairly good sum of money, which he had obtained
from his bankers for the purpose. The brilliants, the
interest in which seemed to be Tess’s for her life only
(if he understood the wording of the will), he advised
hertolethimsendtoabankforsafety;andtothis
she readily agreed.

These things arranged, he walked with Tess back
to the carriage, and handed her in. The coachman
was paid and told where to drive her. Taking next
his own bag and umbrella—the sole articles he had
brought with him hithezwards—he bade her good-bye;
and they parted there and then.

The ﬂy moved creepineg up a hill, and Clare
watched it go with an unpremeditated hope that Tess
would look out of the window for one moment. But
that she never thought of doing, would not have ven-
tured to do, lying in a half-dead faint inside. Thus
he beheld her recede, and in the anguish of his heart
qéuﬁled a line from a poet, with peculiar emendations
o s own-—

God’s MI in his heaven: all’s wrong with the world!

When Tess had passed over the crest of the hill he
turned to go his own way, and hardly knew that he
loved her still.

XXXVIII

As she drove on through Blackmoor Vale, and the
landscape of her youth began to open around her, Tess
aroused herself from her stupor. Her ﬁrst thought
was how would she be able to face her parents?

She reached a turnpike-gate which stood upon
the highway to the village. It was thrown open by a
stranger, not by the old man who had kept it for many
years, and to whom she had been known; he had
probably left on New Year's Day, the date when such
changes were made. Having received no intelligence
lately from her home, she asked the turnpike-keeper
for news.

‘Oh—nothing, miss, he answered. ‘Marlott is
Marlott still. Folks have died and that. John Durbey-
ﬁeld, too, hev had a daughter married this week to a
gentleman—farmer; not from John’s own house, you
know; they was married elsewhere; the gentleman
being of that high standing that John’s own folk was
not considered well-be—doing enough to have any part
in it, the bridegroom seeming not to know how’t have
been discovered that John is a old and ancient noble-
man himself by blood, with family skillentons in their
own vaults to this day, but done out of his property in
the time o’ the Romans. However, Sir John, as we
call ’n now, kept up the wedding-day as well as he
could, and stood treat to everybody in the parish;
and John’s wife sung songs at The Pure Drop till
past eleven o'clock.’

Hearing this, Tess felt so sick at heart that she
could not decide to go home publicly in the ﬂy with
her luggage and belongings. She asked the turnpike-

325

v

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

keeper if she might deposit her things at his house
for a while, and, on his offering no objection, she
dismissedherwriage,andwentontothevillage
alone by a back lane.

At sight of her father’s chimney she asked herself
how she could possibly enter the house! Inside that
cottage her relations were calmly supposing her far
away on a wedding-tour with a comparatively rich
man, who was to conduct her to bouncing prosperity;
while here she was, friendless, creeping up to the old
door quite by herself, with no better place to go to in
the world.

She did not reach the house unobserved. Just by
the garden-hedge she was met by a girl who knew
her—one of the two or three with whom she had been
intimate at school. After making a few inquiries as to
how Tess came there, her friend, unheeding her tragic
look, interrupted with—

‘But where’s thy gentleman, Tess?’

Tess hastily explained that he had been called
away on business, and, leaving her interlocutor,
clambered over the garden-hedge, and thus made her
way to the house.

As she went up the garden-path she heard her
mother singing by the back door, coming in sight of
which she perceived Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld on the doorstep
in the act of wringing a sheet. Having performed
this without observing Tess, she went indoors, and
her daughter followed her.

The washing-tub stood in the same old place on
the same old quarter-hogshead, and her mother,
having thrown the sheet aside, was about to plunge
her arms in anew.

‘Why—Tess!—my chil’—I thought you was mar-
ried!—married really and truly this time~we sent
the cider—'

‘Yes, mother; so I am.’

‘Going to be?"

‘No—I am married.’ 6

32

THE WOMAN PAYS

‘Married! Then where’s thy husband?’

‘Oh, he’s gone away for a time.’

‘Gone away! When was you married, then? The
day you said?’

‘Yes, Tuesday, mother.’

‘And now 'tis on’y Saturday, and he gone away?’

‘Yes; he’s gone.’

‘What’s the meaning 0’ that? ’Nation seize such
husbands as you seem to get, say I!‘

‘Mother!’ Tess went aeross to Joan Durbeyﬁeld,
laid her face upon the matron’s bosom, and burst into
sobs. ‘I don’t know how to tell ’ee, mother! You
saidtome,andwrotetome,that1wasnottotell
him. But I did tell him—I couldn’t help it—-and he
went away!’

‘0 you little fool—you little fool!’ burst out Mrs.
Durbeyﬁeld, splashing Tess and herself in her agita-
tion. ‘My good God! that ever I should ha' lived to
say it, but I say it again, you little fool !'

Tess was eonvulsed with weeping, the tension of
so many days having relaxed at last.

‘I know it—I know—I know!’ she gasped through
her sobs. ‘But, 0 my mother, I could not help it!
He was so good—and I felt the wickedness of trying
to blind him as to what had happened! If—if—it
were to be done again—I should do the same. I
could not—I dared not—so sin—against him!’

“But you sinned enough to marry him ﬁrstl’

‘Yes, yes; that's where my misery do lie! But I
thought he could get rid 0’ me by law if he were
determined not to overlook it. And 0. if you knew—
if you could only half know how I loved him—how
amdoustastohavehim—andhowwmnngas
betweencaringsomuchforhimandmywishtobe
fair to him!’

Tess was so shaken that she could get no further,
and sank a helpless thing into a chair.

‘Well, well; what's done can’t be undone! I'm
sure I don’t lmow why children 0' my bringing forth

337

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

should all be bigger simpletons than other people's——
not to know better than to blab such a thing as that,
when he couldn’t ha’ found it out till too late!’ Here ‘
Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld began shedding tears on her own
account as a mother to be pitied. ‘What your father
will say I don't know,’ she continued; ‘for he’s been
talking about the wedding up at Rolliver's and The
Pure Drop every day since, and about his family
getting back to their rightful position through you——
poor silly maul—and now you've made this mess of it!
The Lord-a—Lord!’

As if to bring matters to a focus, Tess’s father was
heard approaching at that moment. He did not,
however, enter immediately, and Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld
said that she would break the bad news to him
herself, Tess keeping out of sight for the present.
After her ﬁrst burst of disappointment Joan began
to take the mishap as she had taken Tess’s original
trouble, as she would have taken a wet holiday or
failure in the potato—crop; as a thing which had come
upon them irrespective of desert or folly; a chance
external impingement to be borne with; not a lesson.

Tess retreated upstairs, and beheld casually that
the beds had been shifted, and new arrangements
made. Her old bed had been adapted for two younger
children. There was no place here for her now.

The room below being uneeiled, she could hear
most of what went on there. Presently her father
entered, apparently carrying a live hen. He was a
foot-haggler now, having been obliged to sell his
second home, and he travelled with his basket on his
arm. The hen had been carried about this morning,
as it was often carried, to show people that he was in
his work, though it had lain, with its legs tied, under
the table at Rolliver's for more than an hour.

‘We’ve just had up a story about—’ Durbeyﬁeld
began, and thereupon related in detail to his wife a
discussion which had arisen at the inn about the
clergy, originated by the fact of his daughter having

338

THE WOMAN PAYS

married into a clerical family. ‘They was formerly
styled “sir,” like my own anecstry.’ he said, ‘though
nowadays their tme style, strictly speaking, is “clerk”
only.’ As Tess had wished that no great publicity
should be given to the event, he had mentioned no
particulars. He hoped she would remove that pro-
hibition soon. He proposed that the couple should
take Tess's own name, d’Urberville, as uneorrupted.
It was better than her husband’s. He asked if any
letter had come from her that day.

Then Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld informed him that no
Etta- had come, but Tess unfortunately had come

When at length the collapse was explained to him
a sullen mortiﬁcation, not usual with Durbeyﬁeld,
overpowered the inﬂuence of the cheering glass. Yet
the intrinsic quality of the event moved his touchy
sensitiveness less than its conjectured eﬂect upon
the minds of others.

‘To think, now, that this was to be the end o’t!’
said Sir John. ‘And I with a family vault under that
there church of Kingsbere as big as Squire Jollard’s
ale-cellar, and my folk lying there in sixes and sevens,
as genuine county bones and marrow as any recorded
in ' . And now to be sure what they fellers at
Rolliver’s and The Pure Drop will say to me! How
they’ll squint and glane, and say, “This is yer mighty
match is it; this is yer getting back to the true level
of yer forefathers in King Norman's time!" I feel
this is too much, Joan; I shall put an end to myself,
title and all—I can bear it no longer! . . . But she
can make him keep her if he’s married her?’

‘Why, yes. But she won’t think 0’ doing that.’

'D’ye think he really have married her?—or is it
like the ﬁrst—’

Poor Tess, who had heard as far as this, could not
bear to hear more. The perception that her word
could be doubted even here, in her own parental house,
set her mind against the spot as nothing else could

329

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

have done. How unexpected were the attacks of
destiny! And if her father doubted her a little, would
not neighbours and acquaintance doubt her much?
0, she could not live long at home!

A few days, accordingly, were all that she allowed
herself here, at the end of which time she received a
short note from Clare, informing her that he had gone
to the North of England to look at a term. In her
craving for the lustre of her true position as his wife,
and to hide from her parents the vast extent of the
division between them, she made use of this letter as
her reason for again departing, leaving them under
the impression that she was setting out to join him.
Still further to screen her husband from any imputa-
tion of unkindness to her, she took twenty-ﬁve of the
ﬁfty pounds Clare had given her, and handed the sum
overtohermother, asifthewifeofamanlikeAngel
Clare could well afford it, saying that it was a slight
return for the trouble and humiliation she had brought
upon them in years past. With this assertion of her
dignity she bade them farewell; and after that there
were lively doings in the Durbeyﬁeld household for
some time on the strength of Tess's bounty, her
mother saying, and, indeed, believing, that the rupture
which had arisen between the young husband and
wife had adjusted itself under their strong feeling that
they could not live apart from each other.

XXXIX

IT was three weeks after the marriage that Clare
found himself descending the hill which led to the
well-known parsonage of his father. With his down.
waxdeoursethetowerofthechurchroseintothe
eveningskyinamannerofinquiryastowhyhehad
come; and no living person in the twilighted town
seemed to notice him, still less to expect him. He
was arriving like a. ghost, and the sound of his own
footsteps was almost an encumbrance to be got rid of.

The picture of life had changed for him. Before
this time he had known it but speculatively; now he
thought he knew it as a practical man; though perhaps
he did not, even yet. Nevertheless humanity stood
before him no longer in the pensive sweetness of
Italian art, but in the staring and ghastly attitudes of
a Wiertz Museum, and with the leer of a study by
Van Beers.

His conduct during these ﬁrst weeks had been
desultory beyond description. After mechanically
attempting to pursue his agricultural plans as though
nothing unusual had happened, in the manner recom-
mended by the great and wise men of all ages, he
concluded that very few of those great and wise men
had ever gone so far outside themselves as to test the
feasibility of their counsel. ‘This is the chief thing:
be not perturbed,’ said the Pagan moralist. That was
just Clare's own opinion. But he was perturbed.
‘Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid,’ said the Nazarene. Clare chimed in cordially;
but his heart was troubled all the same. How he
would have liked to confront those two great thinkers,

331

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

and earnestly appeal to them as fellow-man to fellow‘
men, and ask them to tell him their method!

His mood transmuted itself into a dogged in-
diﬁerence till at length he fancied he was looking on
his own eiu‘stence with the passive interest of an
outsider.

He was embittered by the conviction that all this
desolation had been brought about by the accident of
her being a. d'Urberville. When he found that Tess
came of that exhausted ancient line, and was not of
the new tribes from below, as he had fondly dreamed,
why had he not stoically abandoned her, in ﬁdelityto
his principles? This was what he had got by apostasy,
and his punishment was deserved.

Then he became weary and anxious, and his
anxiety increased. He wondered if he had treated
her unfairly. He ate without knowing that he ate,
and drank without tasting. As the hours dropped
past, as the motive of each act in the long series of
bygone days presented itself to his view, he perceived
how intimately the notion of having Tess as a dear
possessionwasmixedupwithallhisschanesand
words and ways.

In going hither and thither he observed in the
outskirts of a small town a red-and-blue placard
setting forth the great advantages of the Empire of
Brazil as a ﬁeld for the emigrating agricultun'st.
Land was oﬂered there on exceptionally advantageous
terms. Brazil somewhat attracted him as a new idea.
Tess could eventually join him there, and perhaps in
that country of contrasting scenes and notions and
habits the conventions would not be so operative
which made life with her seem impractimble to him
here. In brief he was strongly inclined to try Brazil,
ﬁaesplefally as the season for going thither was just at

With this view he was returning to Emminster
todisclosehisplantohisparents,andtomakethe
best explanation he could make of arriving without

331

THE WOMAN PAYS

Tess, short of revealing what had actually separated
them. As he reached the door the new moon shone
upon his face, just as the old one had done in the
small hours of that morning when he had carried
hiswifeinhisarmsacrossthexivertothegraveyard
of the monks; but his face was thinner now.

Clare had given his parents no warning of his
visit, and his arrivalvstirred the atmosphere of the
Vicarage as the dive of the kingﬁsher stirs a quiet
pool. His father and mother were both in the
drawing-room, but neither of his brothers was now
at home. Angel entered, and closed the door quietly
behind him. -

‘But—where’s your wife, dear Angel?’ cried his
mother. 'How you surprise us!‘

‘She is at her mother's—temporarily. I have
come home rather in a hurry because I’ve decided
to go to Brazil.’

‘Brazil! Why they are all Roman Catholics there
sur'ely!’

‘Are they? I hadn’t thought of that.’

But even the novelty and painfulness of his going
to a. Papistical land could not displace for long Mr.
and Mrs. Clare‘s natural interest in their son’s mar-

nage.

‘We had your brief note three weeks ago announc-
ing that it had taken place,’ said Mrs. Clare, ‘and
your father sent your godmother’s gift to her, as you
know. Of course it was best that none of us should
be present, especially as you preferred to marry her
from the dairy, and not at her home, wherever that
may be. It would have embarrassed you, and given
us no pleasure. Your brothers felt that very strongly.
Now it is done we do not complain, particularly if ~
she suits you for the business you have chosen to
followinsteadoftheministryoftheGospel. . . .Yet
I wish I could have seen her ﬁrst, Angel, or have
known a little more about her. We sent her no
present of our own, not knowing what would best

333

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

give her pleasure, but you must suppose it only
delayed. Angel, there is no irritation in my mind
or your father’s against you for this marriage; but
we have thought it much better to reserve our liking
for your wife till we could see her. And now you
have not brought her. It scans strange. What has
happened?’

He replied that it had been thought best by them
that she should go to her parents’ home for the present,
whilst he came there.

‘I don’t mind telling you, dear mother,’ he said,
‘that I always meant to keep her away from this
house till I should feel she could come with credit to
you. But this idea of Brazil is quite a recent one. If
I do go it will be unadvisable for me to take her on
this my ﬁrst journey. She will remain at her mother's
till I come back.’

‘And I shall not see her before you start?’

He was afraid they would not. His original plan
hadbeen, ashehad said, toreﬁ'ainfrombxingingher
there for some little while—not to wound their prej-
udices—feelings—in any way; and for other reasons
he had adhered to it. He would have to visit home
in the course of a year, if he went out at once; and it
would be possible for them to see her before he started
a second time—with her.

A hastily prepared supper was brought in, and
Clare made further exposition of his plans. His
mother's disappointment at not seeing the bride still
remained with her. Clare’s late enthusiasm for Tess
had infected her through her maternal sympathies,
till she had almost fancied that a good thing could
come out of Nazareth—a charming woman out of
Talbothays Dairy. She watched her son as he
ate.

‘Cannot you describe her? I am sure she is very
pretty. Angel?

‘Of that there can be no question? he said, with
a zest which covered its bitterness.

334

'THE WOMAN PAYS

'And that she is pure and virtuous goes without
question?’

‘Pure and virtuous, of course, she is.’

‘I can see her quite distinctly. You said the
other day that she was ﬁne in ﬁgure; roundly built;
had deep red lips like Cupid's bow; dark eyelashes
and brows, an immense rope of hair like a ship’s cable;
and large eyes violety-bluey-blackish.’

‘I did, mother.’

‘I quite see her. And living in such seclusion she
naturally had scarce ever seen any young man from
the world without till she saw you.’

‘Seareely.’

‘You were her ﬁrst love?’

‘Of course.’

‘There are worse wives than these simple, rosy-
mouthed, robust girls of the farm. Certainly I
could have wished—well, since my son is to be an
agriculturist, it is perhaps but proper that his
lvinf'fe should have been accustomed to an outdoor

e.’

His father was less inquisitive; but when the time
came for the chapter from the Bible which was always
read before evening prayers, the Vicar observed to
Mrs. Clare—

‘I think, since Angel has come, that it will be
more appropriate to read the thirty-ﬁrst of Proverbs
than the chapter which we should have had in the
usual course of our reading?’

‘Yes, certainly,’ said Mrs. Clare. 'The words of
King Lemuel’ (she could cite chapter and verse as
well as her husband). ‘My dear son, your father has
decided to read us the chapter in Proverbs in praise
of a virtuous wife. We shall not need to be reminded
to apply the words to the absent one. May Heaven
shield her in all her ways!’

A lump rose in Clare’s throat. The portable
lectem was taken out from the corner and set in the
middle of the ﬁreplace, the two old servants came in,

335

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

and Angel's father began to read at the tenth verse of
the aforesaid chapter-—

“‘Who can ﬁnd a virtuous woman? for her price
is far above rubies. She riseth while it is yet night,
and giveth meat to her household. She girdeth her
loins with strength and strengtheneth her arms. She
peroeiveth that her merchandise is good; her candle
goeth not out by night. She looketh well to the ways
of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.
Her children arise up and call her blessed; her hus-
band also, and he praiseth her. Many daughters have
done virtuously, but thou excellest than all."’

When prayers were over, his mother said—-

‘I could not help thinking how very aptly that
chapter your dear father read applied, in some of its
particulars, to the woman you have chosen. The
perfect woman, you see, was a working woman; not an
idler; not a ﬁne lady; but one who used her hands and
her head and her heart for the good of others. “Her
children arise up and call her blessed; her husband
also, and he praiseth her. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but she exoelleth them all." Well, I wish
I could have seen her, Angel. Since she is pure and
chaste she would have been reﬁned enough for me.’

Clare could bear this no longer. His eyes were
full of tears, which seemed like drops of molten lead.
He bade a quick good—night to these sincere and
simple souls whom he loved so well; who knew neither
the world, the ﬂesh, nor the devil in their own hearts;
only as something vague and external to themselves.
He went to his own chamber.

His mother followed him, and tapped at his door.
Clare opened it to discover her standing without, with
anxions eyes.

‘Angel,’ she asked, ‘is there something wrong that
you go away so soon? I am quite sure you are not
yourself.’

‘I am not, quite, mother,’ said he. '

'About her? Now, my son, I know it is that—I

336

THE WOMAN PAYS

know it is about her! Have you quarrelled in these
three weeks?’

‘We have not exactly quarrelled,’ he said. ‘But
we have had a diﬂ'erence—'

‘Angel—is she a young woman whose history will
bear investigation?’

With a mother’s instinct Mrs. Clare had put her
ﬁnger on the kind of trouble that would cause such a
disquiet as seemed to agitate her son.

‘She is spotless!’ he replied; and felt that if it had
sent him to eternal hell there and then he would
have told that lie.

‘Then never mind the rest. After all, there are
fewpurerthingsinnaturethananunsullied country
maid. Any crudeness of manner which may oﬂend
your more educated sense at ﬁrst, will, I am sure,
disappear under the inﬂuence of your companionship
and tuition.’

Such terrible sarcasm of blind magnanimity brought
home to Clare the secondary perception that he had
utterly wrecked his career by this marriage, which had
not been among his early thoughts after the disclosure.
True, on his own account he cared very little about
his career; but he had wished to make it at least a
respectable one on account of his parents and brothers.
And now as he looked into the candle its ﬂame dumbly
expressed to him that it was made to'shine on sensible
people, and that it abhorred lighting the face of a dupe
and a failure.

When his agitation had cooled he would be at
moments incensed with his poor wife for causing a 
situation in which he was obliged to practise deception
on his parents. He almost talked to her in his anger,
asifshehadbeenintheroom. Andthenherccoing
voice, plaintive in expostulation, disturbed the dark-
ness, the velvet touch of her lips passed over his brow,
and he could distinguish in the air the warmth of her
breath.

This night the woman of his belittling deprecations

337

TESS OF THE D'U'RBERVILLES

was thinking how great and good her husband was.
But over them both there hung a deeper shade than
the shade which Angel Clare perceived, namely, the
shade of his own limitations. With all his attempted
independence of judgment this advanced and well-
meaning young man, a sample product of the last ﬁve-
and-twenty years, was yet the slave to custom and
conventionality when surprised back into his early
teachings. No prophet had told him, and he was not
prophet enough to tell himself, that essentially this
young wife of his was as deserving of the praise of
King Lemuel as any other woman endowed with the
same dislike of evil, her moral value having to be
reckoned not by achievement, but by tendency. More-
over, the ﬁgure near at hand suﬁers on such occasions,
because it shows up its soniness without shade; while
vague ﬁgures afar oﬁ are honoured, in that their
distance makes artistic virtues of their stains. In
considering what Tess was not, he overlooked what
she was, and forgot ﬂint the defective can be more

than the entire. \

XL

AT breakfast Brazil was the topic, and all endeavoured
to take a hopeful view of Clare’s proposed experiment
with that country’s soil, notwithstanding the dis-
couraging reports of some farm-labourers who had
emigrated thither and returned home within the twelve
months. After breakfast Clare went into the little
towntowindupsuchtriﬂingmattersashewasoon—
cemedwiththere,andtogetfromthelocalbankall
the money he possessed. On his way back he en-
countered Miss Mercy Chant by the church, from
whosewallssheseemedtobeasortofemanatiom
She was carrying an armful of Bibles for her class, and
such was her view of life that events which produced
heartache in others wrought batiﬁc smiles upon her
—-an enviable result, although, in the opinion of Angel,
it was obtained by a curiously unnatural sacriﬁce of
humanity to mysticism.

She had learnt that he was about to leave England,
and observed what an excellent and promising scheme
it seemed to be.

‘Yes; it is a likely scheme enough in a commercial
sense, no doubt,’ he replied. ‘ But, my dear Mercy, it
snaps the continuity of existence. Perhaps a cloister
would be preferable.’

‘A cloister! 0, Angel Clare!’

‘Well?’

‘Why, you wicked man, a cloister implies a monk,
and a monk Roman Catholicism.’

‘And Roman Catholicism sin, and sin damnation.
Thou art in a parlous state, Angel Clare.’

‘1 glory in my Protestantism!’ she said severely.

339

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Then Clare, thrown by sheer misery into one of the
demoniacal moods in which a man does despite to his
true principles, called her close to him, and ﬁendishly
whispered in her ear the most heterodox ideas he could
think of. His momentary laughter at the horror which
appeared on her fair face ceased when it merged in
pain and anxiety for his welfare.

‘Dear Mercy,’ he said, ‘you must forgive me. I
think I am going crazy!’

She thought that he was; and thus the interview
ended. and Clare re-entered the Vicarage. With the
local banker he deposited the jewels till happier days
should arise. He also paid into the bank thirty pounds
——to be sent to Tess in a few months, as she might
require; and wrote to her at her parents' home in
Blackmoor Vale to inform her of what he had done.
This amount, with the sum he had already placed
in her hands—about ﬁfty pounds—he hoped would
be amply suﬁicient for her wants just at present,
particularly as in an emergency she had been directed
to apply to his father.

He deemed it best not to put his parents into com-
munimﬁon with her by informing them of her address;
and, being unaware of what had really happened to
estrange the two, neither his father nor his mother

that he should do so. During the day he
left the parsonage, for what he had to complete he
wished to get done quickly.

As the last duty More leaving this part of England
it was necessary for him to call at the Wellbridge
farmhouse, in which he had spent with Tess the ﬁrst
three days of their marriage, the triﬂe of rent having
to be paid, the key given up of the rooms they had
occupied, and two or three small articles fetched away
that they had left behind. It was under this roof that
the deepest shadow ever thrown upon his life had
stretched its gloom over him. Yet when he had un~
locked the door of the sitting-room and looked into it,
the memory which returned ﬁrst upon him was that of

34°

THE WOMAN PAYS

their happy arrival on a similar afternoon, the ﬁrst
fresh sense of sharing a habitation conjointly, the ﬁrst
meal together, the chatting by the ﬁre with joined
hands.

The farmer and his wife were in the ﬁelds at the
moment of his visit, and Clare was in the rooms alone
for some time. Inwardly swollen with a renewal of
sentiments that he had not quite reckoned with, he
went upstairs to her chamber, which had never been
Thebedwas smoothasshehadmadeit with
her own hands on the morning of leaving. The
mistletoe hung under the tester just as he had placed
it. Having been there three or four weeks it was
turning colour, and the leaves and berries were
wrinkled. Angel took it down and crushed it into the
grate. Standing there he for the ﬁrst time doubted
whether his course in this conjuncture had been a wise,
much less a generous, one. But had he not been
cruelly blinded? In the incoherent multitude of his
emotions he knelt down at the bedside wet-eyed. ‘0
Tess! If you had only told me sooner, I would have
forgiven you!‘ he mourned.

Hearing a footstep below he rose and went to the
top of the stairs. At the bottom of the ﬂight he saw
a woman standing, and on her turning up her face
recognized the pale, dark-eyed Izz Huett.

‘Mr. Clare,’ she said, ‘I’ve called to see you and
Mrs. Clare, and to inquire if ye be well. I thought
you might be back here again.’

This was a girl whose secret he had guessed, but
who had not yet guessed his; an honest girl who
loved him—one who would have made as good, or
nearly as good, a practical farmer’s wife as Tess.

‘I am here alone,‘ he said; ‘we are not living here
now.’ Explaining why he had come, he asked,
‘Which way are you going home, Izz?’

‘I have no home at Talbothays Dairy now, sir,’
she said.

‘Why is that?‘

34!

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Izz looked down.

' ‘ItwassodismaltherethatIleft! Iamstaying
out this way.’ She pointed in a contrary direction,
the direction in which he was journeying.

‘Well—are you going there now? I can take you
if you wish for a lift.’

Her olive complexion grew richer in hue.

‘Thank 'ee, Mr. Clare,’ she said.

He soon found the farmer, and settled the account
for his rent and the few other items which had to be
considered by reason of the sudden abandonment of
the lodgings. On Clare’s return to his horse and gig
Izz jumped up beside him.

‘I am going to leave England, Izz,’ he said, as they
drove on. ‘Going to Brazil: '

‘And do Mrs. Clare like the notion of such ajour-
ney?’ she asked. -

‘She is not going at present—say for a year or so.
.Ialtini‘going out to reoonnoitrhto see what life there
is e.’

They sped along eastward for some considerable
distance, In making no observation.

‘How are the others?’ he inquired. ‘How is
Retty?’

‘She was in a sort of nervous state when I zid her
last; and so thin and hollow-cheeked that 'a. do seem
in a decline. Nobody will ever fall in love wi’ her
any more,’ said 122, absently.

‘And Marian?’

Izz lowered her voice.

‘Marian drinks.’

‘Indeed!’

‘Yes. The dairyman has got rid of her.’

'And you!’

‘I don’t drink, and I bain’t in a decline. But—I
am no great things at singing afore breakfast now!’

‘How is that? Do you remember how neatly you
used to turn “"I‘was down in Cupid’s Gardens" and
“The Tailor's Breeches" at morning milking?

342

THE WOMAN PAYS

‘Ah, yes! When you ﬁrst came, sir. that was‘.
Not when you had been there a bit.’

‘Why was that falling-off?

Her black eyes ﬂashed up to his face for one mo-
ment by way of answer.

‘Izzl—how weak of you—for such as I!’ he said,
and fell into reverie. ‘Then—suppose I had asked
you to marry mei”

'If you had I should have said “Yes,” and you
would have married a woman who loved ’ee!’

‘Really!’

‘Down to the ground!’ she whispered vehemently.
‘0 my God! did you never guess it till now!’

By-and-by they reached a branch road to a. village.

‘I must get down. I live out there,’ said Izz
abruptly, never having spoken since her avowal.

Clare slowed the horse. He was incensed against
his fate, bitterly disposed towards social ordinances;
for they had cooped him up in a corner, out of which
there was no legitimate pathway. Why not be
revenged on society by shaping his future domes.-
ticities loosely, instead of kissing the pedagogic rod
of convention in this ensnan'ng manner?

‘I am going to Brazil alone, Izz,’ said he. ‘I have
sepmted from my wife for personal, not voyaging,
reasons. I may never live with her again. I may
not be able to love you; but——will you go with me
instead of her?’

‘You truly wish me to go?’

‘I do. I have been badly used enough to wish for
relief. And you at least love me disinterestedly.’

‘Yes—I will go,’ said 122, after a pause.

‘You will? You know what it means, Izz?’

‘It means that I shall live with you for the time
you are over there—that's good enough for me.’

‘Remember, you are not to trust me in morals
now. But I ought to remind you that it will be
wrong—doing in the eyes of civilization—Western
civilization, that is to say.’

343

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

'I don't mind that; no woman do when it comes
to agonypoint, and there’s no other way!’

‘Then don’t get down, but sit where you are.’

He drove past the cross-roads, one mile, two miles,
without showing any signs of affection.

‘You love me very, very much, Izz?’ he suddenly
asked.

‘I do—I have said I do! I loved you all the time
we was at the dairy together!’

‘More than Tess?’

She shook her head.

‘No,’ she murmurai, ‘not more than she.’

‘How's that?’

‘Because nobody could love ’ee more than Tess
did! . . . She would have laid down her life for 'ee.
I could do no more.’

Like the prophet on the top of Peor Izz Huett
would fain have spoken perverser at such a. mo-
ment, but the fascination exercised over her rough-
er nature by Tess's character compelled her to
grace.

Clare was silent; his heart had risen at these
straightforward words from such an unexpected un-
impeachable quarter. In his threat was something
as if a sob had solidiﬁed there. His ears repeated,
‘ShWMwhiddmlmltfefw'ee. Icoulddono
more

‘Forget our idle talk, Izz,‘ he said, turning the
horse's head suddenly. ‘I don't know what I've
been saying! I will now drive you back to where
your lane branches off.’

‘So much for honesty towards ’ee! O—how can I
bear it—hcw can I—how can I!’

In Huett burst into wild tears, and beat her fore-
head as she saw what she had done.

‘Do you regret that poor little act of justice to an
absent one? O, 122, don’t spoil it by regret!’

She stilled herself by degrees.

‘Very well, sir. Perhaps I didn’t know what I was

344

THE WOMAN PAYS

saying, either, wh—when I agreed to go! I wish—
what cannot be!’

‘Because I have a loving wife already.’

‘Yes, yes! You have.’

They reached the corner of the lane which they
had passed half an hour earlier, and she hopped down.

‘Izz—please, please forget my momentary levity!’
he cried. ‘It was so ill-considered, so ill-advised?

‘Forget it? Never, never! 0, it was no levity
to me!’

He felt how richly he deserved the reproach that
the wounded cry conveyed, and, in a sorrow that was
inexpressible, leapt down and took her hand.

'Well, but, 122, we'll part friends, anyhow? You
don't know what I’ve had to bear!’

She was a really generous girl, and allowed no
further bitterness to ma: their adieux.

‘I forgive ’ee, sir!’ she said.

‘Now Izz,’ he said, while she stood beside him
there, forcing himself to the mentor’s part he was far
from feeling; ‘I want you to tell Marian when you
seeherthatsheistobeagoodwoman,andnotto
give way to folly. Promise that, and tell Retty that
there are more worthy men than I in the world, that
for my sake she is to act wisely and well—remember
the words—wisely and well—for my sake. I send
this message to them as a dying man to the dying;
for I shall never see them again. And you, Izzy, you
have saved me by your honest words about my wife
from an incredible impulse towards folly and treachery.
Women may be bad, but they are not so bad as men
in these things! On that one account I can never
forget you. Be always the good and sincere girl you
have hitherto been; and think of me as a worthless
lover, but a faithful friend. Promise.’

She gave the promise.

‘Heaven bless and keep you, sir. Good-bye!’

He drove on; but no sooner had In turned into
the lane, and Clare was out of sight, than she ﬂung

34S

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

herself down on the bank in a. ﬁt of racking anguish;
and it was with a strained unnatural face that she
entered her mother’s cottage late that night. Nobody
ever was told how Izz spent the dark hours that inter-
vened between Angel Clare's parting from her and her
arrival home.

Clare, too, after bidding the girl farewell, was
wrought to aching thoughts and quivering lips.
But his sorrow was not for Izz. That evening he was
within a feather-weight’s turn of abandoning his road
to the nearest station, and driving across that elevated
dorsal line of South Wessex which divided him from his
Tess's home. It was neither a contempt for her na-
ture, nor the probable state of her heart, which de-
terred him.

No; it was a sense that, despite her love, as cor-
roborated by Izz’s admission, the facts had not
changed. If he was right at ﬁrst, he was right now.
And the momentum of the course on which he had
embarked tended to keep him going in it, unless
diverted by a stronger, more sustained force than had
played upon him this afternoon. He could soon come
back to her. He took the train that night for London,
and ﬁve days after shook hands in farede of his
brothers at the port of embarkation.

XLI

Fnou the foregoing events of the winter-time let us
press on to an October day, more than eight months
subsequent to the parting of Clare and Tess. We
discover the latter in changed conditions; instead of a
bride with boxes and trunks which others bore, we see
her a lonely woman with a basket and a bundle in her
own porterage, as at an earlier time when she was
no bride; instead of the ample means that were pro-
jected by her husband for her comfort through this
probationary period, she can produce only a ﬂattened

After again leaving Marlott, her home, she had got
through the spring and summer without any great
stress upon her physical powers, the time being mainly
spent in rendering light irregular service at dairy-work
near Port-Brady to the west of the Blackmoor Valley,
equally remote from her native place and from
Talbothays. She preferred this to living on his allow-
ance. Mentally she remained in utter stagnation, a
condition which the mechanical occupation rather
fostered than checked. Her consciousness was at that
other dairy, at that other season, in the presence of the
tender lover who had confronted her there—he who,
the moment she had grasped him to keep for her own,
had disappeared like a shape in a

The dairy-work lasted only till the milk began to
lessen, for she had not met with a second
engagement as at Talbothays, but had done duty as a
supernurnerary only. However, as harvest was now

' ' , she had simply to remove from the pasture
to the stubble to ﬁnd plenty of further occupation, and
this continued till harvest was done.

3‘7

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

Of the ﬁve-and-twenty pounds which had remained

to her of Clare’s allowance, after deducting the other
half of the ﬁfty as a contribution to her parents for
the trouble and expense to which she had put them,
she had as yet spent but little. But there now fol-
lowed an unfortunate interval of wet weather, dur-
ing which she was obliged to fall back upon her
sovereigns.
She could not bear to let them go. Angel had put
them into her hand, had obtained them bright and
new from his bank for her; his touch had consecrated
. them to souvenirs of himself—they appeared to have
had as yet no other history than such as was created
by his and her own experiences—and to disperse them
was like giving away relics. But she had to do it, and
one by one they left her hands.

She had been compelled to send her mother her
address from time to time, but she concealed her cir-
cumstances. When her money had almost gone a
letter from her mother reached her. Joan stated that
they were in dreadful difﬁculty; the autumn rains had
gone through the thatch of the house, which required
entire renewal; but this could not be done because
the previous thatching had never been paid for.
New rafters 'and a new ceiling upstairs also were re-
quired, which, with the previous bill, would amount
to a sum of twenty pounds. As her husband was a.
man of means, and had doubtless returned by this
time, could she not send them the money?

Tess had thirty pounds coming to her almost im-
mediately from Angel's bankers, and, the case being
so deplorable, as soon as the sum was received she
sent the twenty as requested. Part of the remainder
she was obliged to expend in winter clothing, leaving
only a nominal sum for the whole inclement season at
hand. When the last pound had gone, a remark of
Angel’s that whenever she required further resources
shewasto applyto hisfather,rerna.ined to be con-
sidered.

348

THE WOMAN PAYS

But the more Tess thought of the step the more
reluctant was she to take it. The same delicacy,
pride, false shame, whatever it may be called, on
Clare’s account, which had led her to hide from her
own parents the prolongation of the estrangement,
hindered her in owning to his that she was in want
after the fair allowance he had left her. They prob-
ably despised her already; how much more they
would despise her in the character of a mendicant!
The consequence was that by no effort could the par-
son's daughter-in-law bring herself to let him know
her state.

Her reluctance to communicate with her husband’s
parents might, she thought, lessen with the lapse of
time; but with her own the reverse obtained. On
her leaving their house after the short visit subsequent
to her marriage they were under the impression that
she was ultimately going to join her husband; and
from that time to the present she had done nothing to
disturb their belief that she was awaiting his return
in comfort, hoping against hope that his journey to
Brazil would result in a. short stay only, after which he
would come to fetch her, or that he would write for
her to join him; in any case that they would soon
present a united front to their families and the world.
This hope she still fostered. To let her parents know
that she was a deserted wife, dependent, now that she
had relieved their necessities, on her own hands for a
living, after the éclat of a marriage which was to nullify
the egallapse of the ﬁrst attempt, would be too much
ind .

The set of brilliants returned to her mind. Where
Clare had deposited them she did not know, and it
mattered little, if it were true that she could only use
and not sell them. Even were they absolutely hers it
would be passing mean to enrich herself by a legal
title to them which was not essentially hers at all.

Meanwhile her husband's days had been by no
means frw from trial. At this moment he was lying

349

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

ill of fever in the clay lands near Curitiba. in Brazil,
having been drenched with thunder-storms and per-
secuted by other hardships, in common with all the
English farmers and farm-labourers who, just at this
time, were deluded into going thither by the promises
of the Brazilian Government, and by the baseless
assumption that those frames which, ploughing and
sowing on English uplands, had resisted all the
weathers to whose moods they had been born, could
resist equally well all the weathers by which they
were surprised on Brazilian plains.

To return. Thus it happened that when the last of
Tess's sovereigns had been spent she was unprovided
with others to take their place, while on account of
the season she found it increasingly difﬁcult to get
employment. Not being aware of the rarity of in-
telligence, energy, health, and willingness in any
sphere of life, she refrained from seeking an indoor
occupation; fearing towns, large houses, people of
means and social sophistication, and of manners other
than rural. From that direction of gentility Black
Care had come. Society might be better than she
supposed from her slight experience of it. But she
had no proof of this, and her instinct in the circum-
stances was to avoid its purlieus.

The small dairies to the west, beyond Port-Brody,
in which she had served as supernumerary milkmaid
during the spring and summer required no further aid.
Room would probably have been made for her at
Talbothays, if only out of sheer compassion; but,
comfortable as her life had been there she could not
go back. The anti-climax would be too intolerable;
and her return might bring reproach upon her idolized
husband. She could not have borne their pity, and
their whispered remarks to one another upon her
strange situation; though she would almost have faced
a knowledge of her circumstances by every individual
there, so long as her story had remained isolated in
the mind of each. It was the interchange of ideas

35°

THE WOMAN PAYS

about her that made her sensitiveness wince. Tess
could not account for this distinction; she simply
knew that she felt it.

She was now on her way to an upland farm in the
centre of the county, to which she had been recom-
mended by a wandering letter which had reached her
from Marian. Marian had somehow heard that Tess
was separated from her husband—probably through
122 Huett—and the good-natured and now tippling
girl, deeming Tess in trouble, had hastened to notify
to her former friend that she herself had gone to this
upland spot after leaving the dairy, and would like to
see her there, where there was room for other hands,
if it was really true that she worked again as of old.

With the shortening of the days all hope of obtain-
ing her husband's forgiveness began to leave her;
and there was something of the habitude of the
wild animal in the unreﬂecting instinct with which she
rambled on-disconnecting herself by littles from her
eventful put at every step, obliterating her identity,
giving no thought to accidents or contingencies which
might make a quick discovery of her whereabouts by
others of importance to her own happiness, if not to
theirs. '

Among the diﬁiculties of her lonely position not the
least was the attention she excited by her appearance,
a certain bearing of distinction, which she had caught
from Clare, being superadded to her natural attractive-
ness. Whilst the clothes lasted which had been

for her marriage, these casual glances of
interest caused her no inconvenience, but as soon as
she was compelled to don the wrapper of a ﬁeld-woman,
rude words were addressed to her more than once;
but nothing occurred to cause her bodily fear till a
particular November afternoon.

She had preferred the country west of the River
Brit to the upland farm for which she was now bound,
because, for one thing, it was nearer to the home of
her husband’s father; and to hover about that region

351

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

unrecognized, with the notion that she might decide to
call at the Vicarage some day, gave her pleasure.
But having once decided to try the higher and drier
levels, she pressed back eastward, marching afoot
towards the village of Chalk-Newton, where she
meant to pass the night.

The lane was long and unvaried, and, owing to
the rapid shortening of the days, dusk came upon her
before she was aware. She had reached the top of
a hill down which the lane stretched its serpentine
length in glimpses, when she heard footsteps behind
her back, and in a few moments she was overtaken
by a man. He stepped up alongside Tess and
said——-—

‘Good-night, my pretty maid’: to which she civilly
replied.

The light still reinaining in the sky lit up her face,
though the landscape was nearly dark. The man
turned and stared hard at her. '

‘Why. surely, it is the young wench who was
at Trantridge awhile—young Squire d’Urberville's
friend? I was there at that time, though I don’t
live there now.’

She recognized in him the well-to-do boor whom
Angel had knocked down at the inn for addressing
her coarsely. A spasm of anguish shot through her,
and she returned him no answer.

'Be honest enough to own it, and that what I said
in the town was true, though your fancy-man was so
up about it~hey, my sly one? You ought to beg my
pardon for that blow of his, considering.’

Still no answer came from Tess. There seemed
only one escape for her hunted soul. She suddenly
took to her heels with the speed of the wind, and,
without looking behind her, ran along the road till she
came to a gate which opened directly into a plantation.
Into this she plunged, and did not pause till she was
deep enough in its shade to be safe against any
possibility of discovery.

352

THE WOMAN PAYS

Under foot the leaves were dry, and the foliage of
some holly-bushes which grew among the deciduous
trees was dense enough to keep OE draughts. She
scraped together the dead leaves till she had formed
them into a large heap, making a. sort of nest in the
middle. Into this Tess crept.

Such sleep as she got was naturally ﬁtful; she
fancied she heard strange noises, but persuaded herself
that they were caused by the breeze. She thought of
her husband in some vague warm clime on the other
side of the globe, while she was here in the cold.
Was there another such a wretched being as she in
the world? Tess asked herself; and, thinking of her
wasted life, said, ‘All is vanity.’ She repeated the
words mechanically, till she reﬂected that this was a
most inadequate thought for modern days. Solomon
had thought as far as that more than two thousand
years ago; she herself, though not in the van of
thinkers, had got much further. It all were only
vanity, who would mind it? All was, alas, worse than
vanity—injustice, punishment, exaction, death. The
wife of Angel Clare put her hand to her brow, and
felt its curve, and the edges of her eye-sockets per-
ceptible under the soft skin, and thought as she did
so that a time would come when that bone would be
bare. ‘I wish it were now,’ she said.

In the midst of these whimsical fancies she heard a
new strange sound among the leaves. It might be
the wind; yet there was scarcely any wind. Some-
times it was a palpitation, sometimes a ﬂutter; some-
timesitwasasortofgasporgurgle. Soonshewas
certain that the noises came from wild creatures of
some kind, the more so when, originating in the boughs
overhead, they were followed by the fall of a heavy
body upon the ground. Had she been ensconced
here under other and more pleasant conditions she
would have become alarmed; but, outside humanity,
she had at present no fear.

Day at length broke in the sky. When it had

353

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

been day aloft for some little while it became day in
the wood.

Directly the assuring and prosaic light of the
world’s active hours had grown strong she crept from
under her hillock of leaves, and looked around boldly.
Then she perceived what had been going on to dis-
turb her. The plantation wherein she had taken
shelter ran down at this spot into a peak, which ended
it hitherward, outside the hedge being arable ground.
Under the trees several pheasants lay about, their
rich plumage dabbled with blood; some were dead,
some feeny twitching a wing, some staring up at
the sky, some pulsating quickly, some contorted, some
stretched out-all of them writhing in agony, except
the fortunate ones whose tortures had ended during
the night by the inability of nature to bear more.

Tess guessed at once the meaning of this. The
birds had been driven down into this corner the
day before by some shooting-party; and while those
that had dropped dead under the shot, or had died
before nightfall, had been searched for and carried
OE, many badly wounded birds had escaped and
hidden themselves away, or risen among the thick
boughs, where they had maintained their position
till they grew weaker with loss of blood in the night-
time, when they had fallen one by one as she had
heard them.

She had occasionally caught glimpses of these men
in girlhood, looking over hedges, or peering through
bushes, and pointing their guns, strangely accoutred,
a. bloodthirsty light in their eyes. She had been told
that, rough and brutal as they seemed just then,
they were not like this all the year round, but were,
in fact, quite civil persons save during certain weeks
of autumn and winter, when, like the inhabitants of
the Malay Peninsula, they ran amuck, and made it
their purpose to destroy life-in this case harmless
feathered creatures, brought into being by artiﬁcial
means solely to gratify these propensities—at once

354

THE WOMAN PAYS

so unmannerly and so unchivalrous towards their
weaker fellows in Nature’s teeming family.

With the impulse of a soul who could feel for
kindred suﬂerers as much as for haself, Tess’s ﬁrst
thought was to put the still living birds out of their
torture, and to this end with her own hands she broke
the necks of as many as she could ﬁnd, leaving them
to lie where she had found them till the gamekeepers
should come—as they probably would come—to look
for them a second time. ‘

‘Poor- darlings—to suppose myself the most miser-
able being on earth in the sight 0' such misery as
yours!‘ she exclaimed, her tears running down as she
killed the birds tenderly. ‘And not a twinge of bodily
pain about me! I be not mangled, and I be not
bleeding, and I have two hands to feed and clothe
me.’ She was ashamed of herself for her gloom of
the night, based on nothing more tangible than a
sense of condemnation under an arbitrary law of
society which had no foundation in Nature.

XLII

IT was now broad day, and she started again, emerg-
ing cautiously upon the highway. But there was no
need for caution; not a soul was at hand, and Tess
went onward with fortitude, her recollection of the
birds’ silent endurance of their night of agony im-
pressing upon her the relativity of sorrows and the
tolerable nature of her own, if she could once rise high
enough to despise opinion. But that she could not
do so long as it was held by Clare.

She reached Chalk-Newton, and breakfasted at an
inn, where several young men were troublesomer
complimentary to her good looks. Somehow she felt
hopeful, for was it not possible that her husband also
might say these same things to her even yet? She
was bound to take care of herself on the chance of it,
and keep 0E these casual lovers. To this end Tess re-
solved to run no further risks from her appearance.
As soon as she got out of the village she entered a
thicket and took from her basket one of the oldest
ﬁeld-gowns, which she had never put on even at the
dairy—never since she had worked among the stubble
at Marlott. She also, by a felicitous thought, took a
handkerchief from her bundle and tied it round her
face under her bonnet, covering her chin and half her
cheeks and temples, as if she were suﬁering from
toothache. Then with her little scissors, by the aid
of a pocket looking-glass, she mercilessly nipped her
eyebrows off, and thus insured against aggressive
admiration she went on her uneven way.

‘What a mommet of a maid!’ said the next man
who met her to a companion.

355

THE WOMAN PAYS

Tearscameintohereyesforverypityofhetselfas
she heard him.

‘But I don’t care!’ she said. ‘0 no——I don’t
care! I’ll always be ugly now, because Angel is not
here, and I have nobody to take care of me. My
husband that was is gone away, and never will love
me any more; but I love him just the same, and hate
all other men, and like to make 'em think soornfully
0 me.’

ThusTesswalkson;aﬁg-urewhichispartofthe
landscape; a ﬁeld-woman pure and simple, in winter
guise; a gray serge cape, a red woollen cravat, a
stud skirt covered by a whitey-brown rough wrapper,
and bud-leather gloves. Every thread of that old
attire has become faded and thin under the stroke
ofraindrops, thebumofsunbeams, andthestxessof
winds. There is no sign of young passion in her
now—

The maiden's mouth '3 cold

Fold over ample' told

Binding ha- head.
Inside this exterior, over which the eye might have
roved as over a thing scarcely percipient, almost in-
organic, there was the record of a pulsing life which
had learnt too well, for its years,'of the dust and
ages of things. of the cruelty of lust and the fragility
o eve.

Next day the weather was bad, but she trudged
on, the honesty, directness, and impartiality of ele.
mental enmity disconcerting her but little. Her
object being a winter’s occupation and a winter’s
home, there was no time to lose. Her experience of
short hirings had been such that she was determined
to accept no more.

Thus she went forward from farm to farm in the
direction of the place whence Malian had written to
her. which she determined to make use of as a last

357

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

shift only, its rumoured stringencies being the reverse
of tempting. First she inquired for the lighter kinds
of employment, and, as acceptance in any variety of
these grew hopeless, applied next for the less light,
till, beginning with the dairy and poultry tendanoe that
she liked best, she ended with the heavy and coarse
pursuits which she liked least—work on arable land:
work of such roughness, indeed, as she would never
have deliberately volunteered for.

Towards the second evening she reached the
irregular chalk table-land or plateau, bosomed with
semi-globular tumuli—as if Cybele the Many-breasted
were supiner extended there—which stretched be-
tween the valley of her birth and the valley of her
love.

Here the air was dry and cold. and the long cart-
roads were blown white and dusty within a few hours
after rain. There were few trees, or none, those
that would have grown in the hedges being mercilessly
plashed down with the quickset by the tenant-farmers,
the natural enemies of tree, bush, and brake. In the
middle distance ahead of her she could see the summits
of Bulbarrow and of Nettlecombe Tout, and they
seemed friendly. They had a. low and unassuming
aspect from this upland, though as approached on the
other side from Blackmoor in her childhood they were
as lofty bastions against the sky. Southerly, at many
miles’ distance, and over the hills and ridges coastward,
she could discern a surface like polished steel: it
was the English Channel at a point far out towards
France.

Before her, in a slight depression, were the remains
of a village. She had, in fact, reached Flintcomb-Ash,
the place of Marian's sojourn. There seemed to be no
help for it; hither she was doomed to come. The
stubborn soil around her showed plainly enough that
the kind of labour in demand here was of the roughest
kind; but it was time to rest from searching, and she
resolved to stay, particularly as it began to rain. At

358

THE WOMAN PAYS

the entrance to the village was a cottage whose gable
jutted into the road, and before applying for a lodging
she stood under its shelter, and watched the evening
close in.

‘Who would think I was Mrs. Angel Clare!’ she
said.

The wall felt warm to her back and shoulders, and
she found that immediately within the gable was the
cottage ﬁreplace, the heat of which came through
the bricks. She warmed her hands upon them, and
also put her cheek—red and moist with the drizzle
——against their comforting surface. The wall seemed
to be the only friend she had. She had so little
wish to leave it that she could have stayed there all
night.

Tess could hear the occupants of the cottage-
gathered together after their day’s 1abour~tallcing to
each other within, and the rattle of their supper—plates
was also audible. But in the village street she had
seen no soul as yet. The solitude was at last broken
by the approach of one feminine ﬁgure, who, though
the evening was cold, wore the print gown and the
tilt-bonnet of summer-time. Tess instinctively thought
it might be Marian, and when she came near enough
to be distinguishable in the gloom surely enough it was
she. Marian was even stouter and redder in the face
than formerly, and decidedly shabbier in attire. At
any previous period of her existence Tess would hardly
have cared to renew the acquaintance in such con-
ditions; but her loneliness was excessive, and she
responded readily to Marian's greeting.

Marian was quite respectful in her inquiries, but
seemed much moved by the fact that Tess should still
continue in no better condition than at ﬁrst; though
she had dimly heard of the separation.

‘Tess—Mrs. Clank-the dear wife of clear he!
And is it really so bad as this, my child? Whyis
your cwomely face tied up in such a way? Anybody
been beating 'ee? Not he?

359

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘No, no, no! I merely did it not to be clipsed or
called. Marian.’

She pulled oil in disgust a bandage which could
suggest such wild thoughts.

‘And you've got no collar on’ (Tess had been
accustomed to wear a little white collar at the dairy).

‘I lmow it, Marian,l

‘You’ve lost it travelling.’

‘I’ve not lost it. The truth is, I don't care
anything about my looks; and so I didn’t put
it on.’

‘And you don't wear your wedding-ring?

‘Yes, I do; but not in public. I wear it round
my neck on a ribbon. I don't wish people to think
wholambymarriage,orthat1ammarriedatall;
Efwould be so awkward while I lead my present

e.’

Marian paused.

‘But you be a gentleman's wife; and it seems
hardly fair that you should live like this!’

‘0 yes, it is, quite fair; though I am very un-
happy! .

‘ ell, well. Hemamedyou-mdyoucanbe
unhappy?

‘Wives are unhappy sometimes; from no fault of
their husbands—from their own.’

‘You’ve no faults, deal-y; that I’m sure of. And
lag: none. So it must be somethmg‘ outside ye

t .'

‘Marian, dear Marian, will you do me a good turn
without asking questions? My husband has gone
abroad. and somehow I have overrun my allowance,
sothatIhavetofallbaekuponmyoldworkfora
time. Do not call me Mrs. Clare, but Tess, as before.
Do they want a hand here?’

‘0 yes; they'll take one always, because few care
to come. ’Tis a starve-acre place. Corn and swede:
areallthe'ygrow. Thougtheheremyself,Ifeel
'tis a pity for such as M60190 come.‘

3

THE WOMAN PAYS

‘Butyouusedtobeasgoodadairywomanasl.’

‘Yes; but I’ve got out 0' that since I took to drink.
Lord, that’s the only comfort I've got now! If you
engage, you'll be set swede-hacking. That's what I
be doing; but you won’t like it.’

‘O—anything! Will you speak for me?’

‘You will do better by speaking for yourself.’

‘Very well. Now, Marian, remember—~nothing
about him, if I get the place. I don’t wish to bring
his name down to the dirt.’

Marian, who was really a trustworthy girl though
of coarser grain than Tess, promised anything she

‘This is pay-night,’ she said, 'and if you were to
come with me you would know at once. I be real
sorry that you are not happy; but ’tis because he’s
away, I know. You couldn’t be unhappy if he were
here, even if he gie'd ye no money—even if he used
you like a drudge.’

"I‘hat’s true; I could not!’

They walked on together, and soon reached the
farmhouse, which was almost sublime in its dreariness.
There was not a. tree within sight; there was not, at
this season, a. green pasture—nothing but fallow and
turnips everywhere; in large ﬁelds divided by hedges
plashed to unrelieved levels.

Tess waited outside the door of the farmhouse till
the group of work-folk had received their wages, and
then Marian introduced her. The farmer himself.
it appeared, was not at home, but his wife, who repre-
sented him this evening. made no objection to hiring
Tess, on her agreeing to remain till Old Lady-Day.
Female ﬁeld-labour was seldom oﬁered now, and its
cheapness made it proﬁtable for tasks which women
could perform as readily as men.

Having signed the agreement, there was nothing
more for Tess to do at piesent than to get a lodging,
and she found one in the house at whose gable-wall

shehadwarmed herself. 6Itwasa.poor subsistence
3x

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

that she had ensured, but it would afford a shelter for
the winter at any rate.

That night she wrote to inform her parents of her
new address, in case a letter should arrive at Marlott
from her husband. But she did not tell them of the
son-iness of her situation: it might have brought
reproach upon him.

XLIII

THERE was no exaggeration in Marian’s deﬁnition of
Flintcomb—Ash farm as a starveacre place. The
single fat thing on the soil was Marian herself; and she
wasanimportation. Ofthethreeclassesofvillage,
the village cared for by its lord, the village cared for
by itself, and the village uncared for either by itself or
by its lord (in other words, the village of a. resident
squire’s tenantry, the village of free or copy-holders,
and the absentee-owner's village, farmed with the
land), this place, Flintcomb—Ash, was the third.

But Tess set to work. Patience, that blending of
moral courage with physical timidity, was now no
longer a minor feature in Mrs. Angel Clare; and it
sustained her.

The swede-ﬁeld in which she and her companion
weresethackingwasastretchofahundred oddacres,
in one patch, on the highest ground of the farm, rising
above stony lanchets or lynchets—the outcrop of
siliceous veins in the chalk formation, composed of
myriads of loose white ﬂints in bulbons, cusped, and
phallic shapes. The upper half of each turnip had
been eaten off by the live-stock, and it was the business
ofthetwowomentogrubupthelowerorearthyhalf
of the root with a hooked fork called a hacker, that it
might be eaten also. Every leaf of the vegetable
having already been consumed, the whole ﬁeld was in
colour a desolate drab; it was a complexion without
features, as if a face, from chin to brow, should be only
an expanse of skin. The sky wore, in another colour,
the same likeness; a. white vacuity of countenance
with the lineaments gone.6 So these two upper and

a 3

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

nether visages confronted each other all day long, the
white face looking down on the brown face, and the
brown face looldng up at the white face, without any-
thing standing between them but the two girls crawling
over the surface of the former like ﬂies.

Nobody came near them, and their movements
showed a mechanical regularity; their forms standing
enshrouded in Hessian ‘wroppers’——sleeved brown
pinafores, tied behind to the bottom, to keep their
gowns from blowing about—scant skirts revealing
boots that reached high up the ankles, and yellow
sheepskin gloves with gauntlets. The pensive char-
acter which the curtained hood lent to their bent
heads would have reminded the observer of some early
Italian conception of the two Marys.

They worked on hour after hour, unconscious of
the forlorn aspect they bore in the landscape, not
thinking of the justice or injustice of their lot. Even
in such a position as theirs it was possible to exist in
a dream. In the afternoon the rain came on again,
and Marian said that they need not work any more.
But if they did not work they would not be paid; so
they worked on. It was so high a situation, this ﬁeld,
that the rain had no occasion to fall, but raced along
horizontally upon the yelling wind, sticking into them
like glass splinters till they were wet through. Tess
had not known till now what was really meant by that.
There are degrees of dampness, and a. very little is
called being wet through in common talk. But to
stand working slowly in a. ﬁeld, and feel the creep of
rain-water, ﬁrst on legs and shoulders, then on hips
and head, then at back, front, and sides, and yet to
work on till the leaden light diminishes and marks that
the sun is down, demands a distinct modicum of
stoicism, even of velour.

Yet they did not feel the wetness so much as
might be supposed. They were both young, and
they were talking of the time when they lived and
loved together at Talbothagzs Dairy, that happy green

3

THE WOMAN PAYS

tract of land where summer had been liberal in he:
gifts; in substance to all, emotionally to these. Tess
would fain not have conversed with Marian of the
man who was legally, if not actually, her husband:
but the irresistible fascination of the subject betrayed
her into reciprocating Marian's remarks. And thus,
as has been said, though the damp curtains of their
bonnets ﬂapped smartly into their faces, and their
wrappers clung about them to wearisomeness, they
lived all this afternoon in memories of green, sunny,
romantic Talbothays.

‘You canseeagleam ofahillwithinafewmileso’
Froom Valley from here when ’tis ﬁne,’ said Marian.

‘Ah! Can you?‘ said Tess, awake to the new
value of this locality.

So the two forces were at work here as everywhere,
the inherent will to enjoy, and the circumstantial will
against enjoyment. Marian's will had a method of
assisting itself by taking from her pocket as the
afternoon wore on a pint bottle corked with white
rag, from which she invited T to drink. Tess's
unassisted power of dreaming, however, being enough
for her sublimation at present, she declined except the
merest sip, and then Marian took a. pull herself from

- the spirits.
‘I’ve got used to it,’ she said, ‘and can't leave it 05
now. 'Tis my only comfort—a You see I lost

him: you didn’t; and you can do without it perhaps.
Tess thought her loss as great as Marian's, bu
upheld by the dignity of being Angel’s wife, in the
letter at least, she accepted Marian’s differentiation.
Amid this scene Tess slaved in the morning frosts
and in the afternoon rains. When it was not swede-
grubbing it was swede-trimming, in which process
they sliced 05 the earth and the ﬁbres with a. bill-
hook before storing the roots for future use. At this
occupation they could shelter themselves by a thatched
hurdle if it rained; but if it was frosty even their
thick leather gloves could not prevent the frozen
3 S

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

masses they handled from biting their ﬁngers. Still
Tess hoped. She had a conviction that sooner or
later the magnanimity which she persisted in reckon—
ingasachiefingredientofClare’scharacterwould
lead him to rejoin her.

Marian, primed to a humorous mood, would dis—
cover the queer—shaped ﬂints aforesaid, and shriek
with laughter, Tess remaining severely obtuse. They
often looked across the country to where the Var or
Froom was lmown to stretch, even though they might
not be able to see it; and, ﬁxing their eyes on the
cloaking gray mist, imagined the old times they had

t out there.

‘Ah,’ said Marian, ‘how I should like another or
twoofouroldsettocomehere! Thenwecould
bring up Talbothays every day here aﬁeld, and talk
of he, and of what nice times we had there, and o' the
old things we used to know, and make it all come
back again a’most, in seeming!’ Marian’s eyes so£t~
ened, and her voice grew vague as the visions re-
turned. ‘I’ll write to 122 Huett,’ she said. IShe’s
hiding at home doing nothing now. I know, and I’ll
tellherwebehere,andaskhertocome; andperhaps
Retty is well enough now.’

Tess had nothing to say against the proposal, and
the next she heard of this plan for importing old
Talbothays’ joys was two or three days later, when
Marian informed her that 122 had replied to her
inquiry, and had promised to come if she could.

There had not been such a winter for years. It
came on in stealthy and measured glides, like the
moves of a chess-player. One morning the few lonely
trees and the thorns of the hedgerows appeared as if
they had put oﬂ a vegetable for an animal integument.
Every twig was covered with a white nap as of fur
grown from the rind during the night, giving it four
times its usual stoutness; the whole bush or tree
forming a staring sketch in white lines on the mourn-
ful grey of the sky and hg‘rizon. Cobwebs revealed

3

THE WOMAN PAYS

their presenceonshedsandwallswherenonehad
ever been observed till brought out into visibility by
the crystallizing atmosphere, hanging like loops of
white worsted from salient points of the authorises,
posts, and gates.

Afterthisseasonofcongealeddampnesscamea
spell of dry frost, when strange birds from behind the
North Pole began to arrive silently on the upland of
Flintoomb-Ash; gaunt spectral creatures with tragical
eyes-eyes which had witnessed scenes of cataclymnal
horror in inaccessible polar regions of a magnitude
suchasnohumanbeinghadever conceived,in curd-
ling temperatures that no man could endure; which
had beheld the crash of icebergs and the slide of snow-
hillsbytheshootinglightoftheAurora; beenhalf
blinded by the whirl of colossal storms and ten-aque-
ous distortions; and retained the expression of feature
that such scenes had engendered. These name]
birds came quite near to Tess and Marian, but of all
they had seen which humanity would never see, they
brought no account. The traveller's ambition to tell
was not theirs, and, with dumb impassivity, they
dismissed experiences which they did not value for
the immediate incidents of this homely upland—the
trivial movements of the two girls in disturbing the
clodswiththeirhackerssoestouncoversomething
or other that these visitants relished as food.

Then one day a peculiar quality invaded the air of
this open country. There came a moisture which was
not of rain, and a cold which was not of frost. It
chilled the eyeballs of the twain, made their brows
ache, penetrated to their skeletons, affecting the
surface of the body less than its core. They knew
that it meant snow, and in the night the snow came.
Tess, who continued to live at the cottage with the
warm gable that cheered any lonely pedestrian who
paused beside it, awoke in the night, and heard above
thethatchnoiseswhichseemedtosignifythatthe
roofhadturneditselfintgagymnasiumofallthe

3 7

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

winds. When she lit her lamp to get up in the
morning she found that the snow had blown

a chink in the casement, forming a white cone of the
ﬁnest powder against the inside, and had also come
down the chimney, so that it lay sole-deep upon the
ﬂoor, on which her shoes left tracks when she moved
about. Without, the storm drove so fast as to create
a snow-mist in the kitchen; but as yet it was too dark
out-of—doors to see anything.

Tess lmew that it was impossible to go on with
the swedes; and by the time she had ﬁnished break-
fast beside the solitary little lamp, Marian arrived to
tell her that they were to join the rest of the women
at reed-drawing in the barn till the weather changed.
As soon, therefore, as the uniform cloak of darkness
without began to turn to a disordered medley of
greys, they blew out the lamp, wrapped themselves
up in their thickest pinners, tied their woollen ctavats
round their necks and across their chests, and started
for the barn. The snow had followed the birds from
the polar basin as a white pillar of a cloud, and
individual ﬂakes could not be seen. The blast smelt
of icebergs, arctic seas, whales, and white “bears,
carrying the snow so that it licked the land but did
not deepen on it. They trudged onwards with
slanted bodies through the ﬂossy ﬁelds, keeping as
well as they could in the shelter of hedges, which,
however, acted as strainers rather than screens. The
air, aﬁ‘licted to pallor with the hoary multitudes that
infested it, twisted and spun them eccentiically,
suggesting an achromatic chaos of things. But both
the young women were fairly cheerful; such weather
on a dry upland is not in itself dispiriting.

‘Ha—ha! the cunning northern birds knew this
was coming,‘ said Marian. ‘Depend upon't, they
keep just in front o't all the way from the North
Star. Your husband, my dear, is, I make no doubt,
having scorching weather all this time. Lord, if he
could only see his pretty wife now! Not that this

368

THE WOMAN PAYS

weather hurts your beauty at all—in fact, it rather
does it good.’

‘You mustn’t talk about him to me, Marian,’ said
Tess severely.

‘Well, but—surely you care for '13! Do you?’

Instead of answering, Tess, with tears in her eyes,
impulsively faced in the direction in which she
imagined South America to lie, and, putting up ha-
lips, blew out a passionate kiss upon the snowy wind.

‘Well, well, I know you do. But 'pon my body,
it is a rum life for a married couple! There—I won’t
say another word! Well, as for the weather, it won’t
hurt us in the wheat-barn; but reed-drawing is fearful
hard work—worse than swede-hacking. I can stand
it because I’m stout; but you be slimmer than I. I
can’t think why maister should have set 'ee at it.’

They reached the wheat-barn and entered it. One
end of the long structure was full of earn; the middle
was where the reed-drawing was carried on, and there
hndalreadybeenplecedinthereed-prestheevening
before as many sheaves of wheat as would be suﬂicient
for the women to draw from during the day.

‘Why, here’s Izz!’ said Marian.

Izz it was, and she came forward. She hadwalked’
all the way from her mother’s home on the previous
afternoon, and, not deeming the distance so great,
had been belated, arriving, however. just before the
snow began, and sleeping at the ale-house. The
farmer had agreed with her mother at market to take
heronifshecameto-day, andshehadbeenafraidto
disappoint him by delay.

In addition to Tess, Marian, and Izz, there were two
women from a. neighbouring village; two Amazonian
sisters, whom Tess with a start remembered as Dark
Car the Queen of Spades and her junior the Queen
of Diamonds—those who had tried to ﬁght with her
in the midnight quarrel at Trantridge. They showed
no recognition of her, and possibly had none, for they
hadbeenundertheinﬂgenoeofliquoronthat

3

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

occasion, and were only temporary sojourners there
as here. They did all kinds of men’s work by
preference, including well-sinking, hedging, ditching,
and excavating, without any sense of fatigue. Noted
reed-drawers were they too, and looked round upon
the other three with some superciliousness.

Puttingontheirgloves,allset toworkinarowin
front of the press, an erection formed of two
connected by a cross-beam, under which the sheaves
tobedrawn from werelaidearsoutward,thebeam
being pegged down by pins in the uprights, and
lowered as the sheaves diminished.

The day hardened in colour, the light coming in
at the barn—doors upwards from the snow instead of
downwards from the sky. The girls pulled handful
after handful from the press; but by reason of the
presence of the strange women. who were recounting
scandals, Marian and 122 could not at ﬁrst talk of old
times as they wished to do. Presently they heard
the mumed tread of a horse, and the farmer rode up
to the barn-door. When he had dismounted he came
close to Tess, and remained looking musineg at the
side of her face. She had not turned at ﬁrst, but
his ﬁxed attitude led her to look round, when she
perceived that her employer was the native of Trent.
ridge from whom she had taken ﬂight on the high-
road because of his allusion to her history.

He waited till she had carried the drawn bundles
to the piles outside, when he said, ‘So you be the
young woman who took my civility in such ill part?
BedrownedifIdidn'tthinkyoumightbeassoon
as I heard of your being hired! Well. you thought
you had got the better of me the ﬁrst time at the inn
with your fancy-man, and the second time on the
road, when you bolted; but now I think I’ve got the
better of you.’ He concluded with a hard laugh.

Tess, between the Amazons and the farmer like a
bird caught in a. clap-net, returned no answer, can-
tinuingtopullthestmw. Sherde

31’9

THE WOMAN PAYS

suﬂiciently well to lmow by this time that she had
nothing to fear from her ployer's gallantry; it was
rather the tyranny induced by his modiﬁcation at
Clare’s treatment of him. Upon the whole she pre-
ferred that sentiment in man and felt brave enough
to endure it.

‘You thought I was in love with ’ee, I suppose?
Somewomenaresuchfoolstotakeeverylookas
serious earnest. But there’s nothing like a winter
aﬁeld for taking that nonsense out 0’ young wenches’
heads; and you've signed and agreed till Lady-Day.
Now, are you going to beg my pardon?’

‘I thinkyououghttobegmine.’

‘Very well—as you like. But we’ll see which is
master here. Be they all the sheaves you’ve done
today?”

‘Yes, sir.’

"Tis a very poor show. Just see what they’ve
done over there' (pointingtothetwostalwart women).
‘The rest, too, have done better than you.’

‘They’ve all practised it before, and I have not.
And I thought it made no diﬂerenee to you, as
iti:1 task work, and we are only paid for what
we o.'

‘Oh, but it does. I want the barn cleared.’

‘Iamgoingtoworkalltheafternooninsteadof
leaving at two as the others will do.’

He looked sullenly at her and went away. Tess
felt that she could not have come to a much worse
place; but anythingwasbetterthangallantry. When
two o’clock arrived the professional reed-drawers
tossed 03 the last half-pint in their ﬂagon, put down
their hooks, tied their last sheaves, and went away.
Marian and 122 would have done likewise, but on
hearing that Tess meant to stay, to make up by
longer hours for her lack of skill, they would not
leave her. Looking out at the snow, which still
fell, Marian exclaimed, ‘Now, we've got it all to
ourselves.’ And so at last the conversation turned to

37!

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

their old experiences at the dairy; and, of course, the
incidents of their affection for Angel Clare.

‘Izz and Marian,’ said Mrs. Angel Clare, with a
dignity which was extremely touching, seeing how
very little of a wife she was: ‘I can't join in talkwith
you now, as I used to do, about Mr. Clare; you will
see that I cannot; because, although he is gone away
from me for the present, he is my husband.’

Izz was by nature the sauciest and most caustic of
all the four girls who had loved Clare. ‘He was a.
very splendid lover, no doubt,’ she said; ‘but I don’t
thinkheisatoofondhusbandtogoawayfromyou
so soon.’

‘He had to go—he was obliged to go, to see about
the land over there!’ pleaded Tess.

‘He might have tided ’ee over the winter.’

‘Ah——tha.t’s owing to an accident—a misunder-
standing; and we won’t argue it,’ Tess answered, with
tearfulness in her words. ‘ Perhaps there’s a good deal
to be said for him! He did not go away, like some
husbands, without telling me; and I can always ﬁnd
out where he is.’

After this they continued for some long time in e
reverie, as they went on seizing the ears of corn, draw-
ing out the straw, gathering it under their arms, and
cutting oﬁ the ears with their bill—hooks, nothing
sounding in the barn but the swish of the straw and
the crunch of the hook. Then Tess suddenly ﬂagged,
fand sank down upon the heap of wheat-ears at her

eet.

‘I knew you wouldn’t be able to stand it!’ cried
Malian. ‘It wants harder ﬂesh than yours for this
war .'

Just then the farmer entered. ‘Oh, that's how
you get on when I am away,’ he said to her.

‘But it is my own loss,’ she pleaded. ‘Not yours.’

‘I want it ﬁnished,’ he said doggedly. as he crossed
the ham and went out at the other door.

‘Don’t ’ee mind him, there’s a dear,’ said Marian.

373

THE WOMAN PAYS

‘I've worked here before. Now you go and lie
Sgtwnthere,andIzzandeillmakeupyournum-

‘I don’t like to let you do that. I'm taller than
you, too.’

However, she was so overcome that she consented
to lie down awhile, and reclined on a heap of pull-
tails—the refuse after the straight straw had been
drawn—thrown up at the further side of the barn.
Her succumbing had been as largely owing to agita-
tion at reopening the subject of her separation
from her husband as to the hard work. She lay in
a state of percipience without volition, and the rustle
of the straw and the cutting of the ears by the others
had the weight of bodily touches.

She could hear from her corner, in addition to
these noises, the murmur of their voices. She felt
certain that they were continuing the subject already
broached, but their voices were so low that she could
not catch the words. At last Tess grew more and
more anxious to lcnow what they were saying, and,
persuading herself that she felt better, she got up and
resumed work.

Then Izz Huett broke down. She had walked
more than a dozen miles the previous evening, had
gone to bed at midnight, and had risen again at ﬁve
o’clock. Marian alone, thanks to her bottle of liquor
and her stoutness of build, stood the strain upon back
and arms without suﬁering. Tess urged 122 to leave
05, agreeing, as she felt better, to ﬁnish the day with-
out her, and make equal division of the number of
sheaves.

Izz accepted the oﬁer gratefully, and disappeared
through the great door into the snowy track to her
lodging. Marian, as was the case every afternoon at
this time on account of the bottle, began to feel in a
romantic vein.

‘1 should not have thought it of him—never?
shesaidinadreamytone. ‘AndIlovedhimso!

373

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

I didn’t mind his having you. But this about 122 is
too bad!’ ,

Tess, in her start at the words, narrowly missed
cutting off a ﬁnger with the bill-hook.

‘Is it about my husband?’ she stammered.

‘Well, yes. Izz said, “Don’t ’ee tell her”; but
I am sure I can’t help it! It was what he wanted
do. He wanted her to go oﬁ to Brazil with

Tess's face faded as white as the scene without,
and its curves straightened. ‘And did In refuse to
go?’ she asked.

‘I don’t know. Anyhow he changed his mind.’

‘Pooh—then he didn't mean it! ’Twas just a
man's jest!’

‘Yes he did; for he drove her agoodways towards
the station.’

‘He didn’t take her!‘

They pulled on in silence till Tess, without any
premonitory symptoms, burst out trying.

‘l’l‘herel' said Marian. ‘Now I wish I hadn’t told
1w ,

‘No. It is a very good thing that you have done!
I have been living on in a thirtover, lackaday way,
and have not seen what it may lead to! I ought to
have sent him a letter oftener. He said I could not
gotohim,buthedidn’tsay1wasnottowriteas
often as I liked. I won't daily like this any longer!
I have been very wrong and neglectful in leaving
everything to be done by him!’

The dim light in the barn grew dimmer. and they
could see to work no longer. When Tess had reached
home that evening, and had entered into the privacy of
her little white-washed chamber, she began im-
petuously writing a letter to Clare. But, falling into
doubt she could not ﬁnish it. Afterwards she took
the ring from the ribbon on which she wore it next her
heart, and retained it on her ﬁnger all night, as if to
fortify herself in the sensation that she was really the

374

THE WOMAN PAYS

wife of this elusive lover of hers, who could propose
that Izz should go with him abroad, so shortly after
he had left her. Knowing that, how could she
write entreaties to him, or show that she cared far

'him any more?

XLIV

BY the disclosure in the barn her thoughts were led
anew in the direction which they had taken more than
once of late—to the distant Emminster Vicarage. It
was through her husband's parents that she had been
charged to send a letter to Clare if she desired; and
to write to them direct if in diﬂiculty. But that sense
of her having morally no claim upon him had always
led Tess to suspend her impulse to send these notes;
and to the family at the Vicarage, therefore, as to her
own parents since her marriage, she was virtually
non-existent. This self-effucement in both directions
had been quite in consonance with her independent
character of desiring nothing by way of favour or pity
to which she was not entitled on a fair consideration
of her deserts. She had set herself to stand or fall
by her qualities, and to waive such merely technical
claims upon a strange family as had been established
for her by the ﬂimsy fact of a member of that family,
in a season of impulse, writing his name in a church-
book beside hers.

But now that she was stung to a fever by his tale,
there was a limit to her powers of renunciation. Why
had her husband not written to her? He had distinct-
ly implied that he would at least let her know of the
locality to which he had journeyed; but he had not
sent a line to notify his address. Was he really in-
diﬁerent? But was he ill? Was it for her to make
some advance? Surely she might summon the courage
of solicitude, call at the Vicarage for intelligence, and
express her grief at his silence. If Angel’s father
were the good man she had heard him represented to

376

THE WOMAN PAYS

be, he would be able to enter into her heart-starved
situation. Her social hardships she could conceal.

To leave the farm on a week-day was not in her
power; Sunday was the only possible opportunity.
Flintcornb—Ash being in the middle of the cretaceous
table-land over which no railway had climbed as yet, it
would be necessary to walk. And the distance being
ﬁfteen miles each way she would have to allow herself
a long day for the undertaking by rising early.

A fortnight later, when the snow had gone, and
had been followed by a hard black frost, she took
advantage of the state of the roads to try the experi-
ment. At four o’clock that Sunday morning she
came downstairs and stepped out into the starlight.
The weather was still favourable, the ground ringing
under her feet like an anvil.

Marian and 122 were much interested in her ex-
cursion, knowing that the journey concerned her
husband. Their lodgings were in a cottage a little
further along the lane, but they came and assisted
Tess in her departure. and argued that she should
dress up in her very prettiest guise to captivate the
hearts of her parents-in-law: though she, knowing of
the austere and Calvinistic tenets of old Mr. Clare,
was indifferent, and even doubtful. A year had now
elapsed since her sad marriage, but she had preserved
sufﬁcient draperies from the wreck of her then full
wardrobe to clothe her very charmingly as a simple
country girl with no pretensions to recent fashion; a
soft gray woollen gown, with white craps quilling
againstthepinkskinofherfaceandneck,andablack
velvet jacket and hat.

‘ ’Tis a thousand pities your husband can’t see 'ee
now—you do look a real beauty!’ said Izz Huett,
regarding Tess as she stood on the threshold between
the steely starlight without and the yellow candlelight
within. Izz spoke with a. magnanimous abandonment
of herself to the situation; she could not be-no
woman with a heart bigger than a hazel-nut could be

377

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

~antagonistic to Tess in her presence, the inﬂuence
which she exercised over those of her own sex being
of a warmth and strength quite unusual, curiously
overpowering the less worthy feminine feelings of
spite and rivalry.

Withaﬁnaltugandtouchhere,andaslightbrush
there, they let her go; and she was absorbed into the
pearly air of the fore-dawn. They heard her footsteps
tap along the hard road as she stepped out to her full
pace. Even Izz hoped she would win, and, though
without any particular respect for her own virtue, felt
glad that she had been prevented wronging her friend
when momentarily tempted by Clare.

Itwasayearago,allbutaday,thatClm'ehad
married Tess, and only a few days less than a. year
that he had been absent fromher. Still,tostartona
briskwalk,andonsuchanerrandashers,onadry
clear wintry morning, through the rareﬁed air of these
chalky hogs’-backs, was not depressing; and there is
no doubt that her dream at starting was to win the
heart of her mother-in—law, tell her whole history to
that lady, enlist her on her side, and so gain back the
truant.

In time she reached the edge of the vast escarp-
ment below which stretched the loamy Vale of Bled:-
moor, now lying misty and still in the dawn. Instead
of the colourless air of the uplands the atmosphere
down there was a deep blue. Instead of the great
enclosures of a hundred acres in which she was now
accustomed to toil there were little ﬁelds below her of
less than half-a-dm acres, so numerous that they
looked from this height like the meshes of a net.
Here the landscape was whitey-brown; down there,
as in Fmom Valley, it was always green. Yet it was
inthatvalethathersorrowhadtakenshape,andshe
did not love it as formerly. Beauty to her, as to all
who have felt, lay not in the thing, but in what the
thing symbolized.

Keeping the Vale on her right, she steered steadily

378

THE WOMAN PAYS

westward; passing above the Hintocks, crossing at
right-angles the high-road from Sherton-Abbas to
Casterbridge, and skirting Dogbury Hill and High-
Stoy, with the dell between them called 'The Devil’s
Kitchen! Still following the elevated way she reached
Cross—in—Hand, where the stone pillar stands desolate
and silent, to mark the site of a miracle, or murder, or
both. Three miles further she cut across the straight
and deserted Roman road called Long-Ash Lane;
leaving which as soon as she reached it she dipped
downahillbyah‘ansverselaneintothesmalltown
or village of Evershead, being now about half-way
over the distance. She made a halt here, and break-
fasted a second time, heartily enough—not at the
Sow-and-Aeorn, for she avoided inns, but at a cottage
by the church.

The second half of her journey was through a more
gentle country, by way of Benvill Lane. But as the
mileage lessened between her and the spot of her pil-
grimage, so did Tess’s conﬁdence decrease, and her
enterprise loom out more formidably. She saw her

urpose in sud: staring lines, and the landscape so
faintly, that she was sometimes in danger of losing her
way. However, about noon she paused by a gate on
the edge of the basin in which Emminster and its
Vicarage lay.

The square tower, beneath which she knew that at
that moment the Vicar and his congregation were
gathered, had a severe look in her 'eyes. She wished
that she had somehow contrived to come on a week-
day. Such a good man might be prejudiced against a
woman who had chosen Sunday, never realizing the
necessities of her case. But it was incumbent upon
her to go on now. She took oﬁ the thick boots in
which she had walked thus far, put on her pretty thin
ones of patent leather, and, stuﬂing the former into
the hedge by the gate-post where she might readily
ﬁnd them again, descended the hill; the freshness of
colour she had derived from the keen air thinning

379

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

away in spite of her as she drew near the par-
sonage.

Tess hoped for some accident that might favour
her, but nothing favoured her. The shrubs on the
Vicarage lawn rustled uncomfortably in the frosty
breeze; she could not feel by any stretch of imagina-
tion, dressed to her highest as she was, that the house
was the residence of near relations; and yet nothing
essential, in nature or emotion, divided her from them:
in pains, pleasures, thoughts, birth, death, and after-
death, they were the same.

She nerved herself by an eﬁort, entered the swing-
gate, and rang the door-bell. The thing was done;
there could be no retreat. No; the thing was not
done. Nobody answered to her ringing. The eﬁort
hadtoberisentoandmadeagain. Sherangasecond
time, and the agitation of the act, coupled with her
wear-iness after the ﬁfteen miles' walk, led her to sup-
port herself while she waited by mting her hand on her
hip. and her elbow against the wall of the porch. The
wind was so nipping that the ivy-leaves had become
wizened and grey, each tapping incessantly upon its
neighbour with a disquieting stir of her nerves. A
piece of blood-stained paper, caught up from some
meat-buyer's dust-heap, beat up and down the road
without the gate; too ﬂimsy to rest, too heavy to ﬂy
away; and a few straws kept it company.

The second peel had been louder, and still nobody
came. Then she walked out of the porch, opened the
gate, and passed through. And though she looked
dubiously at the house-front. as if inclined to return, it
was with a breath of relief that she closed the gate.
A feeling haunted her that she might have been recog-
nized (though how she could not tell), and orders
been given not to admit her.

Tess went: as far as the corner. She had done all she
could do; but determined not to escape present trepidae
tion at the expense of future distress, she walked back

againquite past the house, looking up at allthewindows.
380

THE WOMAN PAYS

Ah—the explanation was that they were all at
church, every one. She remembered her husband
saying that his father always insisted upon the house—
hold, servants included, going to morning-service, and,
as a consequence, eating cold food when they came
home. It was, therefore, only necessary to wait till
the service was over. She would not make herself
conspicuous by waiting on the spot, and she started to
get past the church into the lane. But as she reached
the churchyard-gate the people began pouring out,
and Tess found herself in the midst of them.

The Emminster congregation looked at her as only
a congregation of small country-townsfolk walln'ng
home at its leisure can look at a woman out of the
common whom it perceives to be a stranger. She
quickeued her pm, and ascended the road by which
she had come, to ﬁnd a retreat between its hedges till
the Vicar’s family should have lunched, and it might
be convenient far them to receive her. She soon
distanced the churchgoers, except two youngish men,
who, linked arm-in-arm, were beating up behind her
at a. quick step.

As they drew nearer she could hear their voices
engaged in earnest discourse, and, with the natural
quickness of a woman in her situation, did not fail to
recognize in those voices the quality of her husband’s
tones. The pedestrians were his two brothers. For-
getting all her plans, Tess’s one dread was lest they
should overtake her now, in her disorganized condition,
before she was prepared to confront them; for though
she felt that they could not identify her, she instinct-
ively dreaded their scrutiny. The more briskly they
walked the more briskly walked she. They were
plainly bent upon taking a. short quick stroll be-
fore going indoors. to ‘lunch or dinner, to restore
warnith tolimbschilledwith sittingthroughalong
serwce.

OnlyonepersonhadprecededTessupthehilL—a
ladylike young woman, sorgewhat interesting, though,

3 l

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

perhaps, a triﬂe guindée and prudish. Tess had nearly
overtaken her when the speed of her brothers-in-law
brought them so nearly behind her back that she could
hear every word of their conversation. They said
nothing, however, which particularly interested her
till, observing the young lady still further in front, one
of them remarked, ‘There is Mercy Chant. Let us
overtake her.’

Tess knew the name. It was the woman who had
been destined for Angel's life-companion by his and
her parents, and whom he probably would have
married but for her intrusive self. She would have
known as much without previous information if she
had waited a moment, for one of the brothers proceed-
ed to say: ‘Ah! poor Angel, poor Angel! I never see
that nice girl without more and more regretting his
precipitancy in throwing himself away upon a dairy-
maid, or whatever she may be. It is a queer business,
apparently. Whether she has joined him yet or not I
don't know; but she had not done so some months
ago when I heard from him.’

‘ I can't say. He never tells me anything nowadays.
His ill-considered marriage seems to have completed
that estrangement from me which was begun by his
extraordinary opinions.’

Tess beat up the long hill still faster; but she could
not outwalk th without exciting notice. At last
they outsped her altogether, and pawed her by. The
young lady still further ahead heard their footsteps and
turned. Then there was a greeting and a shaking of
hands, and the three went on together.

They soon reached the summit of the hill, and,
evidently intending this point to be the limit of their
promenade, slackened pace and turned all three aside
to the gate whereat Tess had paused an hour before
that time to reconnoitre the town before descending
into it. During their discourse one of the clerical
brothers probed the hedge careﬁilly with his umbrella,

and dragged something toslight.
3 a

'THE WOMAN PAYS

‘Here’s a pair of old boots,’ he said. ‘Thrown
away, I suppose, by some tramp or other.’

‘Some impostor who wished to come into the town
barefoot, perhaps, and so excite our sympathies,’ said
Miss Chant. ‘Yes, it must have been, for they are
excellent walking-boots—by no means worn out.
What a wicked thing to do! I’ll carry them home
for some poor person.’

Cuthbert Clare, who had been the one to ﬁnd
them, picked th up for her with the crook of his
stick; and Tess's boots were appropriated.

She, who had heard this, walked past under the
screen of her woollen veil, till, presently looking back,
she perceived that the church party had left the gate
with her boots and retreated down the hill.

Thereupon our heroine resumed her walk. Tears,
blinding tears, were running down her face. She
lmew that it was all sentiment, all baseless impressi-
bility, which had caused her to read the scene as her
own condemnation; nevertheless she could not get
over it; she could not contravene in her own defence-
less person all these untoward omens. It was im-
possible to think of returning to the Vicarage. Angel’s
wife felt almost as if she had been hounded up that
hill like a scorned thing by those—to her—super-
ﬁne clerics. Innocently as the slight had been in-
ﬂicted, it was somewhat unfortunate that she had en-
countered the sons and not the father, who, despite
his harrowness, was far less starched and ironed than
they, and had to the full the gift of charity. As she
again thought of her dusty boots she almost pitied
those habih'ments for the quizzing to which they had
been subjected, and felt how hopeless life was for tha'r
owner.

‘Ah!’ she said, still sighing in pity of herself, ‘01:)!
didn’t know that I wore those over the roughest
partoftheroadtosavetheseprettyoneshebought
for me—no—they did not know it! And they didn't
thinkthathechosethecolouro'myprettyfrock—mo

383

 

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

—how could they? If they had known perhaps they
would not have cared, for they don't care much for
him, poor thing!’

Then she grieved for the beloved man whose con-
ventional standard of judgment had caused her all
these latter sorrows; and she went her way without
knowing that the greatest misfortune of her life was
this feminine loss of courage at the last and critical
moment through her estimating her father-in-law by
his sons. Her present condition was precisely one
which would have enlisted the sympathies of old Mr.
and Mrs. Clare. Their hearts went out of them at a
bound towards extreme cases, when the subtle mental
troubles of the less desperate among mankind failed to
win their interest or regard. In jumping at Publicans
and Sinners they would forget that a word might be
said for the worries of Scribes and Pharisees; and this
defect or limitation might have recommended their
own daughter-in—law to them at this moment as a fair-
ly choice sort of lost person for their love.

Thereupon she began to plod back along the road
by which she had come not altogether full of hope,
but full of a conviction that a crisis in her life was
approaching. No crisis, apparently, had supervened;
and there was nothing left for her to do but to con-
tinue upon that starve-acre farm till she could again
summon courage to face the Vicarage. She did, in-
deed, take suﬂicient interest in herself to throw up her
Veil on this return journey, as if to let the world' see
that she could at least exhibit a face such as Mercy
Chant could not show. But it was done with a sorry
shake of the head. ‘It is nothing—it is nothing? she
said. ‘Nobody loves it; nobody sees it. Who cares
about the looks of a castaway like me!’

Her journey back was rather a. meander than a
match. It had no sprightliness, no purpose: only a
tendency. Along the tedious length of Benvill Lane
she began to grow tired, and she leaned upon gates and
paused by milestones

384

THE WOMAN PAYS

She did not enter any house till, at the seventh or
eighth mile, she descended the steep long hill below
which lay the village or townlet of Evershead, where
in the morning she had breakfasted with such con-
trasting expectations. The cottage by the church,
in which she again sat down, was almost the ﬁrst at
that end of the village, and while the woman fetched
her some milk from the pantry, Tess, looking down the
street, perceived that the place seemed quite deserted.

‘The people are gone to afternoon service, I sup-
pose?’ she said.

‘No, my dear,’ said the old woman. ‘ 'Tis too soon
for that; the bells hain’t strook out yet. They be all
gone to hear the preaching in yonder barn. A ranter

es there between the services—an excellent,
ﬁery, Christian man, they say. But, Lord, I don't go
to hear'n! What comes in the regular way over the
pulpit is hot enough for I.’

Tess soon went onward into the village, her foot-
steps echoing against the houses as though it were a
place of the dead. Nearing the central part her echoes
were intruded on by other sounds; and seeing the
barnnotfaroﬁtheroad, sheguessedthesetobethe
utterances of the preacher.

His voice became so distinct in the still clear air
that she could soon catch his sentences, though she
was on the closed side of the barn. The sermon, as
might be expected, was of the extremest antinomian
type; on justiﬁcation by faith, as expounded in the
theology of St. Paul. This ﬁxed idea of the rhapsodist
was delivered with animated enthusiasm, in a manner
entirely declamatory, for he had plainly no skill as a
dialectidan. Although Tess had not heard the be-
ginning of the address, she learnt what the text had
been from its constant iteration——

’0 foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that
ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?’

Tess was all the more interested, as she stood

385

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

listening behind, in ﬁnding that the preacher’s doctrine
was a vehement form of the views of Angel’s father,
and her interest intensiﬁed when the speaker began to
detail his own spiritual experiences of how he had
come by those views. He had,, he said, been the
greatest of sinners. He had scoﬁed; he had wantonly
associated with the reckless and the lewd. But a day
of awakening had come, and, in a human sense, it had
been brought about mainly by the inﬂuence of a cer-
tain clergyman, whom he had at ﬁrst grossly insulted;
but whose parting words had sunk into his heart, and
had remained there, till by the grace of Heaven they
had worked this change in him, and made himwhat
they saw him.

But more startling to Tess than the doctrine had
been the voice, which, impossible as it seemed, was
precisely that of Alec d'Urberville. Her face ﬁxed in
painfulsuspenseshemmeroundtothefrontofthe
barn, and passed before it. The low winter sun
beamed directly upon the great double-domed en-
trance on this side; one of the doors being open, so
that the rays stretched far in over the threshing-ﬂoor
to the preacher and his audience, all snugly sheltered
from the northern breeze. The listeners were entirely
villagers, among them being the man whom she had
seen carrying the red paint-pot on a former memorable
occasion. But her attention was given to the central
ﬁgure, who stood upon some sacks of corn, facing the
people and the door. The three o'clock sun shone full
upon him, and the strange enervating conviction that
her seducer confronted her, which had been gaining
groundinTesseversinceshehadheardhiswords
distinctly, was at last established as a fact indeed.

END 0? PHASE THE FIFTH

 

 

PHASE THE SIXTH

TEE CONVERT

XLV

TILL this moment she had never seen or heard from
d'Urberville since her departure from Trantridge.

The rencounter came at a heavy moment, one of all
moments calculated to permit its impact with the least
emotional shock. But such was unreasoning memory
that, though he stood there openly and palpably a
converted man, who was sorrowing for his past ir-

'ties, a fear overcame her, paralyzing her move-
ment so that she neither retreated nor advanced.

To think of what emanated from that countenance
when she saw it last, and to behold it now! . . . There
was the same handsome unpleasantness of mien, but
now he wore neatly trimmed. old-fashioned whiskers,
the sable moustache having disappeared; and his dress
was half clerical, a. modiﬁcation which had changed
his expression suﬁieiently to abstract the dandyism
from his features, and to hinder for a second her
belief in his identity.

To Tess's sense there was, just at ﬁrst, a y
bimrren'e, a grim incongruity, in the march of these
solemn words of Scripture out of such a. mouth. This
too familiar intonation, less than four years earlier,
had brought to her ears expressions of such divergent

that her heart became quite sick at the irony
of the contrast.

It was less a reform than a transﬁguration. The

389

~TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

former curves of sensuousness were now modulated to
lines of devotional passion. The lip-shapes that had
meant seductiveness were now made to apress sup-
plication; the glow on the cheek that yesterday cmild
be translated as riotousness was evangelized to-day
into the splendour of pious rhetoric; animalism had
become fanaticism; Paganism Paulinism; the bold
rolling eye that had ﬂashed upon her form in the
old time with such mastery now beamed with the
rude energy of a theolatry that was almost ferocious.
Those black angularities which his face had used to
put on when his wishes were thwarted now did duty in
picturing the incorrigible backslider who would insist
uponturningagaintohiswallowinginthemire.

The lineaments, as such, seemed to complain.
They had been diverted from their hereditary con-
notation to signify impressions for which nature did
not intend them. Strange that their very elevation
was a misapplication, that to raise seemed to falsify.

Yet could it be so? She would admit the ungener-
ous sentiment no longer. D'Urberville was not the
ﬁrst wicked man who had turned away from his
wickedness to save his soul alive, and why should she
deemitunnaturalinhim? Itwasbuttheusageof
thought'which had been jarred in her at hearing good
new words in bad old notes. The greater the sinner
the greater the saint; it was not necessary to dive far
into Christian history to discover that.

Such impressions as these moved her vaguely, and
without strict deﬁniteness. As soon as the nerveless
pause of her surprise would allow her to stir, her im-
pulsewastopassonout ofhissight. Hehadob-
tvkilously not discerned her yet in her position against

e sun.

But the moment that she moved again he recognized
her. The eﬁect upon her old lover was electric, far
stronger than the eﬁect of his presence upon her. His
ﬁre, the tumultuous ring of his eloquence, seemed to go
out of him. His lip struggled and trembled under the

39°

THE CONVERT

words that lay upon it; but deliver them it could not
ulcngasshefacedhim. Hiseyes,a.ftertheirﬁrst
glance upon her face, hung confusedly in every other
direction but hers, but came back in a desperate leap
every few seconds. This paralysis lasted, however,
but a short time; for Tess’s energies returned with
the atrophy of his, and she walked as fast as she was
able past the barn and onward.

Assoonasshecouldreﬂectitappalledher,this
change in their relative platforms. He who had
wrought her undoing was now on the side of the
Spirit, while she remained unregenerate. And, as in
the legend. it had resulted that her Cyprian image
had suddenly appeared upon his altar, whereby the
ﬁre of the priest had been well-nigh extinguished.

She went on without turning her head. Her back
seemed to be endowed with a sensitiveness to ocular
beams—even her clothing—so alive was she to a
fancied gaze which might be resting upon her from the
outside of that barn. All the way along to this point
herhearthadbeenheavywithaninactivesonow;
now there was a change in the quality of its trouble.
That hunger for affection too long withheld was for
the time displaced by an almost physical sense of an
implacable past which still engirdled her. It inten-
siﬁed her consciousness of error to a practical despair;
the break of continuity between her earlier and present
existence, which she had hoped for, had not,‘ after all,
taken place. Bygones would never be complete by-
gones till she was a bygone herself.

Thus absorbed she recrossed the northern part of
Long-Ash Lane at right-angles, and presently saw
before her the road ascending whitely to the upland
along whose margin the remainder of her journey lay.
Its dry pale surface stretched severely onward, un-
broken by a single ﬁgure, vehicle, or mark, save some
occasional brown horse-droppings which dotted its cold
aridity here and there. While slowly breasting this
ascent Tess became conscious of footsteps behind her,

39!

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

and turning she saw approaching that well-known form
——so strangely accoutred as the Methodist—the one
personage in all the world she wished not to encounter
alone on this side of the grave.

There was not much time, however, for thought
or elusion, and she yielded as calmly as she could to
the necessity of letting him overtake her. She saw
that he was excited, less by the speed of his walk than
by the feelings within him.

‘Tess!’ he said.

She slackened speed without looking round.

‘Tess!’ he repeated. ‘It is I—Alec d’Urberville.’

She then looked back at him, and he came up.

‘I see it is,’ she answered coldly.

‘Well-—is that all? Yet I deserve no more! Of
course,’ he added, with a slight laugh, ‘there is some-
thing of the ridiculous to your eyes in seeing me like
this. But—I must put up with that. . . . I heard you
had gone away, nobody knew where. Tess, you
wonder why I have followed you?’

‘I do, rather; and I would that you had not. with
all my heart!’

‘Yes—you may well say it,‘ he returned grimly, as
they moved onward together, she with unwilling tread.
‘But don't mistake me; I beg this because you may
have been led to do so in noticing—ii you did notice
it—how your sudden appearance unnerved me down
there. It was but a momentary faltering; and con-
sidering what you had been to me, it was natural
enough. But will helped me through it—though
perhaps you think me a humbug for saying it—and
immediately afterwards I felt that, of all persons in the
world whom it was my duty and desire to save from
the wrathto come—sneer if you like—the womanwhom
Ihadso grievouslywrongedwasthat person. Ihave
come with that sole purpose in view—nothing more.‘

There was the smallest vein of scorn in her words
of rejoinder: ‘Have you saved yourself? Charity
begins at home, they say.’

392

THE CONVERT

‘ I have done nothing!’ said he indiﬁerently.
‘Heaven, as I have been telling my hearers, has done
all. No amount of contempt that you can pour upon
me, Tess, will equal what I have poured upon myself
—-the old Adam of my former years! Well, it is a
strange story; believe it or not; but I can tell you the
means by which my conversion was brought about,
andIhopeyouwillbeinterestedenoughatleastto
listen. Have you ever heard the name of the parson of
Emminster—you must have done SOP—old Mr. Clare;
one of the most earnest of his school; one of the few
intense men left in the Church; not so intense as the
extreme wing of Christian believers with which I have
thrown in my lot, but quite an exception among the
Established clergy, the younger of whom are gradually
attenuating the true doctrines by their sophistries, till
they are but the shadow of what they were. I only
diﬂer from him on the question of Church and State-—
the interpretation of the text, “ Come out from among
them and be ye separate, saith the Lord"—that’s all.
He is one who, I ﬁrmly believe, has been the humble
means of saving more souls in this country than any
other man you can name. You have heard of him?

‘I have,’ she said.

‘He came to Trantridge two or three years ago to
preach on behalf of some missionary society; and I,
wretched fellow that I was, insulted him when, in his
disinterestedness, he tried to reason with me and show
me the way. He did not resent my conduct; he simply
said that some day I should receive the ﬁrst-fruits of
the Spirit—that thaw who came to scoﬁ sometimes
remained to pray. There was a strange magic in his
words. They sank into my mind. But the loss of
my mother hit me most; and by degrees I was
brought to see daylight. Since then my one desire
has been to hand on the true view to others. and that
is what I was trying to do to-day; though it is only
lately that I have preached hereabout. The ﬁrst
months of myministryhave been spentintheNorth

39s

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

of England among strangers, where I preferred to
make my earliest clumsy attempts, so as to acquire
courage before undergoing that severest of all tests of
one's sincerity, addressing those who have known one,
and have been one’s companions in the days of dark-
ness. If you could only know, Tess, the pleasure

having a good slap at yourself, I am sure—'

‘Don’t go on with it!’ she cried passionately, as
she turned away from him to a stile by the wayside, on
which she bent herself. ‘I can’t believe in such sudden
things! Ifeelindignantwithyoufortalldngwme
like this, when you know—when you know what harm
you’ve done me! You, and those like you, take your
ﬁllofpleasureonearthbymaldng thelifeofsuch as
me bitter and black with sorrow; and then it is a.
ﬁne thing, when you have had enough of that, to
think of securing your pleasure in heaven by becom-
ing converted! Out upon such—I don’t believe in
you—I hate it 1'

‘Tess,’ he insisted; ‘don't speak so! It came to
me like a jolly new idea! And you don’t believe me?
What don't you believe?’

‘Your conversion. Your scheme of religion.’

‘Why?’

She dropped her voice. ‘Because a better man
than you does not believe in such.’

‘What a woman’s reason! Whoisthisbetterman?’

‘I cannot tell you.’

‘Well,’ he declared, a resentment beneath his
words seeming ready to spring out at a moment's
notice, ‘God forbid that I should say I am a good
man—and you know I don't say any such thing. I
am new to goodness, truly; but newcomers see fur-
thest sometimes.’

‘Yes,’ she replied sadly. ‘But I cannot believe in
your conversion to a new spirit. Such ﬂashes as you
feel, Alec, I fear don't last!’

Thus speaking, she turned from the stile over which
she had been leaning, and faced him; whereupon his

394

THE CONVERT

eyes, falling casually upon the familiar countenance
and form, remained contemplating her. The inferior
man was quiet in him now; but it was surely not
extracted, nor even entirely subdued.

‘Don’t look at me like that!’ he said abruptly.

Tess, who had been quite unconscious of her
action and mien, instantly withdrew the large dark
gaze of her eyes. stammering with a ﬂush, ‘I beg
your pardon!’ And there was revived in her the
wretched sentiment which had often come to her
before, that in the ﬂeshly tabernacle with
which Nature had endowed her she was somehow
doing wrong.

‘No, no! Don't beg my pardon. But since you
wear a veil to hide your good looks, why don’t you
keep it down?’

She pulled down the veil, saying hastily, ‘Itwas
mostly to keep off the wind.’

‘It may seem harsh of me to dictate like this,’ he
went on; ‘but it is better that I should not look too
often on you. It might be dangerous.’

"Ssh!' said Tess. .

‘Well, women's faces have had too much power
over me already for me not to fear them! An
evangelist has nothing to do with such as they; and
it reminds me of the old times that I would forget!’

After this their conversation dwindled to a casual
remark now and then as they rambled onward, Tess
inwardly wondering how far he was going with her,
and not liking to send him back by positive mandate.
Frequently when they came to a gate or stile they
found painted thereon in red or blue letters some text
of Scripture, and she asked him if he knew who had
been at the pains to blazon these announcements.
He told her that the man was employed by himself
and others who were worln'ng with him in that dis-
trict, to paint these reminders that no means might
be left untried which might move the hearts of a
wicked generation.

395

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

At length the road touched the spot called ‘Cross—
in-I-Iand.’ Of all the spots on the bleached and deso-
late upland this was the most forlorn. It was so far
removed from the charm which is sought in landscape
by artists and view-lovers as to reach a new kind of
beauty, a negative beauty of tragic tone. The place
took its name from a. stone pillar which stood there, a
strange rude monolith, from a stratum unknown in any
local quarry, on which was roughly carved a human
hand. Differing accounts were given of its history
and purport. Some authorities stated that a de-
votional cross had once formed the complete erection
thereon, of which the present relic was butgthe stump;
others that the stone as it stood was entire, and that
ithadbeenﬁxedtheretomarkabmmdaryorplaceof
meeting. Anyhow, whatever the origin of the relic,
there was and is something sinister, or sol, accord-
ing to mood, in the scene amid which it stands;
something tending to impress the most phlegmatic
passer-by.

‘I think I must leave you now.’ he marked, as
they drew near to this spot. ‘I have to preach at
Abbot’s—Cernel at six this evening, and my way lies
across to the right from here. And you upset me
somewhat too, Tessy~—I cannot, will not, say why. I
must go away and get strength. . . . How is it that
you speak so ﬂuently now? Who has taught you
such good English?’

‘I have learnt things in my troubles,’ she said
ev'asively.

'What troubles have you had?’

She told him of the ﬁrst one—the only one that
related to him.

D’Urberville was struck mute. ‘I knew nothing
of this till now!’. he next murmured. ‘Why didn’t
you, write to me when you felt your trouble coming
on

She did not reply; and he broke the silence by
adding: ‘Well—you will see me again.’

396

THE CONVERT

'No,’ she answered. ‘Do not again come near
me!’

‘I will think. But before we part come here.’
He stepped up to the pillar. ‘This was once a Holy
Cross. Relics are not in my creed; but I fear you at
moments-far more than you need fear me at present;
and to lessen my fear. put your hand upon that stone
hand, and swaar that you will never tempt me—by
your charms or ways.’

‘Good God—how can you ask what is so unneces-
sary! All that is furthest from my thought!’

‘Yes—but swear it.’

Tess, half frightened, gave way to his importunity;
placed her hand upon the stone and swore.

‘I am sorry you are not a believer,‘ he continued;
‘ that some unbeliever should have got hold of you and
unsettled your mind. But no more now. At home at
least I can pray for you; and I will; and who knows
what may not happen? I’m 03. Good-bye?

He turned to a. hunting-gate in the hedge, and
without letting his eyes again rest upon her leapt
over, and struck out across the down in the direction
of Abbot’s-Cernel. As he walked his pace showed
perturbation, and by-and-by, as if instigated by a.
former thought, he drew from his pocket 8 small
book, between the leaves of which was folded a letter.
worn and soiled, as from much rereading. D'Urber-
ville opened the letter. It was dated several months
before this time, and was signed by Parson Clare.

The letter began by expressing the writer's un—
feigned joy at d'Urberville's conversion, and thanked
him for his kindness in communicating with the per-
son on the subject. It expressed Mr. Clare’s warm
assurance of forgiveness for d’Urberville’s former con-
duct, and his interest in the young man's plans for
the future. He, Mr. Clare, would much have liked
to see d’Urberville in the Church to whose ministry he
had devoted so many years of his own life, and would
have helped him to enter a theological college to that

397

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

end; but since his correspondent had possibly not
cared to do this on account of the delay it would have
entailed, he was not the man to insist upon its para-
mount importance. Every man must work as he
could best work, and in the method towards which he
felt impelled by the Spirit.

D’Urberville read and reread this letter, and
seemed to quiz himself cynically. He also read some
passages from memoranda as he walked till his face
assumed a calm, and apparently the image of Tess no
longer troubled his mind.

She meanwhile had kept along the edge of the hill
by which lay her nearest way home. Within the
distance of a mile she met a solitary sheph .

‘What is the meaning of that old stone I have
passed?’ she asked of him. ‘Was it ever a Holy
Cross?’

‘Cross—no; 'twer not a cross! 'Tis a thing of
ill—omen, Miss. It was put up in wuld times by the
relations of a. malefactor who was tortured there by
nailinghishandtoapostandafterwardshung. The
bones lie underneath. They say he sold his soul to
the devil, and that he walks at times.‘

She felt the petite ml at this unexpectedly grue-
some information. and left the solitary man behind
her. It was dusk when she drew near to Flintcomb-
Ash, and in the lane at the entrance to the hamlet she
approached a girl and her lover without their observ-
ing her. They were talking no secrets, and the clear
unconcerned voice of the young woman, in response
to the warmer accents of the man, spread into the
chilly air as the one soothing thing within the dusky
horizon, full of a stagnant obscurity upon which
no ' else intruded. For a. moment the voices
cheered the heart of Tess, till she reasoned that this
interview had its origin, on one side or the other, in
the same attraction which had been the prelude to her
own tribulation. When she came close the girl turned
serenelyandrecognizedhexgtheyoungmanwalldng

39

THE CONVERT

OK in embarrassment. The woman was Izz Huett,
whose interest in Tess's excursion immediately super-
seded her own proceedings. Tess did not explain
very clearly its results, and Izz, who was a girl of
tact, began to speak of her own little affair, a phase
of which Tess had just witnessed.

‘He is Amby Seedling, the chap who used to some-
times come and help at Talbothays,’ she explained
indiﬁerenﬂy. ‘He actually inquired and found out
that I had come here, and has followed me. He says
he's been in love wi' me these two years. But I've
hardly answered him.’

XLVI

SEVERAL days had passed since her- futile journey,
and Tess was aﬁeld. The dry winter wind still blew,
but a screen of thatched hurdles erected in the eye
of the blast kept its force away from her. On the
sheltered side was a turnip-slicing machine, whose
bright blue hue of new paint seemed almost vocal
in the otherwise subdued scene. Opposite its front
was a long mound or ‘ grave,’ in which the roots had
been preserved since early winter. Tess was standing
at the uncovered end, chopping OH with a bill-hook
the ﬁbres and earth from each root, and throwing it
after the operation into the slicer. A man was turn-
ing the handle of the machine, and from its trough
came the newly-made swedes, the fresh smell of whose
yellow chips was accompanied by the sounds of the
snuﬁiing wind, the smart swish of the slidng-blades,
and the choppings of the hook in Tess’s leather-
gloved hand. -

The wide acreage of blank agricultural brownness,
apparent where the swedos had been pulled. was
beginning to be striped in wales of darker brown,
gradually broadening to ribands. Along the edge of
each of these something crept upon ten legs, moving
without haste and without rest up and down the whole
length of the ﬁeld; it was two horses and a man, the
plough going between them, turning up the cleared

d for a spring sowing.

For hours nothing relieved the joyless monotony
of things. Then, far beyond the ploughing-teams a
blackspeckwasseen. Ithadeomefromtheoorner

of a fence, where there was a gap, and its tendency
A00

THE CONVERT

was up the incline, towards the swede-cutters. From
the proportions of a mere point it advanced to the
shape of a ninepin, and was soon perceived to be a
man in black, arriving from the direction of Flint-
comb-Ash. The man at the slicer, having nothing
else to do with his eyes, continually obwved the
comer, but Tess, who was occupied, did not perceive
him till her companion directed her attention to his
approach.

It was not her hard taskmaster, Farmer Groby; it
was one in a. semi—clerical costume, who now repre-
sented what had once been the free—and-easy Alec

d'Urberville. Not being hot at his preaching, there -

was less enthusiasm about him now, and the presence
of the grinder seemed to embarrass him. A pale
distress was already on Tess's face, and she pulled
her curtained hood further over it.

D'Urberville came up and said quietly—

‘I want to speak to you, Tess.’

‘You have refused my last request, not to come
near me!’ said she.

‘Yes,but I have a good reason.’

‘Well, tell it.’

‘Itismoreseﬁousthanyoumaythink.’

He glanced round to see if he were overheard.
They were at some distance from the man who turned
the slicer, and the movement of the machine, too,
sufﬁciently prevented Alec’s words reaching other
ears. D’Urberville placed himself so as to screen
Tess from the labourer, turning his back to the latter.

‘It is this,’ he continued, with capricious compunc-
tion. ‘In thinking of your soul and mine when we
last met, I neglected to inquire as to your worldly
condition. You were well dressed, and I did not
think of it. But I see now that it is hard—harder
than it used to be when I—lmew you—harder than
you deserve. Perhaps a good deal of it is owing to
me!’

She did not answer, and he watched her inquiringly,

4oz

 

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

as, with bent head, her face completely screened by
the hood, she resumed her trimming of the swedes.
By going on with her work she felt better able to
keep him outside her emotions.

‘Tess.’ he added, with a sigh of discontent——
‘yours was the very worst case I ever was concerned
in! I had no idea. of what had resulted till you told
me. Scamp that I was to foul that innocent life!
The whole blame was mine—~the whole unconventional
business of our time at Trantridge. You, too, the
real blood of which I am but the base imitation, what
a blind young thing you were as to possibilities! I
sayinallearnestness that itisashameforparentsto
bring up their girls in such dangerous ignorance of
the gins and nets that the wicked may set for than,
whether their motive be a good one or the result of
simple indiﬁerence.’

Tess still did no more than listen, throwing down
one globular root and taking up another with auto-
matic regularity, the pensive contour of the mere
ﬁeld-woman alone marking her.

‘But it is not that I came to say,’ d’Urberville
went on. ‘My circumstances are these. I have lost
my mother since you were at Trantridge, and the
place is my own. But I intend to sell it, and devote
myself to missionary work in Africa. A devil of a.
poor hand I shall make at the trade, no doubt. How-
ever, what I want to ask you is, will you put it in my
power to do my duty—to make the only reparation
I can make for the trick played you: that is, will you
be mywife, and gowith me? . . . I havealreadyob-
tained this precious document. It was my old
mother’s dying wish.’

He drew a piece of parchment from his pocket,
with a slight fumbling of embarrassment.

‘What is it?‘ said she.

‘8 marriage licensﬁef d

‘ no, sir—no! e sai quickly, starting back.

‘You will not? Why is that?’

4p:

THE CONVERT

And as he asked the question a disappointment
which was not entirely the disappointment of thwarted
duty crossed d’Urberville’s face. It was unmistakably
a symptom that something of his old passion for her
had been revived; duty and desire ran hand-in—hand.

‘Surely,’ he began again, in more impetuous tones,
and then looked round at the labourer who turned the
slicer.

Tess, too, felt that the argument could not be ended
there. Informing the man that a gentleman had come
to see her, with whom she wished to walk a. little way,
she moved oﬁ with d'Urberville across the zebra-
striped ﬁeld. When they reached the ﬁrst newly-
ploughed section he held out his hand to help her over
it; but she stepped forward on the summits of the
earth-rolls as if she did not see him.

“You will not me, Tess, and make me a
self-respecting man?’ he repeated, as soon as they
were over the furrows.

‘I cannot.’

‘But why?’

‘You know I have no affection for you.’

‘But you would get to feel that in time, perhaps—
as soon as you really could forgive mel” ~

‘Never!’

‘Why so positive?’

‘I love somebody else.’

The words seemed to astonish him.

‘You do?’ he cried. ‘Somebody else? But has
not a sense of what is morally right and proper any
weight with you?‘

'No, no, no—don’t say that!’

‘Anyhow, then, your love for this other man may
be only a passing feeling which you will overcome— ~'

‘No—no.‘

‘Yes, yes! Why not?’

‘I cannot tell you.’

'You must in honour!‘

‘Wellthen. . .Ihavemarriedhim.’

403

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Ahl’ he exclaimed; and he stopped dead and
gazed at her.

‘I did not wish to tell—I did not mean to!’ she
pleaded. ‘It is a secret here, or at any rate but dimly
known. So will you, please will you, keep from
questioning me? You must remember that we are
now strangers.’

‘Strangexs—are We? Strangers!’

For a moment a ﬂash of his old irony marked his
face; but he determinedly christened it down.

'Is that man your husband?’ he asked mechanic-
ally denoting by a sign the labourer who turned the

e.

‘That man!’ she said proudly. ‘I should think
not!’

‘Who, then?’

‘Do not ask what I do not wish to tell!’ she begged,
and ﬂashed her appeal to him from her upturned
face and lash-shadowed eyes.

D'Urberville was disturbed.

‘But I only ask for your sake!’ he retorted hotly.
‘Angels of heaven !—God forgive me fer such an ex-
pression—I came here, I sweet, as I thought, for your
good. Tess—don't look at me so—I cannot stand
your looks! There never were such eyes, surely, be-
fore Christianity or since! There—I won't lose my
head; I dare not. I own that the sight of you has
waked up my love for you, which, I believed, was
extinguished with all such feelings. But I thought
that our marriage might be a sanctiﬁcation for us
both. “The unbelieving husband is sanctiﬁed by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctiﬁed by the
husband,” I said to myself. But my plan is dashed
from me, and I must bear the disappointment !'

He moodily reﬂected with his eyes on the ground.

‘Married. Married! . . . Well. that being so,’ he
added, quite calmly, tearing the licence slowly into
halves and putting them in his pocket; ‘that being
prevented, I should like to do some good to you and

404 '

THE CONVERT

your husband, whoever he may be. There are many
questions that I am tempted to ask, but I will not do
so, of course, in opposition to your wishes. Though,
if I could lmow your husband, I might more easily
beneﬁt him and you. Is he on this farm?’

‘No,’ she murmured. ‘He is far away.’

‘Far away? From you? What sort of husband
can he be?’

‘0, do not speak against him! Itwasthroughyou!
He found out——-'

‘Ah, is it so! . . . That’s sad, Tess!’

‘Yes.’

‘But to stay away from you—to leave you to work
like this!’

‘He does not leave me to work !' she cried, spring-
ing to the defence of the absent one with all her
fervour. ‘He don't know it! It is by my own
arrangemmt.’

‘Then, does he write?’

‘I——-I cannot tell yo . Thereare things which
are private to ourselves.’

‘Of course that means that he does not. You are
a deserted wife, my fair Tess!’

In an impulse he turned suddenly to take her
hand; the buﬂ-glove was on it, and he seized only the
rough leather ﬁngers which did not express the life or
shape of those within.

‘You must not—you must not!’ she cried fearfully,
slipping her hand from the glove as from a pocket,
and leaving it in his grasp. ‘0, will you go away~
for the sake of me and my husband—go, in the name
of your own Christianity!’

‘Yes, yes; I will,’ he said abruptly, and, thrusting
the glove back to her, turned to leave. Facing round,
however, he said, ‘Tess, as God is my judge, I meant
no humbug in taking your hand!’

A pattering of hoofs on the soil of the ﬁeld, which
they had not noticed in their preoccupation, ceased
close behind them; and a. voice reached her ear:

405

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘What the devil are you doing away from your
work at this time 0’ day?’

Farmer Groby had. espied the two ﬁgures from
the distance, and had inquisitiver ridden across, to
learn what was their business in his ﬁeld.

‘Don't speak like that to her!’ said d'Urberville,
his face blackening with something that was not
Christianity.

‘Indeed, Mister! And what mid Methodist pa’-
sons have to do with she?’

‘Who is the fellow?’ asked d’Urberville, turning
to Tess.

She went close up to him.

‘Go—I do beg you!’ she said.

‘What! And leave you to that tyrant? I can see
in his face what a churl he is.’

‘He won’t hurt me. He’s not in love with me. I
can leave at Lady-Day.’

‘Well, I have no right but to obey, I suppose.
But—well, good-bye!’

Her defender, whom she dreaded more than her
assailant, having reluctantly disappeared, the farmer
continued his reprimand, which Tess took with the
greatest coolness, that sort of attack being independ-
ent of sex. To have as a master this man of stone,
who would have cuffed her if he had dared, was al-
most a relief after her former experiences. She si-
lently walked back towards the summit of the ﬁeld
that was the scene of her labour, so absorbed in the
interview which had just taken place that she was
hardly aware that the nose of Groby’s horse almost
touched her shoulders.

‘If so be you make an agreement to work for me
till Lady-Day, I'll see that you carry it out,’ he
growled. "0d rot the women—now ’tis one thing,
and then ’tis another. But I'll put up with it no
longer!’

Knowing very well that he did not harass the other
women of the farm as he harassed her out of spite for

406

THE CONVERT

the ﬂooring he had once received, she did for one
moment picture what might have been the result if
she had been free to accept the oﬁer just made her of
being the monied Alec’s wife. It would have lifted
her completely out of subjection, not only to her
present oppressive employer, but to a whole world
who Seemed to despise her. ‘But no, no!’ she said
breathlessly; ‘I could not have married him now!
He is so unpleasant to me.’

That very night she began an appealing letter to
Clare, concealing from him her hardships, and assuring
him of her undying aﬁection. Any one who had been
in a position to read between the lines would have
seen that at the back of her great love was some
monstrous fear—almost a desperation—as to some
secret contingencies which were not disclosed. But
again she did not ﬁnish her effusion; he had asked 122
to go with him, and perhaps he did not care for her at
all. She put the letter in her box, and wondered if it
would ever reach Angel’s hands.

Afterthisherdailytasksweregone
heavily enough, and brought on the day which was of
great import to agriculturists—the day of the Candle-
mas Fair. It was at this fair that new engagements
were entered into for the twelve months following the
ensuing Lady-Day, and those of the farming popula-
tion who thought of changing their places duly at-
tended at the county-town where the fair was held.
Nearly all the labourers on Flintcomb-Ash Farm in-
tended ﬂight, and early in the morning there was a
general exodus in the direction of the town, which
lay at a distance of from ten to a dozen miles over
hilly country. Though Tess also meant to leave at
the quarter-day, she was one of the few who did not
go to the fair, having a vaguely shaped hope that
something would happen to render another outdoor
engagement unnecessary.

It was a peaceful February day, of wonderful soft-
ness for the time, and one would almost have thought

407

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

that winter was over. She had hardly ﬁnished her
dinner when d'Urberville’s ﬁgure darkened the window
of the cottage wherein she was a lodger, which she
had all to herself to—day.

Tess jumped up, but her visitor had knocked at
the door, and she could hardly in reason run away.
D'Urberville’s knock, his Walk up to the door, had
some indescribable quality of difference from his air
when she last saw him. They seemed to be acts of
which the doer was ashamed. She thought that she
would not open the door; but, as there was no sense
in that either, she arose, and, having lifted the latch,
stepped back quickly. He came in, saw her, and ﬂung
himself down into a chair before speaking.

‘Tess—I couldn't help it!’ he began desperately,
as he wiped his heated face, which had also a super-
imposed ﬂush of excitement. ‘I felt that I must call
atleasttoaskhowyouare. Iassureyoulhadnot
been thinking of you at all till I saw you that Sunday;
now I cannot get rid of your image, try how I may!
It ishardthatagoodwoman shoulddoharmtoabad
man; yet so it is. If you would only pray for me, Tess !’

The suppressed discontent of his manner was al-
most pitiable, and yet Tess did not pity him.

‘How can I pray for you,’ she said, ‘when I am
forbidden to believe that the great Power who moves
the world would alter His plans on my account?’

'You really think that?”

‘Yes. I have been cured of the presumption of
thinking otherwise.’

‘Cured? By whom?’

‘By my husband, if I must tell.’

‘Ah—your husband-your husband! How strange
it seems! I remember you hinted something of the
sort the other day. What do you really believe in
these matters, Tess?’ he asked. ‘You seem to have
no religion~perhaps owing to me.’

‘But I have. Though I don’t believe in anything
supernatural.’

408

THE CONVERT

D'Urberville looked at her with
‘Thendoyou thinkthattheline Itakeisallwrong?’

‘A good deal of it.’

‘H’m—and yet I’ve felt so sure about it,’ he said
uneasily.

‘I believe in the spirit of the Sermon on the Mount,
and so did my dear husband. . . . But I don't be-
lieve—’

Here she gave her negations.

‘The fact is,’ said d'Urberville drily, ‘whatever
your dear husband believed you accept, and whatever
he rejected you reject, without the least inquiry or
reasoning on your own part. That’s just like you
women. Your mind is enslaved to his.’

‘Ah, because he knew everything? said she, with
a triumphant simplicity of faith in Angel Clare that
the most perfect man could hardly have deserved,
much less her husband.

‘Yes, but you should not take negative opinions
wholesale from another person like that. A pretty
fellow he must be to teach you such soepticism!’

‘He never forced my judgment! He would never
argue on the subject with me! But I looked at it in
this way; what he believed, after inquiring deep into
doctrines, was much more likely to be right than what
I might believe, who hadn’t looked into doctrines
at all.’

‘What used he to say? He must have said some-
thing?’

She reﬂected; and with her acute memory for the
letter of Angel Clare’s remarks, even when she did
not comprehend their spirit, she recalled a merciless
polemicel syllogisrn that she had heard him use when,
as it occasionally happened, he indulged in a species
of thinking aloud with her at his side. In delivering
it she gave also Clare’s accent and manner with
reverential faithfulness.

‘Say that again,’ asked d'Urberville, who had
listened with the greatest attention.

409

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

She repeated the argument, and d’Urberville
thoughtfully murmured the words after her.

‘Anything else?’ he presently asked.

‘He said at another time something like this’;
and she gave another, which might possibly have been
paralleled in many a work of the pedigree ranging
from the Dictionmn're Philasophique to Huxley’s
Essays.

‘Ah—~ha! How do you remember them?

‘I wanted to believe what he believed, though he
didn’twishmeto; andImanagedtocoaxhimtotell
me a. few of his thoughts. I can’t say I quite under—
stand that one; but I know it is right.’

‘H'm. Fancy your being able to teach me what
you don’t know yourself !'

He fell into thought.

‘And so I threw in my spiritual lot with his,’ she
resumed. ‘I didn't wish it to be different. What’s
good enough for him is good enough for me.’

‘Doesheknowthatyouareasbiganinﬁdelashe?’

‘No—I never told him—if I am an inﬁdel.’

‘Well—you are better oﬁ to-day than I am, Tess,
after all! You don’t believe that you ought to preach
my doctrine, and, therdore, do no despite to your
conscience in abstaining. I do believe I ought to
preach it, but like the devils I believe and tremble, for
I suddenly leave oﬁ preaching it, and give way to my
passion for you.’

‘How?’

‘Why,’ he said aridly; ‘I have come all the way
heretoseeyouto-day! Butlstartedfromhometo
go to Caster-bridge Fair, where I have undertaken to
preach the Word from a. waggon at half-past two this
afternoon, and where all the brethren are expecting
me this minute. Here’s the announcement.’

He drew from his breast-pocket a poster whereon
was printed the day, hour, and place of meeting. at
which he, d’Urberville, would preach the Gospel as
aforesaid.

410

THE CONVERT

‘But how can you get there?’ said Tess, looking
at the clock.

‘I cannot get there! I have come here.’

‘What, you have really arranged to preach, and—’

‘Ihavearrangedtopreach,and1shallnotbe
there—byreasonofmyburningdesiretoseeawoman
whom I once despised !—-No, by my word and truth, I
never despised you; if I had I should not love you
now! Why I did not despise you was on account of
your being unsmirched in spite of all; you withdrew
yourself from me so quickly and resolutely when you
saw the situation; you did not remain at my pleasure;
so there was one pettiooat in the world for whom I
had no contempt, and you are she. But you may well
despise me now! I thought I worshipped on the
mountains, but I ﬁnd I still serve in the groves!
Ha! ha.P

‘0 Alec d'Urberville! what does this mean? What
have I done!’

‘Done?’ he said, with a soulless sneer in the word.
' Nothing intentionally. But you have been the means
—the innocent means—of my backsliding, as they call
it. I ask myself, am I, indeed, one of those “servants
of corruption" who, “after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world, are again entangled therein
and overcome"——whose latter end is worse than their
beginning?’ He laid his hand on her shoulder.
‘Tess, my girl, I was on the way to, at least, social
salvation till I saw you again!’ he said, freakishly
shaking her, as if she were a child. ‘And why then
haveyou temptedme? Iwasﬁrmasamancouldbe
till I saw those eyes and that mouth again—surely
there never was such a maddening mouth since Eve's!‘
His voice sank, and a hot archness shot from his own
black eyes. ‘You temptress, Tess; you dear damned
witch of Babylon—I could not resist you as soon as
I met you again?

‘I' eouldn't help your seeing me again? said Tess,
recoding.

4r:

TESS. OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘I know it—I repeat that I do not blame yo .
But the fact remains. When I saw you ill—used on
the farm that day I was nearly mad to think that I
had no legal right to protect you—that I could not
have it; whilst he who has it seems to neglect you
utterly!’

‘Don’t speak against him—-—he is absent!’ she cried
in much excitement. ‘Treat him honourably~—he has
never wronged you! 0 leave his wife before any
scandal spreads that may do harm to his honest
name.’

‘I will—I will,’ he said, like a man awakening from
a luring dream. ‘I have broken my engagement to
preach to those poor drunken boobies at the fair—it is
the ﬁrst time I have played such a practical joke. A
month ago I should have been horriﬁed at such a
possibility. I’ll go away—to swear-and——ah, can I!
-to keep away.’ Then, suddenly: ‘One clasp, Tessy
—one! Only for old frimdship—J

‘I am without defence, Alec! A good man’s
honour is in my keeping—think—be ashamed !’

‘Pooh! Well yes—yes!’

He clenched his lips, mortiﬁed with himself for his
weakness. His eyes were equally barren of worldly
and religious faith. The corpses of those old ﬁtful
passions which had lain inanimate amid the lines of his
face ever since his reformation seemed to wake and
come together as in a resurrection. He went out
indetenninately.

Though d'Urberville had declared that this breach
of his engagement to-day was the simple backsliding
of a believer, Tess’s words, as echoed from Angel
Clare, had made a deep impression upon him, and
continued to do so after he had left her. He moved .
on in silence, as if his energies were benurnbed by
the hitherto undreamt-of possibility that his position
was untenable. Reason had had nothing to do with
his whimsical conversion, which was perhaps the
mereireakofacarelessmaninsearchofanew

4n

THE CONVERT

sensation, and temporarily impressed by his mother’s
death. -

The drops of logic Tess had let fall into the Sea
of his enthusiasm served to chill its eﬁervescence to
stagnation. He said to himself, as he pondered again
and again over the crystallized phrases that she had
handed on to him, ‘That clever fellow little thought
that, by telling her those things, he might be paving
my way back to her!’

XLVII

IT is the threshing of the last wheat-rick at Flintcomb-
Ash Farm. The dawn of the March morning is
singularly inexpressive, and there is nothing to show
where the eastern horizon lies. Against the twilight
rises the trapezoidal top of the stack, which has stood
forlornly here through the washing and bleaching of
the wintry weather.

When Izz Huett and Tess arrived at the scene of
operations only a rustling denoted that others had
preceded them; to which, as the light increased, there
were presently added the silhouettes of two men on
the summit. They were busily ‘unhaling’ the tick,
that is, stripping ad the thatch before beginning to
throw down the sheaves; and while this was in

In and Tess, with the other women—workers,
in their whitey-brown pinners, stood waiting and
shivering, Farmer Groby having insisted upon their
being on the spot thus early to get the job over if
possible by the end of the day. Close under the
eaves of the stack, and as yet barely visible, was the
redtyrantthatthewomenhadcometowa
timber—framed construction, with straps and wheels
appertaining—the threshing-machine which, whilst it
was going, kept up a despotic demand upon the
endurance of their muscles and nerves.

A little way off there was another indistinct ﬁgure;
this one black, with a sustained his that spoke of
strength very much in reserve. The long chimney
running up beside an ash-tree, and the warmth which
radiated from the spot, explained without the necessity
of much daylight that here was the engine which was

4‘!

THE CONVERT

to act as the primum mobile of this little world. By
the engine stood a dark motionless being, a sooty
and grimy embodiment of tallness, in a sort of trance,
with a heap of coals by his side: it was the engine-
man. The isolation of his manner and colour lent
him the appearance of a aeature from Tophet, who
had strayed into the pellucid smokelessness of this
region of yellow grain and pale soil, with which he
had nothing in common, to amaze and to discompose
its aborigines.

What he looked he felt. He was in the agricultural
world, but not of it. He served ﬁre and smoke;
these denizens of the ﬁelds served vegetation, weather,
frost, and sun. He travelled with his engine from
farm to farm, from county to county, for as yet the
steam threshing-machine was itinerant in this part of
Wessex. He spoke in a strange northern accent;
his thoughts being turned inwards upon himself, his
eye on his iron charge, hardly perceiving the scenes
around him, and caring for them not at all: holding
only strictly necessary intercom'se with the natives, as
if some ancient doom compelled him to wander here
against his will in the service of his Plutonic master.
The long strap which ran from the driving-wheel of
his engine to the red thresher under the tick was the
sole tie-line between agriculture and him.

While they uncovered the sheaves he stood apa-
thetic beside his portable repository of force, round
whose hot blackness the morning air quivered. He
had nothing to do with preparatory labour. His ﬁre
was waiting incandescent, his steam was at high
pressure, in a few seconds he could make the long
strap move at an invisible velocity. Beyond its
extent the environment might be corn, straw, or
chaos; it was all the same to him. If any of the
autochthonous idlers asked him what he called him-
self, he replied shortly, ‘an engineer.’

The rick was unhaled by full daylight; the men
then took their places, the women mounted, and the

415

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

work began. Farmer Groby—or, as they called him,
‘he'—had arrived ere this, and by his ordu‘s Toss
was placed on the platform of the machine, close to
the man who fed it, her business being to untie every
sheaf of corn handed on to her by In Huett, who
stood next, but on the rick; so that the feeder could
seize it and spread it over the revolving drum, which
whisked out every grain in one moment.

They were soon in full progress, after a preparatory
hitch or two, which rejoiced the hearts of those who
hated machinery. The work sped on till breakfast-
time, when the thresher was stopped for half an hour;
and on starting again after the meal the whole supple-
mentary strength of the farm was thrown into the
labour of constructing the straw-rick, which began to
grow beside the stack of corn. A hasty lunch was
eaten as they stood, without leaving their positions,
and then another couple of hours brought them near
to dinner-time; the inexorable wheels continuing to
spin, and the penetrating hum of the thresher to thrill
to the very marrow all who were near the revolving
wire-cage.

The old men on the rising straw-rick talked of the
past days when they had been accustomed to thresh
with ﬂails on the oaken barn-ﬂoor; when everything,
even to winnowing, was effected by handolabour,
which, to their thinking, though slow, produced better
results. Those, too, on the corn-rick talked a little;
but the perspiring ones at the machine, including
Tess, could not lighten their duties by the exchange
of many words. It was the ceaselessness of the work
which tried her so severely, and began to make her
wish that she had never come to Flintcomb-Ash.
The women on the com-rack—Marian. who was one
of them, in particular—could stop to drink ale or cold
tea from the ﬂagon now and then, or to exchange a
few gossiping remarks while they wiped their faces or
cleared the fragments of straw and husk from their

clothing; but for Tess there was no respite; for, as
416

THE CONVERT

the drum never stopped, the man who fed it could
not stop, and she, who had to supply the man with
untied sheaves, could not stop either, unless Marian
changed places withﬁher, which she sometimes did for
half an hour in spite of Groby's objection that she
was too slow—handed for a feeder.

For some probably economiml reason it was usually
a woman who was chosen for this particular duty, and
Groby gave as his motive in selecting Tess that she
was one of those who best combined strength with
quickness in untying, and both with staying power,
and this may have been true. The hum of the
thresher, which prevented speech, increased to a rav-
ing whenever the supply of corn fell short of the
regular quantity. As Tess and the man who fed could
never turn their heads, she did not know that just
before the dinner-hour a person had come silently into
the ﬁeld by the gate, and had been standing under a
second rick watching the scene, and Tess in particu-
lar. He was dressed in a tweed suit of fashionable
pattern. and he twirled a gay walking-cane.

‘Who is that?’ said 122 Huett to Marian. She
had at ﬁrst addressed the inquiry to Tess, but the
latter could not hear it.

‘Somebody’s fancy- , I s’pose,’ said Marian
laconically.
‘I’ll lay a guinea he’s after'Tess.’

‘0 no. 'Tis a ranter pa’son who’s been sniﬁing
after her lately; not a dandy like this.’

‘Well—this is the same man.’

‘The same man as the preacher? But he's quite
diﬁerent!’

‘He hev left off his black coat and white necker-
cher, and hey cut off his whiskers; but he’s the same.
man for all that.’

‘D'ye really think so? Then I’ll tell her,’ said
Marian.

‘Don’t. She’ll see him soon enough, good-now.’

‘Well, I don’t think it at all right for him to join

417

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

hispreachingtoeourtingamarriedwoman,even
though her husband mid be abroad, and she, in a
sense, a widow.’

‘Oh—he can do her no harm,’ said In drily. ‘Her
mind can no more be heaved from that one place
where it do bide than a stooded waggon from the
hole he’s in. Lord love ’ee, neither com-paying, nor
preaching, nor the seven thunders themselves, can
wean a woman when ’twould be better for her that
she should be weaned.’

Dinner-time came, and the whirling ceased; where—
upon Tess left her post, her knees trembling so
wretchedly with the shaking of the machine that she
could scarcely walk.

‘You ought to het a quart 0' drink into 'ee, as I’ve
done,’ said Marian. ‘You wouldn't look so white
then. Why, souls above us, your face is as if you'd
been hagrode!‘

It occurred to the good~natured Malian that, as
Tess was so tired, her discovery of her visitor's pres-
ence might have the bad eﬁect of taking away her
appetite; and Marian was thinking of inducing Tess
to descend by a. ladder on the further side of the stack
when the gentleman came forward and looked up.

Tess uttered a short little ‘Oh!’ And a moment
after she said, quickly, ‘I shall eat my dinner here—-
right on the rick.’ ' -

Sometimes, when they were so far from their cot-
tages, they all did this; but as there was rather a
keen wind going to-day, Marian and the rest de-
scended, and sat under the straw-stack.

The newcomer was, indeai, Alec d’Urberville, the
late Evangelist, despite his changed attire and aspect.
It was obvious at a glance that the original Weldust
had come back; that he had restored himself, as
nearly as a man could do who had grown three or
four years older, to the old jaunty, slapdash gmse
under which Tess had ﬁrst-known her admirer, and

cousin sovcalled. Having decided to remain where
418

THE CONVERT

she was, Tess sat down among the bundles, out'of
sight of the ground, and began her meal; till, by-and-
by, she heard footsteps on the ladder, and immediately
after Alec appeared upon the stack—now an oblong
and level platform of sheaves. He strode across th,
and sat down opposite to her without a word.

Tess continued to eat her modest dinner, a slice of
thick pancake which she had brought with her. The
other work-folk were by this time all gathered under
the rick, where the loose straw formed a comfortable
retreat. .

'I am here again, as you see,’ said d'Urberville.

‘Why do you trouble me so!‘ she cried, reproach
ﬂashing from her very ﬁnger-ends.

‘I trouble you? I think I may ask, why do you
trouble me?‘

‘Sure, I don't trouble you any-whenl’

‘You say you don’t? But you do! You haunt me.
Those very eyes that you turned upon me with such a
bitter ﬂash a moment ago, they come to me just as
you showed them then, in the night and in the day!
Tess, ever since you told me of that child of ours, it is
just as if my feelings, which have been ﬂowing in a
strong puritanical stream, had suddenly found a way
open in the direction of you, and had all at once
gushed throngh. The religious channel is left dry
forthwith; and it is you who have done it 1’

She gazed in silence.

‘What—you have given up your preaching en-
tirely?’ she asked.

She had gathered from Angel suﬂicient of the in-
credulity of modern thought to despise ﬂash enthusi-
asms; but, as a woman, she was somewhat appalled.

In aﬁected severity d’Urberville continued——

‘Entirely. I have broken every engagement since
that afternoon I was to address the dmnkards at
Casterbridge Fair. The deuce only knows what I am
thought of by the brethren. Ah—hal The brethren!
No doubt they pray for rue—weep for me; for they

no

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

are kind people in their way. But what do I care?
How could I go on with the thing when I had lost
my faith in itP—it would have been hypocrisy of the
basest kind! Among them I should have stood like
Hymenaeus and Alexander, who were delivered over
to Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme.
What a grand revenge you have taken! I saw you
innocent, and I deceived you. Four years after, you
ﬁnd me a Christian enthusiast; you then work upon
me, perhaps to my complete perdition! But Tess, my
coz,as}usedtocallyou,thisisonlymywayof
talking, ‘and you must not look so horribly concerned.
Of course you have done nothing except retain your
pretty face and shapely ﬁgure. I saw it on the rick
before you saw me—that tight pinafore-thing sets it
03, and that wing-bonnet—you ﬁeld-girls should never
wear those bonnets if you wish to keep out of danger.’ '
He regarded her silently for a few moments, and with
a short cynical laugh resumed: ‘I believe that if the
bachelor-apostle, whose deputy I thought I was, had
been tempted by such a pretty face, he would have let
go the plough for her sake as I do I’

Tess attempted to expostulate, but at this juncture
ﬂdher ﬂuency failed her, and without heedmg‘ he

ed:

‘Well, this paradise that you supply is perhaps as
good as any other, after all. But to speak seriously,
Tess.’ D’Urberville rose and came nearer, reclining
sideways amid the sheaves, and resting upon his elbow.
‘Since I last saw you I have been thinking of what
you said that he said. I have come to the conclu-
sion that there does seem rather a want of common—
sense in these threadbare old propositions; how I
could have been so ﬁred by poor Parson Clare’s
enthusiasm, and have gone so madly to work, tran-
scending even him, I cannot make out! As for what
you said last time, on the strength of your wonderful
husband's intelligence-whose name you have never
told the—about having what they call an ethical

42°

THE CONVERT

system without any dogma, I don't see my way to
that at all.‘

‘Why, you can have the religion of loving kindness
and purity at least, if you can’t have—what do you
call it—dogma.’

‘0 no! I'm a different sort of fellow from that!
If there’s nobody to say, “Do this, and it will be a
good thing for you after you are dead; do that, and it
will be a bad thing for you," I can't warm up. Hang
it, I am not going to feel responsible for my deeds and
passions if there’s nobody to be responsible to; and if
I were you, my dear, I wouldn’t either!’

She tried to argue, and tell him that he had mixed
in his dull brain two matters, theology and morals,
which in the primitive days of mankind had been
quite distinct. But owing to Angel Clare's reticenee.
to her absolute want of training, and to her being a
vessel of emotions rather than reasons, she could not
get on.

‘Well, never mind,’ he resumed. ‘Here I am, my
love, as in the old times!’

‘Not as then—never as then—’tis diﬂerent!’ she
entreated. ‘And there was never warmth with me!
0 why didn’t you keep your faith, if the loss of it has
broughtyoutospeaktomelikethis!’

‘Because you’ve knocked it out of me; so the evil
be upon your sweet head! Your husband little
thought how his teaching would recoil upon him!
Ha-ha—I'm awfully glad you have made an Apostate
ofmeallthesame! Tess, Iammoretakenwithyou
than ever, and I pity you too. For all your closeness,
Iseeyouareinabadway—meglectedbyonewho
ought to cherish you.’

She could not get her morsels of food down her
throat; her lips were dry, and she was ready to choke.
The voices and laughs of the work-folk eating and

' ' undertherickoametoherasiftheywerea
quarter of a mile off.

‘It is cruelty to me!’ she said. ‘How—-how can

421

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

yogtreatmetothistalkﬂfyouoareeversolittlefor
me ’

‘True, true,’ he said, wincing a little. ‘I did not
come to reproach you for my deeds. I came, Tess,
to say that I don’t like you to be working like this,
and I have come on purpose for you. You say you
have a husband who is not I. Well, perhaps you
have; but I’ve never seen him, and you've not told me
his name; and altogether he seems rather a mytho-
logical personage. However, even if you have one,
IthinkIamnearertoyouthanheis. I,atany
rate, try to help you out of trouble, but he does not,
bless his invisible face! The words of the stern
prophet Hosea that I used to read come back to me.
Don't you know them, Tess?—“And she shall follow
after her lover, but she shall not overtake him; and
she shall seek him, but shall not ﬁnd him; then shall
she say, I will go and return to my ﬁrst husband; for
then was it better with me than now!" . . . Tex, my
trap is waiting just under the hill, and—darling mine,
not his l—you know the rest.’

Herfacehadbeenrisingtoadullcrimsonﬁrewhile
he spoke; but she did not answer.

‘You have been the cause of my backsliding,’ he
continued, stretching his arm towards her waist; ‘you
should be willing to share it, and leave that mule you
call husband for ever.’

One of her leather gloves. which she had taken 03
to eat her slimmer-cake, lay in her lap. and without
the slightest warning she passionately swung the glove
by the gauntlet directly in his face. It was heavy
and thick as a warrior's, and it struck him ﬂat on the
mouth. Fancy might have regarded the act as the
recrudescence of a trick in which her armed progeni
were not unpractised. Alec ﬁercely started up from
his reclining position. A scarlet oozing appeared
$1331: her blgzphad alight?é and a morgensga the

began ping mm ' mou upon t e w.
But he soon controlled himself, calmly drew his band
422

THE CONVERT

ketchief from his pocket, and mopped his bleeding
lips.
She too had sprung up, but she sank down again.

‘Now, punish me!’ she said, turning up her eyes
to him with the hopeless deﬁance of the sparrow's gaze
before its captor twists its neck. ‘Whip me, crush
me; you need not mind those people under the rick!
I shall not cry out. Once victim, always victim—
that’s the law!’

‘0 no, no, Tess,’ he said blandly. ‘I can make
full allowance for this. Yet you most unjustly forget
one thing, that I would have married you if you had
not put it out of my power to do so. Did I not ask
you ﬂatly to be my wife—hey? Answer me.’

‘You did.’

‘And you cannot be. But remember one thing!’
His voice hardened as his temper got the better of
him with the recollection of his sincerity in asking her
and her present ingratitnde, and he stepped across to
her side and held her by the shoulders, so that she
shook under his grasp. ‘Remember, my lady, I was
your master once! I will be your master again. If
you are any man's wife you are mine!’

The threshers now began to stir below.

‘So much for our quarrel,’ he said, letting her go.
‘ Now I shall leave you, and shall come again for your
answer during the afternoon. You don’t know me
yet! But I know you.’

She had not spoken again, remaining as if stunned.
D’Urberville retreated over the sheaves, and descended
the ladder, while the workers below rose and stretched
their arms, and shook down the beer they had drunk.
Then the threshing-machine started afresh; and amid
the renewed rustle of the straw Tess resumed her
position by the buzzing drum as one in a dream,
untying sheaf after sheaf in endless succession.

XLVIII

IN the afternoon the farmer made it known that
the rick was to be ﬁnished that night, since there was
a moon by which they could see to work, and the
man with the engine was engaged for another farm on
the morrow. Hence the twanging and humming and
rustling proceeded with even less intermission than
usual

It was not till ‘nammet'-time, about three o'clock,
that Tess raised her eyes and gave a momentary
glance round. She felt but little surprise at seeing
that Alec d’Urberville had come back, and was stand-
ing under the hedge by the gate. He had seen her lift
her eyes, and waved his hand urbaner to her, while
he blew her a kiss. It meant that their quarrel was
over. Tess looked down again, and carefully ab-
stained from gazing in that direction.

Thus the afternoon dragged on. The wheat-rick
shrank lower, and the straw-rick grew higher, and the
com-sacks were carted away. At six o'clock the
wheat-de was about shoulder-high from the ground.
But the unthreshed sheaves remaining untouched
seemed countless still, notwithstanding the enormous
numbers that had been gulped down by the insatiable
swallower, fed by the man and Tess, through whose
two young hands the greater part of them had passed.
And the immense stack of straw, where in the morning
there had been nothing, appeared as the faces: of the
same buzzing red glutton. From the west sky a
wrathful shine—all that wild March could aﬁord in
the way of sunset—had burst forth after the cloudy
day, ﬂooding the tired and sticky faces of the threshers,

424

THE CONVERT

and dyeing them with a coppery light, as also the
ﬂapping garments of the women, which clung to them
like dull ﬂames.

A panting ache ran through the rick. The man
who fed was weary, and Tess could see that the red
nape of his neck was encrusted with dirt and husks.
She still stood at her post, her ﬂushed and perspirin
face coated with the com-dust, and her white bonnet
embrowned by it. She was the only woman whose
place was upon the machine so as to be shaken bodily
by its spinning, and the decrease of the stack now
separated her from Marian and 122, and prevented
their changing duties with her as they had done.
The incessant quivering, in whidi every ﬁbre of her
frame participated, had thrown her into a stupeﬁed
reverie in which her arms worked on independently
of her consciousness. She hardly knew where she
was, and did not hear Izz Hnett tell her from below
that her hair was tumbling down.

By degrees the freshest among them began to
grow cadavercms and saucer-eyed. Whenever Tess
lifted her head she beheld always the great upgmwn
straw-stack, with the men in shirt—sleeves upon it,
against the grey north sky; in front of it the long
red elevator like a. Jacob’s ladder, on which a per-
petual stream of threshed straw ascended, a yellow
river running up-hill, and spouting out on the top of
the rick.

She knew that Alec d'Urberville was still on the
scene, observing her from some point or other, though
she could not say where. There was an excuse for
his remaining, for when the threshed rick drew near
its ﬁnal sheaves a little ratting was always done, and
men unconnected with the threshing sometimes

in for that performance—Sporting characters
of all descriptions, gents with terriers and facetious
pipes, roughs with sticks and stones.

But there was another hour’s work before the
layer of live rats at the base of the stack would be

425

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

reached; and as the evening light in the direction of
the Giant’s Hill by Abbot’s-Cernel dissolved away,
the white-faced moon of the season arose from the
horizon that lay towards Middleton Abbey and
Shottsford on the other side. For the last hour or
two Marian had felt uneasy about Tess, whom she
could not get near enough to speak to, the other
women having kept up their strength by drinking
ale, and Tess having done without it through tra~
ditionary dread, owing to its results at her home in
childhood. But Tess still kept going; if she could
not ﬁll her part she would have to leave; and this
contingency, which she would have regarded with
equan'unity and even with relief a month or two earlier,
had become a tenor since d’Urberville had begun to
hover round her.

The sheaf-pitchers and feeders had now worked
the rick so low that people on the ground could talk
to them. To Tess’s surprise, Farmer Groby came up
onthemachinetoher, andsaid thatifshedesired to
join her friend he did not wish her to keep on any
longer, and would send somebody else to take her
place. The 'friend' was d’Urberville, she knew, and
also that this concession had been granted in obedi-
ence to the request of that friend, or enemy. She
shook her head and toiled on.

The time for the rat-catching arrived at last, and
the hunt began. The creatures had crept downwards
with the subsidence of the n’ck till they were all to-
gether at the bottom, and, being now uncovered from
their last refuge, they ran across the open ground in
all directions, a loud shriek from the by-this-time half-
tipsy Marian informing her companions that one of
the rats had invaded her person—a terror which the
rest of the women had guarded against by various
schemes of skirt-ducking and self-elevation. The rat
was at last dislodged, and, amid the barking of dogs,
masculine shouts. feminine screams, oaths. stampings,
and confusion as of Pandemonium, Tess untied her

426

THE CONVERT

last sheaf ; the drum slowed, the whizzing ceased, and
she stepped from the machine to the groan .

Her lover, who had only looked on at the rat-
catching, was promptly at her side.

‘What——after all—my insulting slap, too!’ said
she in an underbreath. She was so utterly exhausted
that she had not strength to speak louder.

‘I should indeed be foolish to feel oﬂended at any-
thing you say or do,’ he answered, in the seductive
voice of the Trantridge time. ‘How the little limbs
tremble! You are as weak as a bled calf, you know
you are; and yet you need have done nothing since I
arrived. How could you be so obstinate? However,
I have told the farmer that he has no right to employ
women at steam-threshing. It is not proper work for
them; andonallthebetterclassoffarmsithasbeen
given up, as he knows very well. I will walk with
you as far as your home.’

‘0 yes,’ she answered with a jaded gait. ‘Walk
wi’meifyouwill! Idobearinmind thatyoucame
to many me before you knew o’ my state. Perhaps-—
perhaps you are a. little better and kinder than I have
been ' ' you were. Whatever is meant as kind-
ness I am grateful for; whatever is meant in any
other way I am angered at. I cannot sense your
meaning sometimes.’

‘If I cannot legitimize our former relations, at least
I can assist you. And I will do it with much more
regard for your feelings than I formerly showed.
My religious mania, or whatever it was, is over. But
I retain a little good nature; I hope I do. Now
Tess, by all that's tender and strong between man
and women, trust me! I have enough and more than
enough to put you out of anxiety, both for yourself
and your parents and sisters. I can make themall
comfortable if you will only show conﬁdence in me.’

‘Have you seen 'em lately?’ she quickly inquired.

‘Yes. They didn’t know where you were. It was
only by chance that I found you here.’

437

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

The cold moon looked aslant upon Tess's fagged
face between the twigs of the garden-hedge as she
paused outside the cottage which was her temporary
home, d’Urberville pausing beside her.

‘Don’t mention my little brothers and sisters——
don't make me break down quite!’ she said. ‘If
you want to help them—God knows they need it—
do it without telling me. But no, no!’ she cried.
‘I will take nothing from you, either for them or for
me!’

He did not accompany her further, since, as she
lived with the household, all was public indooxs. No
sooner had she herself entered, laved herself in a
washing.tub, and shared supper with the family than
she fell into thought, and, withdrawing to the table
under the wall, by the light of her own little lamp,
wrote in a passionate mood—

Mv OWN Husnmr—LetmeWso—Im—evmiﬁtm
youangrytothinkofmchanun ywifensI. lunataytoywin
my trouble have noone else! I am so apt:st totanptstim,Angel.
Ifeartosaywhoitis,andIdonotlilnetnwdteaboutitoteﬂ. ButI
clingtoyouinawayyoucannotthinkl Cenyounotmetomemw,
stonee,beforeanythingterrlbleha P 0,1knowyouumnot,be—
causeyoumsofsrswayl Ithink mustdieiiyoudonotemneaoon,
ortellmetocomewyou. Thepunishmtymhnvemredmtto
meisdeserved—Idolmawthet—welldmerved—endyouuerightand
justtobeangz'ywith me. But, Angel, please, please, nottobejust—
onlyalittleldndtome,evenifIdonotdmeit,andeometomel
Ifyouwouldcome,lewlddieinywrml Iwouldhewelleontmt
todothatifsobeyouhadforgivmmel

Angel,Iliveentirelyfm-you. Iloveyoufoomuehtoblameywior
goingawa,andllawwitwssneetssaryywehwldﬁndafexm. Do
notthink ahallsayawordofsﬁngorbitm. Onlyeomebeekto
me. Iamdmolatewiﬂwutyw,mydarling,0,sodesolatel Idonot
mimlhavingtoworkzbutifyou willsendmeonelittleline,andsay,
‘I umcmingroon,'1will bide on,Angel—O,socheexfullyl 

Ithasbeensomuchmyteligioneversineewemmamedtobe
faiﬂifultoymineverythwghtandlook,thatevmwhenem
amplimenttomebeforelemawm,itseemswrmgingym. ve
ymneverfeltanelittlebitofwhatywuaedmfeelwhenwemet
thedairy? Ifyouhave,howcanywkeepawsyfmmme? Inmthe
samewoman,Angel,aswaellinlovewith;yes,theverysamel—not
theoneyoudislikedbutneversaw. Whatwesthe hmemsoon
aslmetyou? Itwasedeadthingalmgether. bemmeanother
womm,ﬁﬂedfuﬂofnewhfe£mmym. Howemldlbetheeu'lyone?

428

THE CONVERT

Whydoymnotseeﬂais? Dear,ifywwouldonlybealittlemnre
ooneeited,andbellevein mfarastoseethatymgwemgtmng
moughtoworkthischangeinmeqouwmﬂdperhnpsbemannndw
comemme,¥mupoorwife.

Howsilly wasinmyhappinesswhmlthwghtlcwldtms‘tym
alwaystolovemel Ionghttohavelmownthatsucha.s Lhatwunot
forpoorme. Butlemsickatheart,notonlyforoldums,hxtforthe
present. Think~thinkhowitdoburtmyheartnottoseeyaueyw
ever! Ah,ifIomldonlymalceyourdwheartachepneﬁttlemute
ofeachdayasuﬁnedoeseverydayandalldaylongﬂtnnghtleadyou
cashew pity toyourpoor lonely one. 

Peoplestillsaythntlammtberpmtty,Angel(handmelsthewovd
theyuse,sincelwishwbetmthml). Perhapslamwhattheysay.
But.Idonotvaluemygoodlooksﬂonlyliketohavethembecmmethey
belongfoyou, my dear, and that were maybeat leastonethingabout
meworthyourhaving. SomuchhaveIfethisthatwhenImetwith
annoyanceonaccountofthesmlﬁedupmyfaeeinabandageaslmg
aspeoplewouldbelieveinit. 0Angel,Itellyouallthisnotfmm
vanityl—you will certainlyktwwldo nob—but only thntyoumaycome
tome

Hymreallycannotumetomemﬂlymletmewmemyoul lam,
as I say, worried, pressed to do what I will not do. It cannot be that
Ishallyieldoncinch,yetlaminteﬂoraswwhatanacddentmight
leadbo,andl,sod¢fencelessonaocmmtofmyﬁrstmor. Icannotsay
mmnboutthis—itmakesmemomimble. Butiflbmakdawnby
falling intosomefaarfulsnare, my laststate willbewoxsethanmyﬁxst.
O(;zod,lcannotthinkofitl Letmeemneatonce,oratoneemmeto
me

I would beconﬁent, ay, lad, to live with you asyouraervant, lfI may
notasyourwife;sothat cmldonlybenearyou,andgetglimpsesut
you,andthinkofyouasnﬁne.

The daylight has nothing to show me, since you axe not hue, and I
don’tliketoseetheroolmnndataﬂinpintheﬁelds,bmselgﬁmmd
grievetonﬁssyou,whousedvoseethemwithme. Ilongforonlyone
thinghhavenoreanhorundertheearth,mmeecyo‘gmyowndwl
Comeeomrcometome,andsaveme£mmwlmtthreatensmel—
Your faithful heartbrokm TESS.

XLIX

THE appeal duly found its way to the breakfast-table
of the quiet Vicarage to the westward, in that valley
wheretheairissosoftandthesoilsorichthatthe
eﬁort of growth requires but superﬁcial aid by com—
parison with the tillage at Flinteomb—Ash, and where
to Tess the human world seemed so diﬂerent (though
it was much the same). It was purely for security
that she had been requested by Angel to send her
communications through his father, whom he kept
pretty well informed of his changing addreses in the
country he had gone to exploit for himself with a.
heavy heart.

‘Now,’ said old Mr. Clare to his wife, when he
had read the envelope, ‘if Angel proposes leaving
Rio for a visit home at the end of next month, as he
told us that he hoped to do, I think this may hasten
his plans; for I believe it to be from his wife.’ He
breathed deeply at the thought of her; and the letter
was redirected to be promptly sent on to Angel.

‘Dear fellow, I hope he will get home safely,’
murmured Mrs. Clare. ‘To my dying day I shall
feel that he has been ill-used. You should have
sent him to Cambridge in spite of his want of faith,
and given him the same chance as the other boys had.
He would have grown out of it under proper inﬂu-
ence, and perhaps would have taken Orders after all.
1(Eilxxnurch or no Church, it would have been fairer to

This was the only wail with which Mrs. Clare ever
disturbed her husband’s peace in respect of their
sons. And she did not vent this often; for she

43°

THE CONVERT

was as considerate as she was devout, and knew that
his mind too was troubled by doubts as to his justice
in this matter. Only too often had she heard him
lying awake at night, stiﬂing sighs for Angel with
prayers. But the uncompromising Evangelical did
not even now hold that he would have been justiﬁed
in giving his son, an unbeliever, the same academic
advantages that he had given to the two others,
when it was possible, if not probable, that those
very advantages might have been used to decry the
doctrines which he had made it his life's mission and
desire to propagate, and the mission of his ordained
sons likewise. To put with one hand a pedestal
under the feet of the two faithful ones, and with the
other to exalt the unfaithful by the same artiﬁcial
means, he deemed to be alike inconsistent with his
convictions, his position, and his hopes. Neverthe-
less, he loved his misnamed Angel, and in secret
mourned over this treatment of him as Abraham might
have mourned over the doomed Isaac while they went
up the hill together. His silent, self-generated re-
grets were far bitterer than the reproaches which his
wife rendered audible. ‘ -

They blamed themselves for this unlucky marriage.
If Angel had never been destined for a farmer he
would never have been thrown with agricultural
girls. They did not distinctly know what had
separated him and his wife, nor the date on which
the separation had taken place. At ﬁrst they had
supposed it must be something of the nature of a
serious aversion. But in his later letters he occasion-
ally alluded to the intention of coming home to fetch
her; from which expressions they hoped the division
might not owe its origin to anything so hopelessly
permanent as that. He had told them that she was
with her relatives, and in their doubts they had
decided not to intrude into a situation which they
knew no way of bettering.

The eyes for which Tess's letter was intended

43!

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

were gazing at this time on a limitless expanse of
country from the back of a mule which was bearing
him from the interior of the South-American Conti-
nent towards the coast. His experiences of this
strange land had been sad. The severe illness from
which he had suffered shortly after his arrival had
never wholly left him, and he had by degrees almost
decided to relinquish his hope of farming here, though,
as long as the bare possibility existed of his remaining,
he kept this change of view a secret from his parents.

The crowds of agricultural labourers who had
come out to the country in his wake, dazzled by
representations of easy independence, had suffered,
died, and wasted away. He would see mothers from
English farms trudging along with their infants in
their arms, when the child would be stricken with
fever and would die; the mother would pause to dig
a hole in the loose earth with her bare hands, would
bury the babe therein with the same natural grave-
tools, shed one tear, and again trudge on.

Angel's original intention had not been emigration
to Brazil, but a northern or eastern farm in his own
country. He had come to this place in a ﬁt of des-
peration, the Brazil movement among the English
agriculturists having by chance coincided with his
desire to escape from his past existence.

During this time of absence he had mentally aged
a dozen years. What arrested him now as of value
in life was less its beauty than its pathos. Having
long discredited the old systems of mysticism, he now
began to discredit the old appraisements of morality.
He thought they wanted readjusting. Who was the
moral man? Still more pertinently, who was the
moral woman? The beauty or ugliness of a character
lay not only in its achievements, but in its aims and
impulses; its true history lay, not among things done,
but among things willed.

How, then, about Tess?

Viewing her in these lights, a regret for his hasty

432

THE CONVERT

judgment began to oppress him. Did he reject her
eternally, or did he not? He could no longer say
that he would always reject her, and not to say that
was in spirit to accept her now.

This growing fondness for her memory coincided
in point of time with her residence at Flintcomb-Ash,
but it was before she had felt herself at liberty to
trouble him with a word about her circumstances or
her feelings. He was greatly perplexed; and in his
perplexity as to her motives in withholding intelligence
he did not inquire. Thus her silence of docility was
misinterpreted. How much it really said if he had
understood I—that she adhered with literal exactness
to orders which he had given and forgotten; that
despite her natural fearlessness she asserted no rights,
admitted his judgment to be in every respect the true
one, and bent her head dumny thereto.

In the before-mentioned journey by mules through
the interior of the country, another man rode beside
him. Angel’s companion was also an Englishman,
bent on the same errand, though he came from another
part of the island. They were both in a state of
mental depression, and they spoke of home affairs.
Conﬁdence begat conﬁdence. With that curious ten-
dency evinced by men, more especially when in dis-
tant lands, to entrust to strangers details of their
lives which they would on no account mention to
friends, Angel admitted to this man as they rode
along the sorrowful facts of his marriage.

The stranger had sojourned in many more lands
and among many more peoples than Angel; to his
cosmopolitan mind such deviations from the social
norm, so immense to domesticity, were no more than
are the irregularities of vale and mountain-chain to
the whole terrestrial curve. He viewed the matter
in quite a different light from Angel; thought that
what Tess had been was of no importance beside what
she would be, and plainly told Clare that he was wrong
in coming away from her.

433

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

The next day they were drenched in a. thunder-
storm. Angel's companion was struck down with
fever, and died by the week’s end. Clare waited a few
hours to bury him, and then went on his way.

The cursory remarks of the large-minded stranger,
of whom he knew absolutely nothing beyond a com-
mon-place name, were sublimed by his death, and
inﬂuenced Clare more than all the reasoned ethics of
the philosophers. His own parochialisrn made him
ashamed by its contrast. His inconsistencies rushed
upon him in a ﬂood. He had persistently elevated
Hellenic Paganism at the expense of Christianity;
yet in that civilization an illegal surrender was not
certain disesteexn. Surely then he might have re-
garded that abhorrence of the unintact state, which
he had inherited with the creed of mysticism, as at
least open to correction when the result was due to
treachery. A remorse struck into him. The words
of Izz Huett, never quite stilled in his memory, came
back to him. He had asked Izz if she loved him, and
she had replied in the afﬁrmative. Did she love him
more than Tess did? No, she had replied; Tess would
lay down her life for him, and she herself could do
no more.

He thought of Tess as she had appeared on the
day of the wedding. How her eyes had lingered upon
him; how she had hung upon his words as if they
were a god’s! And during the terrible evening over
the hearth, when her simple soul uncovered itself to
his, how pitiful her face had looked by the rays of the
ﬁre, in her inability to realize that his love and pro-
tection could possibly be withdrawn.

Thus from being her critic he grew to be her advo-
cate. Cynical things he had uttered to himselfabout
her; but no man can be always a cynic and live;
and he withdrew them. The mistake of expressing
them had arisen from his allowing himself to be in-
ﬂuenced by general principles to the disregard of the
particular instance.

434

THE CONVERT

But the reasoning is somewhat musty; lovers and
husbands have gone over the ground before today.
Clare had been harsh towards her; there is no doubt
of it. Men are too often harsh with women they love
or have loved; women with men. And yet theSe
harshnesses are tenderness itself when compared with
the universal harshness out of which they grow; the
harshness of the position towards the temperament,
of the means towards the aims, of to-day towards yes-
terday, of hereafter towards to-day.

The historic interest of her family—that masterful
line of d'Urbervilles—whom he had despised as a
spent force, touched his sentiments now. Why had
he not known the diﬂerenoe between the political value
and the imaginative value of these things? In the
latter aspect her d'Urberville descent was a fact of
great dimensions; worthless to economics, it was a
most useful ingredient to the dreamer, to the moralizer
on declines and falls. It was a fact that would soon
be forgotten—that bit of distinction in poor Tess’s
blood and name, and oblivion would fall upon her
hereditary link with the marble monuments and leaded
skeletons at Kingsbere. So does Time ruthlessly
destroy his own romances. In recalling her face again
and again, he thought now that he could see therein a
ﬂash of the dignity which must have graced her
grand-dames; and the vision sent that aura through
his veins which he had formerly felt, and which left
behind it a sense of sickness.

Despite her not inviolate past. what still abode in
such a woman as Tess outvalued the freshness of her
fellows. Was not the gleaming of the grapes of
Ephraim better than the vintage of Abi-ezer?

So spoke love renascent, preparing the way for
Tess's devoted outpouring, which was then just being
forwarded to him by his father; though owing to his
giganoeinlanditwastobealongtimeinreaching

Meanwhile the writer's expectation that Angel

435

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

would come in response to the entreaty was alternately
great and small. What lessened it was that the facts
of her life which had led to the parting had not
changed—could never change; and that, if her pres-
ence had not attenuated them, her absence could not.
Nevertheless she addressed her mind to the tender
question of what she could do to please him best if he
should arrive. Sighs were expended on the wish that
she had taken more notice of the tunes he played on
his harp, that she had inquired more curiously of him
which were his favourite ballads among those the
country-girls sang. She indirectly inquired of Amby
Seedling, who had followed 122 from Talbothays, and
by chance Amby remembered that, amongst the
snatches of melody in which they had indulged at the
dairyman’s, to induce the cows to let down their milk,
Clare had seemed to like ‘Cupid’s Gardens,’ ‘1 have
parks, I have hounds,’ and ‘The break 0’ the day':
and had seemed not to care for ‘The Tailor's Breeches,’
and ‘Such a beauty I did grow,’ excellent ditties as
they were.

To perfect the ballads was now her whimsical de-
sire. She practised them privately at odd moments,
especially ‘The break 0’ the day':

Arise, arise, arise!
And pick your love a posy,
%0 Ella) sweetest ﬂowers
t in e garden .
The turtle doves ama’ birds
In every bough a—building,
So early in the Mey~time,
At the break 0’ the day!

It would have melted the heart of a stone to hear her
singing these ditties, whenever she worked apart from
the rest of the girls in this cold dry time; the tears
running down her cheeks all the while at the thought
that perhaps he would not, after all, come to hear
her, and the simple silly words of the songs resound-
ing in painful mockery of the aching heart of the singer.
4:46

THE CONVERT

Tesswassowraptupinthisfancifuldreamthat
she seemed not to know how the season was advancing;
that the days had lengthened, that Lady-Day was at
hand, and would soon be followod by Old Lady-Day,
the end of her term here.

But before the quarter-day had quite come some-
thing happened which made Tess think of far diﬂerent
matters. She was at her lodging as usual one evening,
sitting in the downstairs room with the rest of the
family, when somebody knocked at the door and
inquired for Tess. Through the doorway she saw
against the declining light a ﬁgure with the height of
a woman and the breadth of a child, a tall, thin, girlish
creature whom she did not recognize in the twilight till
the girl said ‘Tess!’

‘What—is it ’Liza-Lu?’ asked Tess, in startled
accents. Her sister, whom a little over a year ago
she had left at home as a child, had sprung up by a
sudden shoot to a form of this presentation, of which
as yet Lu seemed herself scarce able to understand
the meaning. Her thin legs, visible below her once
long frock, now short by her growing, and her uncom-
fortable hands and arms, revealed her youth and
inexperience.

‘Yes, I have been traipsing about all day, Tess,’
said Lu, with unemotional gravity, ‘a-trying to ﬁnd
'ee; and I’m very tired.’

‘What is the matter at home?’

‘Mother is took very bad. and the doctor says she's
dying, and as father is not very well neither, and says
'tis wrong for a man of such a high family as his to
slave and drave at common labouring work, we don’t
know what to do.’

Tess stood in reverie a long time before she thought
of asking ’Liza-Lu to come in and sit down. When
she had done so, and ’Liza-Lu was having some
tea, she came to a decision. It was imperative that
she should go home. Her agreement did not end till
Old Lady—Day, the sixth of April, but as the interval

437

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

thereto was not a long one she resolved to run the
risk of starting at once.

To go that night would be a gain of twelve hours;
but her sister was too tired to undertake such a dis-
tance till the morrow. Tess ran down to where
Marian and Izz lived, informed them of what had
happened, and begged them to make the best of her
case to the farmer. Returning, she got Lu a supper,
and after that, having tucked the younger into her
own bed, packed up as many of her belongings as
would go into a withy basket, and started, directing
Lu to follow her next morning. .

L

SE plunged into the chilly equinoctial darkness as
the clock struck ten, for her ﬁfteen miles’ walk under
the steely stars. In lonely districts night is a pro-
tection rather than a danger to a noiseless pedestrian,
and, knowing this, Tess pursued the nearest course
along by-lanes that she would almost have feared in
the daytime; but marauders were wanting now, and
spectral fears were driven out of her mind by thoughts
of her mother. Thus she proceeded mile after mile,
ascending and descending till she came to Bulban'ow,
and about midnight looked from that height into the
abyss of chaotic shade which was all that revealed
itself of the vale on whose further side she was born.
Having already traversed about ﬁve miles on the up-
land, she had now some ten or eleven in the lowland
before her journey would be ﬁnished. The winding
road downwards became just visible to her under the
wan starlight as she followed it, and soon she paced
a soil so contrasting with that above it that the diﬁer-
ence was perceptible to the tread and to the smell.
It was the heavy clay land of Blackmoor Vale, and a
part of the Vale to which tumpike—roads had never
penetrated. Superstitions linger longest on these
heavy soils. Having once been forest, at this shadowy
time it seemed to assert something of its old character,
the far and the near being blended, and every tree
and tall hedge making the most of its presence. The
harts that had been hunted here, the witches that had
been pricked and ducked, the green-Spangled fairies
that ‘whickered’ at you as you passed;—the place
439

TESS- OF THE D’URBERVILLES

teamed with beliefs in them still, and they formed an
impish multitude now.

At Nuttlebury she passed the village inn, whose
sign creaked in response to the greeting of her foot-
steps, which not a human soul heard but herself.
Under the thatched roofs her mind’s eye beheld re-
laxed tendons and ﬂaccid muscles, spread out in the
darkness beneath coverlets made of little purple
patchwork squares, and undergoing a bracing process
at the hands of sleep for renewed labour on the mor-
row, as soon as a hint of pink nebulosity appeared on
Hambledon Hill.

At three she turned the last corner of the maze of
lanes she had threaded, and entered Marlott, passing
the ﬁeld in which, as a club-girl, she had ﬁrst Seen
Angel Clare, when he had not danced with her; the
sense of disappointment remained with her yet. In
the direction of her mother’s house she saw a light.
It came from the bedroom window, and a branch
waved in front of it and made it wink at her. As soon
as she could discern the outline of the house—newly
thatched with her money—it had all its old effect
upon Tess's imagination. Part of her body and life
it ever seemed to be; the slope of its dormers, the
ﬁnish of its gables, the broken courses of brick which
topped the chimney, all had something in common
with her personal character. A stupefaction had come
into these features, to her regard; it meant the illness
of her mother.

She opened the door so softly as to disturb nobody;
the lower room was vacant, but the neighbour who
was sitting up with her mother came to the top of the
stairs, and whispered that Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld was no
better, though she was sleeping just then. Tess pre-
pared herself a breakfast, and then took her place as
nurse in her mother’s chamber.

In the morning, when she contemplated the chil-
dren, they had all a curiously elongated look; although
she had been away little more than a year, their

«0

THE CONVERT

growth was astounding; and the necessity of applying
herself heart and soul to their needs took her out of
her own cares.

Her father’s ill-health was of the same indeﬁnite
kind, and he sat in his chair as usual. But the day
after her arrival he was unusually bright. He had a
rational scheme for living, and Tess asked him what
it was.

‘I’m thinking of sending round to all the old anti-
queerians in this part of England,’ he said, ‘asking
them to subscribe to a fund to maintain me. I’m sure
they'd see it as a romantical, artistical, and proper
thing to do. They spend lots 0' money in keeping up
old ruins, and ﬁnding the bones 0' things, and such
like; and living remains must be more interesting to
’em still, if they only knowed of me. Would that
somebody would go round and tell ’em what there is
living among ’em, and they thinking nothing of him!
If Pa’son Tringham, who discovered me, had lived,
he’d ha’ done it, I’m sure.’

Tess postponed her arguments on this high project
till she had grappled with pressing matters in hand,
which seemed little improved by her remittances.
When indoor necessities had been eased she turned
her attention to external things. It was now the
season for planting and sowing; many gardens and
allotments of the villagers had already received their
spring tillage: but the garden and the allotment of
the Durbeyﬁelds were behindhand. She found, to
her dismay, that this was owing to their having eaten
all the seed potatoes,——that last lapse of the improvi-
dent. At the earliest moment she obtained what
others she could procure, and in~a few days her father
was well enough to see to the garden, under Tess's
persuasive efforts: while she herself undertook the
allotment-plot which they rented in a ﬁeld a couple
of hundred yards out of the village.

She liked doing it after the conﬁnement of the sick
chamber, where she was not now required, by reason

“I

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

of her mother's improvement. Violent motion relieved
thought. The plot of ground was in a high, dry, open
enclosure, where there were forty or ﬁfty such pieces,
and where labour was at its briskest when the hired
labour of the day had ended. Digging began usually
at six o’clock, and extended indeﬁnitely into the dusk
or moonlight. Just now heaps of dead weeds and
refuse were burning on many of the plots, the dry
weather favouring their combustion.

One ﬁne day Tess and 'Lisa-Lu worked on here
with their neighbours till the last rays of the sun smote
ﬂat upon the white pegs that divided the plots. As
soon as twilight succeeded to sunset the ﬂare of the
couch-grass and cabbage-stalk ﬁres began to light up
the allotments ﬁtfully, their outlines appearing and
disappearing under the dense smoke as wafted by the
wind. When a ﬁre glowed, banks of smoke, blown
level along the ground, would themselves become
illuminated to an opaque lustre, screening the work-
people from one another; and the meaning of the
‘pillar of a cloud,’ which was a wall by day and a
light by night, could be understood.

As evening thickened some of the gardening men
and women gave over for the night, but the greater
number remained to get their planting done, Tess
being among them, though she sent her sister home.
It was on one of the couch-burning plots that she
laboured with her fork, its four shining prongs resound-
ing against the stones and dry clods in little clicks.
Sometimes she was completely involved in the smoke
of her ﬁre; then it would leave her ﬁgure free, irra-
diated by the brassy glare from the heap. She was
oddly dressed to—night, and presented a somewhat
staring aspect, her attire being a gown bleached by
many washings, with a short black jacket over it, the
effect of the whole being that of a wedding and
funeral guest in one. The women further back wore
white aprons, which, with their pale faces, were
all that could be seen of them in the gloom, except

4.42

THE CONVERT

when at moments they caught a ﬂash from the
ﬂames.

Westward, the wiry boughs of the bare thorn hedge
which formed the boundary of the ﬁeld rose against
the pale opalesoence of the lower sky. Above,
Jupiter hung like a. full-blown jonquil, so bright as
almost to throw a shade. A few small nondescript
stars were appearing elsewhere. In the distance a
dog barked, and wheels occasionally rattled along the
dry road.

Still the prongs continued to click assiduously, for
it was not late; and though the air was fresh and keen
there was a whisper of spring in it that cheered the
workers on. Something in the place, the hour, the
crackling ﬁres, the fantastic mysteries of light and
shade, made others as well as Tess enjoy being there.
Nightfall, which in the frost of winter comes as a ﬁend
and in the warmth of summer as a. lover, came as a
tranquillizer on this March day.

Nobody looked at his or her companions. The
eyes of all were on the soil as its turned surface was
revealed by the ﬁres. Hence as Tess stirred the
clods, and sang her foolish little songs with scarce
now a hope that Clare would ever hear them, she did
not for a. long time notice the person who worked
nearest to her—a man in a long smockfrock who, she
found, was forking the same plot as herself, and whom
she supposed her father had sent there to advance the
work. She became more conscious of him when the
direction of his digging brought him closer. Some-
times the smoke divided them; then it swerved, and
the two were visible to each other but divided from all
the rest.

Tess did not speak to her fellow-worker, nor did
hespeaktoher. Nordidshethinkofhimfurther
than to recollect that he had not been there when it
was broad daylight. and that she did not know him as
any one of the Marlott labourers, which was no
wonder, her absences having been so long and fre-

443

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

quent of late years. By-and-by he dug so close to
her that the ﬁre-beams were reﬂected as distinctly
from the steel prongs of his fork as from her own.
On going up to the ﬁre to throw a. pitch of dead weeds
upon it, she found that he did the same on the other
side. The ﬁre ﬂared up, and she beheld the face of
d’Urberville.

The unexpectedness of his presence, the grotesque-
ness of his appearance in a gathered smockfrock, such
as was now worn only by the most old-fashioned of the
labourers, had a ghastly comicality that chilled her
as to its bearing. D’Urberville emitted a low long
laugh.

‘If I were inclined to joke I should say, How much
this seems like Paradise!’ he remarked whimsically,
looking at her with an inclined head.

‘What do you say?’ she weakly asked.

‘A jester might say this is just like Paradise. You
are Eve, and I am the old Other One come to tempt
you in the disguise of an inferior animal. I used
to be quite up in that scene of Milton’s when I was
theological. Some of it goes—-

“Emprtss, the way is ready, and not long,
Beyonderowofmyrtls....

. . . If thou accept

My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.”
“Lead then,” said Eve.

And so on. My dear, dear Tess, I am only putting
this to you as a. thing that you might have supposed or
said quite untruly, because you think so badly of me.’

‘ I never said you were Satan, or thought it. I
don’t think of you in that way at all. My thoughts of
you are quite cold, except when you affront me. What,
did you come digging here entirely because of me?’

‘Entirely. To see you; nothing more. The smock-
frock, which I saw hanging for sale as I came along,
was an aiter—thmight, that I mightn’t be noticed.
I come to protest against your working like this.’

‘But I like doing it—it is for my father.’

444

THE CONVERT

‘gour engagement at the other place is ended?’
I a"

‘Where are you going to next? To join your dear
husband?’

She could not bear the humiliating reminder.

‘O—I don't know!’ she said bitterly. ‘I have no
husband!’

‘It is quite true—in the sense you mean. But
you have a friend, and I have determined that you
shall be comfortable in spite of yourself. When you
get down to your house you will see what I have sent
there for you.’

‘O, Alec, I wish you wouldn't give me anything
at all! I cannot take it from you! I don’t like—it is
not right!’

‘It is right!’ he cried lightly. ‘I am not going to
seeawomanwhomIfeelsotenderlyforasIdofor
you, in trouble without trying to help her.’

‘But I am very well OR! I am only in trouble
about—about-not about living at all!’

She turned, and desperately resumed her digging,
figs dripping upon the fork-handle and upon the

s.
‘About the children+your brothers and sisters,’ he
resumed. ‘ I've been thinking of them.’

Tess’s heart quivered—he was touching her in a
weak place. He had divined her chief anxiety. Since
returning home her soul had gone out to those children
with an aﬁection that was passionate.

‘If your mother does not recover, somebody ought
to do something for them; since your father will not
be able to do much, I suppose?’

‘He can with my assistance. He must !’

‘And with mine.’

‘No, sir!’

‘How damned foolish this is!’ burst out d’Urber.
ville. ‘Why, he thinks we are the same family; and
will be quite satisﬁed!’

‘He don’t. I’ve undeoeived him.’

445

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘The more fool you!’

D'Urberville in anger retreated from her to the
hedge, where he pulled 0E the long smockfrock which
had disguised him; and rolling it up and pushing it
into the couch-ﬁre, went away.

Tess could not get on with her digging after this;
she felt restless; she wondered if he had gone back to
her father's house; and taking the fork in her hand
proceeded homewards.

Some twenty yards from the house she was met by
one of her sisters.

‘0, Tessy—what do you think! 'Liza-Lu is a—cry-
ing, and there’s a lot of folk in the house, and mother
is a good deal better, but they think father is dead!’

The child realized the grandeur of the news; but
not as yet its sadness; and stood looking at Tess with
round—eyed importance, till, beholding the effect pro-
duced upon her, she said—

‘What, Tess, shan’t we talk to father never no
more?’

‘But father was only a little bit ill!’ exclaimed
Tess distractedly.

’Liza-Lu came up.

‘He dropped down just now, and the doctor who
was there for mother said there was no chance for him,
because his heart was growed in.’

Yes; the Durbeyﬁeld couple had changed places;
the dying one was out of danger, and the indisposed
one was dead. The news meant even more than it
sounded. Her father’s life had a value apart from his
personal achievements, or perhaps it would not have
had much. It was the last of the three lives for whose
duration the house and premises were held under a
lease; and it had long been coveted by the tenant—
farmer for his regular labourers, who were stinted in
cottage accommodation. Moreover, ‘liviers’ were dis-
approved of in villages almost as much as little free-
holders, because of their independence of manner, and
when a. lease determined it was never renewed.

446

THE CONVERT

Thus the Durbeyﬁelds, once d’Utbervilles, saw
descending upon them the destiny which, no doubt,
when they were among the Olympians of the county,
they had caused to descend many a time, and severer
enough, upon the heads of such landless ones as they
themselves were now. So do ﬂux and reﬂux—the
rhythm of change—alternate and persist in everything
under the sky.

1-,:

Ar length it was the eve of Old Lady-Day, and the
agricultural world was in a fever of mobility such as
only occurs at that particular date of the year. It is
a day of fulﬁlment; agreements for outdoor service
during the ensuing year, entered into at Candlemas,
are to be now carried out. The labourers—or ‘work-
folk,’ as they used to call themselves immemorially till
the other word was introduced from without—who
wish to remain no longer in old places are removing
to the new farms.

These annual migrations from farm to farm were
on the increase here. When Tess's mother was a
child the majority of the ﬁeld-folk about Marlott had
remained all their lives on one farm, which had been
the home also of their fathers and grandfathers; but
latterly the desire for yearly removal had risen to a
high pitch. With the younger families it was a
pleasant excitement which might possibly be an ad-
vantage. The Egypt of one family was the Land
of Promise to the family who saw it from a distance,
till by residence there it became in turn their Egypt
also; and so they changed and changed.

However, all the mutations so increasingly dis-
cernible in village life did not originate entirely in the
agricultural unrest. A depopulation was also going
on. The village had formerly contained, side by side
with the agricultural labourers, an interesting and
better-informed class, ranking distinctly above the
former—the class to which Tess's father and mother
had belonged—and including the carpenter, the smith,
the shoemaker, the huckster, together with nonde-

' 443

THE CONVERT

script workers other than farm-labourers; a set of
people who owed a certain stability of aim and conduct
to the fact of their being life-holders like Tess’s father,
or copy-holders, or, occasionally, small freeholders.
But as the long holdings fell in they were seldom again
let to similar tenants, and were mostly pulled down, if
not absolutely required by the farmer for his hands.
Cottagers who were not directly employed on the land
were looked upon with disfavour, and the banishment
of some starved the trade of others, who were thus
obliged to follow. These families, who had formed the
backbone of the village life in the past, who were the
depositaries of the village traditions, had to seek ref-
uge in the large centres; the process, humorously
designated by statisticians as ‘the tendency of the
rural population towards the large towns,’ being really
the tendency of water to ﬂow up-hill when forced by
machinery.

The cottage accommodation at Marlott having
been in this manner considerably curtailed by dem-
olitions, every house which remained standing was
required by the agriculturist for his work-people.
Ever since the occurrence of the event which had
cast such a shadow over Tess’s life, the Durbeyﬁeld
family (whose descent was not credited) had been
tacitly looked on as one which would have to go when
their lease ended, if only in the interests of morality.
It was, indeed, quite true that the household had not
been shining examples either of temperance, sober-
ness, or chastity. The father, and even the mother,
had got drunk at times, the younger children seldom
had gone to church, and the eldest daughter had
made queer unions. By some means the village had
to be kept pure. So on this, the ﬁrst Lady-Day on
which the Durbeyﬁelds were expellable, the house,
being roomy, was required for a carter with a large
family; and Widow Joan, her daughters Tess and
’Liza-Lu, the boy Abraham and the younger children,
had to go elsewhere.

449

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

On the evening preceding their removal it was
getting dark betimes by reason of a drizzling rain
which blurred the sky. As it was the last night they
would spend in the village which had been their
home and birthplace, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, 'Liza-Lu, and
Abraham had gone out to bid some friends goodbye,
and Tess was keeping house till they should return.

She was kneeling in the window-bench, her face
close to the easement, where an outer pane of rain-
water was sliding down the inner pane of glass. Her
eyes rested on the web of a spider, probably starved
long ago, which had been mistakenly placed in a
corner where no ﬂies ever came, and shivered in the
slight draught through the easement. Tess was
reﬂecting on the position of the household, in which
she perceived her own evil inﬂuence. Had she not
come home her mother and the children might prob-
ably have been allowed to stay on as weekly tenants.
But she had been observed almost immediately on
her return by some people of scrupulous character and
great inﬂuence: they had seen her idling in the
churchyard, restoring as well as she could with a little
trowel a baby’s obliterated grave. By this means they
had found that she was living here again; her mother
was scolded for ‘harboun'ng’ her; sharp retorts had
ensued from Joan, who had independently oﬁered to
leave at once; she had been taken at her word; and
here was the result.

‘I ought never to have come home,’ said Tess to
herself, bitterly. .

She 'was so intent upon these thoughts that she
hardly at ﬁrst took note of a man in awhite mackintosh
whom she saw riding down the street. Possibly it
was owing to her face being near to the pane that he
saw her so quickly, and directed his horse so close to
the cottage—front that his hoofs were almost upon the
narrow border for plants growing under the wall. It
was not till he touched the window with his riding-
crop that she observed him. The rain had nearly

450

THE CONVERT

ceased, and she opened the casement in obedience to
his gesture.

‘Didn't you see me?’ asked d'Urberville.

‘I was not attending,’ she said. ‘I heard you, I
believe, though I fancied it was a carriage and horses.
I was in a sort of dream.’

‘Ah! you heard the d'Urberville Coach, perhaps.
You lmow the legend, I suppose?‘

'No. My—somebody was going to tell it me once,
but didn’t.’

‘If you are a genuine d’Urberville I ought not to
tell you either, I suppose. As for me, I'm a sham one,
so it doesn’t matter. It is rather dismal. It is that
this sound of a non-existent coach can only be heard
by one of d'Urberville blood, and it is held to be of
ill-omen to the one who hears it. It has to do with a.
murder, committed by one of the family, centuries ago.’

‘Now you have begun it, ﬁnish it.’

‘Very well. One of the family is said to have
abducted some beautiful woman, who tried to escape
from the coach in which he was carrying her 06, and
in the struggle he killed her—or she killed him—I
forget which. Such is one version of the tale. . . . I
see that your tubs and buckets are packed. Going
away, aren’t you?’

‘Yes, to-mon-ow—Old Lady-Day.’

‘I heard you were, but could hardly believe it; it
seems so sudden. Why is it?’

‘ Father’s was the last life on the property, and when
that dropped we had no further right to stay. Though
we might, perhaps, have stayed as weekly tenants—if
it had not been for me?’

‘What about you?’

‘I am not a—proper woman.’

D'Urberville's face ﬂushed.

‘What a blasted shame! Miserable snobs! May
their dirty souls be burnt to cinders!’ he exclaimed
in tones of ironic resentment. ‘That’s why you are
going, is it? Turned out?’

451

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘We are not turned out exactly; but as they said
we should have to go soon, it was best to go now

everybody was moving, because there are better
chances.’

‘Where are you going to?’

‘Kingsbere. We have taken rooms there. Mother
ish so foolish about father's people that she will go
t ere.’

‘But your mother’s family are not ﬁt for lodgings,
and in a little hole of a town like that. Now why not
come to my garden—house at Trantridge? There are
hardly any poultry now, since my mother’s death;
but there’s the house, as you know it, and the garden.
It can be whitewashed in a day, and your mother can
live there quite comfortably; and I will put the chil-
dren to a good school. Really I ought to do something
for you!’

‘But we have already taken the rooms at Kings-
berel' she declared. ‘And we can wait there—’

‘Wait—what for? For that nice husband, no
doubt. Now look here, Tess, I know what men are,
and, bearing in mind the grounds of your separation, I
am quite positive he will never make it up with you.
Now, though I have been your enemy, I am your
friend, even if you won’t believe it. Come to this
cottage of mine. We’ll get up a regular colony of
fowls, and your mother can attend to them excellently;
and the children can go to school.’

Tess breathed more and more quickly, and at length
she said—

‘How do I know that you would do all this? Your
views may change—and then—we should be—my
mother would be—homeless again.’

‘0 no—no. I would guarantee you against such
as that in writing, if necessary. Think it over.’

Tess shook her head. But d’Urberville persisted;
she had seldom seen him so determined; he would not
take a negative.

‘Please just tell your mother,’ he said, in emphatic

453

THE CONVERT

tones. ‘It is her business to judge—not yours. I
shall get the house swept out and whitened to-morrow
morning, and ﬁres lit; and it will be dry by the
evening, so that you can come straight there. Now
mind, I shall expect you.’

Tess again shook her head; her throat swelling
with complicated emotion. She could not look up at
d'Urberville.

‘I owe you something for the past, you lcnow,’ he
resumed. ‘And you cured me, too, of that craze;
so I am glad—’

‘I would rather you had kept the craze, so that
you had kept the practice which went with it!’

‘I am glad of this opportunity of repaying you a
little. Tomorrow I shall expect to hear your mother’s
goods unloading. . . . Give me your hand on it now
-—dea.r, beautiful Tess!’

With the last sentence he had dropped his voice to
a murmur, and put his hand in at the half-open case-
ment. With stormy eyes she pulled the stay-bar
quickly, and, in doing so, caught his arm between the
casement and the stone mullion.

‘Damnation—you are very cruel!’ he said, snatch-
ing out his arm. ‘No, nol—I know you didn’t do it
on purpose. Well, I shall expect you, or your mother
and the children at least.’

‘I shall not come—I have plenty of money!’ she
cried.

‘Where?’

‘At my father-in-law’s, if I ask for it.’

‘If you ask for it. But you won’t, Tess; I know
you; you’ll never ask‘ for it—you’ll starve ﬁrst!’

With these words he rode 01f. Just at the corner
of the street he met the man with the paint-pot, who
asked him if he had deserted the brethren.

‘You go to the devil,’ said d’Urberville.

Tess remained where she was a long while, till a.
sudden rebellious sense of injustice caused the region
of her eyes to swell with the rush of hot tears

453

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Her husband, Angel Clare himself, had, like others,
dealt out hard measure to her, surely he had! She
had never before admitted such a thought; but he had
surely! Never in her life—she could swear it from
the bottom of her soul~had she ever intended to do
wrong; yet these hard judgments had come. What-
ever her sins, they were not sins of intention, but of
inadvertence, and why should she have been punished
so persistently?

She passionately seized the ﬁrst piece of paper that
came to hand, and scribbled the following lines:

Owhyhaveymu’eatedmesomonstmusl ,Angell Idonotdeserve
it. I have thought it all over Why, an I can never, never forgive
you! Youlmowthatldidnot intmdmwronlgym—whyhaveyoueo

me? You are cruel, cruel indeed! will try to
It is all injustice I have received at your handsl .

She watched till the postman passed by, ran out to
him with her epistle, and then again took her listless
place inside the window-panes.

Itwasjustaswelltowritelikethatastomite
tenderly. How could he give way to entreaty? The
facts had not changed: there was no new event to
alter his opinion.

It grew darker, the ﬁrelight shining over the room.
The two biggest of the younger children had gone out
with their mother; the four smallest, their ages rang-
ing from three-and-a-half years to eleven, all in black
frocks, were gathered round the hearth babbling their
own little subjects. Tess at length joined them,
without lighting a candle.

‘This is the last night that we shall sleep here,
clears, in the house where we were born,’ she said
quickly. ‘We ought to think of it, oughtn’t we?’

They all became silent; with the irnpressibility of
their age they were ready to burst into tears at the
picture of ﬁnality she had conjured up. though all the
day hitherto they had been rejoicing in the idea of a
new place. Tess changed the subject.

‘Sing to me. dears,’ she said.

454

THE CONVERT

‘What shall we sing?’

‘Anything you know; I don’t mind.’

There was a. momentary pause; it was broken,
ﬁrst, by one little tentative note; then a second voice
strengthened it, and a third and a fourth chimed in in
unison, with words they had learnt at the Sunday-

school-—
Herewesuﬁergrlefandpain,
Herewemeettopartagain;
InHeavmwepartnomu-e.

The four sang on with the phlegmatic passivity of
persons who had long ago settled the question, and
there being no mistake about it, felt that further
thought was not required. With features strained
hard to enunciate the syllables, they continued to re-
gard the centre of the ﬂickering ﬁre, the notes of the
youngest straying over into the pauses of the rest.

Tess turned from them, and went to the window

' . Darkness had now fallen without, but she put
her face to the pane as though to peer into the gloom.
It was really to hide her tears. If she could only
believe what the children were singing; if she were
only sure, how different all would now be; how con-
ﬁdently she would leave them to Providence and
their future kingdom! But, in default of that, it
behoved her to do something; to be their Providence;
for to Tess, as to not a few millions of others, there
was ghastly satire in the poet’s lines—

Not in utter nakedness
But trailing clouds of glory do we come.

To her and her like, birth itself was an ordeal of
degrading personal compulsion, whose gratuitousness
nothing in the result seemed to justify, and at best
could only palliate.

In the shades of the wet road she soon discerned
her mother with tall ’Liza-Lu and Abraham. Mrs.
Durbeyﬁeld’s pattens clicked up to the door, and Tess
opened it.

455

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘I see the tracks of a horse outside the window,’
said Joan. ‘Hev somebody called?’

‘No,’ said Tess.

The children by the ﬁre looked gravely at her, and
one murmured——

‘Why, Tess, the gentleman a-horseback!’

‘He didn’t call,’ said Tess. ‘He spoke to me in
passmg.’

‘Who was the gentleman?’ asked her mother.
‘Your husband?’

‘No. He’ll never, never oome,’ answered Te$ in
stony hopelessness.

‘Then who was it?’

‘Oh, you needn’t ask. You've seen him More,
and so have I.’

‘Ah! What did he say?’ asked Joan curiously.

‘I will tell you when we are settled in our lodgings
at Kingsbere to-morrow—every word.’

It was not her husband, she had said. Yet a con-
seiousness that in a physical sense this man alone was
her husband seemed to weigh on her more and more.

LII

DURING the small hours of the next morning, while
it was still dark, dwellers near the highways were
conscious of a disturbance of their night's rest by
rumbling noises, intermittently continuing till day-
light—noises as certain to recur in this particular ﬁrst
week of the month as the voice of the cuckoo in the
third week of the same. They were the preliminaries
of the general removal, the paxing of the empty
waggons and teams to fetch the goods of the migrating
families; for it was always by the vehicle of the
farmer who required his services that the hired man
was conveyed to his destination. That this might be
accomplished within the day was the explanation of
the reverberation occurring so soon after midnight,
theaimofthecartersbeingtoreachthedoorofthe
outgoing households by six o’clock, when the loading
of their movables at once began.

But to Tess and her mother's household no such
anxious farmer sent his team. They were only
women; they were not regular labourers; they were
not particularly required anywhere; hence they had
tohireawaggonattheirownexpense,andgotnothing
sent gratuitously.

It was a. relief to Tess, when she looked out of the
window that morning, to ﬁnd that though the weather
was windy and louring, it did not rain, and that the
wagon had come. A wet Lady-Day was a spectre
which removing families never forgot; damp furniture,
damp bedding, damp clothing accompanied it, and

left a tram of ills.

Her mother, ’Liza-Lu, and Abraham were also‘
451

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

awake, but the younger children were let sleep on.
The four breakfasted by the thin light, and the ‘house-
ridding’ was taken in hand.

It proceeded with some cheerfulness, a. friendly
neighbour or two assisting. When the large articles
of furniture had been packed in position a circular nest
was made of the beds and bedding, in which Jam
Durbeyﬁeld and the young children were to sit
through the journey. After loading there was a long
delay before the horses were brought, these having
been unhamessed during the ridding; but at length,
about two o’clock, the whole was under way, the cook-
ing-pot swinging from the axle of the waggon, Mrs.
Durbeyﬁeld and family at the top, the matron having
in her lap, to prevent injury to its works, the head of
the clock, which, at any exceptional lurch of the
waggon, struck one, or one-and-a-hnlf, in hurt tones.
Tess and the next eldest girl walked alongside till
they were out of the village.

They had called on a few neighbours that morning
and the previous evening, and some came to see them
oﬁ, all wishing them well, though, in their secret
hearts, hardly expecting welfare possible to such a
family, harmless as the Durbeyﬁelds were to all ex-
cept themselves. Soon the equipage began to ascend
to higher ground, and the wind grew keener with the
change of level and soil.

The day being the sixth of April, the Durbeyﬁeld
waggon met many other waggons with families on the
summit of the load, which was built on a well-nigh
unvarying principle, as peculiar, probably, to the rural
labourer as the hexagon to the bee. The groundwork
of the arrangement was the family dreﬁer, which, with
its shining handles, and ﬁnger-marks, and domestic
evidences thick upon it, stood importantly in from,
over the tails of the shaft-horses, in its erect and
natural position, like some Ark of the Covenant that
they were bound to carry reverently.

Some of the households were lively, some mournful;

458

THE CONVERT

some were stopping at the doors of wayside inns;
where, in due time, the Durbeyﬁeld menagetie also
drew up to bait horses and refresh the travellers.

During the halt Tess's eyes fell upon a three-pint
blue mug, which was ascending and descending
through the air to and from the feminine section of a
household, sitting on the summit of a load that had
also drawn up at a little distance from the same inn.
She followed one of the mug’s journeys upward, and
perceived it to be clasped by hands whose owner she
well knew. Tess went towards the waggon.

‘Marian and Izz!‘ she cried to the girls, for it was
they, sitting with the moving family at whose house
they had lodged. ‘Are you house-ridding to-day, like
everybody else?’

They were, they said. It had been too rough a. life
for them at Flintoomb-Ash, and they had come away,
almost without notice, leaving Groby to prosecute
them if he chose. They told Tess their destination,
and Tess told them hers.

Marian leant over the load, and lowered her voice.
‘Do you know that the gentleman who follows 'ee—
you’ll guess who I mean—came to ask for 'ee at
Flintcomb after you had gone? We didn’t tell’n
Elise you was, knowing you wouldn't wish to see
‘Ah—but I did see him!’ Tess murmured. ‘He
found me.’

‘And do he know where you be going?’

‘I think so.’

‘gusband come back?’

I 0.!

She bade her acquaintance good-bye—for the re-
spective carters had now come out from the inn—end
the two waggons resumed their journey in opposite
directions; the vehicle whereon sat Marian, 122, and
the ploughman’s family with whom they had thrown
in their lot, being brightly painted, and drawn by
three powerful horses with shining brass ornaments on

459

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

their harness; while the waggon on which Mrs. Dur-
beyﬁeld and her family rode was a creaking erection
that would scarcely bear the weight of the superin-
cumbent load; one which had known no paint since
it was made, and drawn by two horses only. The
contrast well marked the diﬁerence between being
fetched by a thriving farmer and conveying oneself
whither no hirer waited one's coming. -

The distance was great—too great for a day's
journey—and it was with the utmost diﬁ'iculty that
the horses performed it. Though they had started so
early, it was quite late in the afternoon when they
turned the ﬂank of an eminence which formed part of
the upland called Greenhill. While the horses stood
to stale and breathe themselves Tess looked around.
Under the hill, and just ahead of them, was the half-
dead townlet of their pilgrimage, Kingsbere, where
lay those ancestors of whom her father had spoken
and sung to painfulness: Kingsbere, the spot of all
spots in the world which could be considered the
d’Urbervilles' home, since they had resided there for
full ﬁve hundred years.

A man could be seen advancing from the outskirts
towards them, and when he beheld the nature of their
waggon-load he quickened his steps.

‘You be the woman they call Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, I
reckon?’ he said to Tess's mother, who had descended
to walk the remainder of the way.

She nodded. ‘Though widow of the late Sir John
d'Urberville, poor nobleman, if I cared for my rights;
and returning to the domain of his forefathers.’

‘Oh? Well, I know nothing about that; but if
you be Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, I am sent to tell ’ee that the
rooms you wanted be let. We didn't know you was
coming till we got your letter this morning—when
’twas too late. But no doubt you can get other lodg-
ings somewhere.’

The man had noticed the face of Tess, which had

become ash-pale at his Her mother
4

 

THE CONVERT 

looked hopelessly at fault. ‘What shall we do now,
Tess?’ she said bitterly. ‘Here’s a welcome to your
ancestors’ lands! However, let’s try further.’

They moved on into the town, and tried, with all
their might, Tess remaining with the waggon to take
care of the Mdren whilst her mother and ’Liza-Lu
made inquiries. At the last return of Joan to the
vehicle, an hour later, when her’search for acoommoda—
tion had still been fruitless, the driver of the waggon
said the goods must be unloaded, as the horses were
half-dead, and he was bound to return part of the way
at least that night.

‘Very well—unload it here,’ said Joan recklessly.
‘I‘ll get shelter somewhere.’

The waggon had drawn up under the churchyard
wall, in a spot screened from view, and the driver,
nothing loth, soon hauled down the poor heap of
household goods. This done, she paid him, reducing
herself to almost her last shilling thereby, and he
moved off and left them, only too glad to get out of
further dealings with such a family. It was a dry
night, and he guessed that they would come to no
harm.

Tess gazed desperately at the pile of furniture.
The cold sunlight of this spring evening peered in-
vidiously upon the crooks and kettles, upon th
bunches of dried herbs shivering in the breeze, upon
the brass handles of the dresser, upon the wicker
cradle they had all been rocked in, and upon the well-
rubbed clock-case, all of which gave out the reproach-
ful gleam of indoor articles abandoned to the vicissi-
tudes of a rooﬂess exposure for which they were never
made. Round about were deparked hills and slopes
—now out up into little paddocks—and the green
foundations that showed where the d'Urberville man-
sion once had stood; also an outlying stretch of Egdon
Heath that had always belonged to the estate. Hard
by, the aisle of the church called the d’Urberville
Aisle looked on imperturliéably.

I

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

‘Isn't your family vault your own freehold?’ said
Tess’s mother, as she returned from a reconnoitre of
the church and graveyard. ‘Why, of course 'tis, and
that’s where we will camp, girls, till the place of your
ancestors ﬁnds us a roof! Now Tess and 'Liza and
Abraham, you help me. We'll make a nest for these
children, and then we’ll have another look round.’

Tess listlessly lent a. hand, and in a quarter of an
hour the old four-post bedstead was dissociated from
the heap of goods, and erected under the south wall of
the church, the part of the building known as the
d’Urberville Aisle, beneath which the huge vaults lay.
Over the tester of the bedstead was a beautifully
traceried window, of many lights, its date being the
ﬁfteenth century. It was called the d’Urberville
Window, and in the upper part could be discerned
heraldic emblems like those on Durbeyﬁeld’s old sail
and spoon.

Joandrewthecurtainsroundthebedsoasto
make an excellent tent of it, and put the smaller
children inside. ‘If it comes to the worst we can
sleep there too, for one night,’ she said. ‘But let us
try further on, and get something for the clears to eat!

‘ O, Tess, what’s the use of your playing at marrying
gentlemen, if it leaves us like this!’

Accompanied by ’Liza-Lu and the boy, she again
ascended the little lane which secluded the church
from the townlet. As soon as they got into the street
they beheld a man on horseback gazing up and down.
‘Ah—I’m looking for you!’ he said, riding up to them.
‘This is indeed a family gathering on the historic
spot!’

It was Alec d’Urberville. ‘Where is Tess?‘ he
asked.

Personally Joan had no liking for Alec. She
cursorin signiﬁed the direction of the church. and
went on, d'Urberville saying that he would see them
again, in case they should be still unsuccessful in
their search for shelter, (ifs which he had just heard.

2

THE CONVERT

When they had gone d'Urberville rode to the inn, and
shortly after came out on foot.

In the interim Tess, left with the children inside
the bedstead, remained talking with them awhile, till,
seeing that no more could be done to make them
comfortable just then, she walked about the church-
yard, now beginning to be embrowned by the shades
of nightfall. The door of the church was unfastened,
and she entered it for the ﬁrst time in her life.

Within the window under which the bedstead stood
were the tombs of the family, covering in their dates
several centuries. They were canopied, altar-shaped,
and plain; their carvings being defaced and broken;
their brasses torn from the matrices, the rivet-holes
remaining like marten-holes in a sand-cliff. Of all
the reminders that she had ever received that her
people were socially extinct there was none so forcible
as this spoliation.

Shedrewneartoadarkstoneonwhichwasin-
scribed:

Quin. upulrlpti antique: familiae h‘urhmillc.

Tess did not read Church-Latin like 9. Cardinal,
but she knew that this was the door of her ancestral
sepulchre, and that the tall knights of whom her
father had chanted in his cups lay inside.

She musineg turned to withdraw, passing near an
altar-tomb, the oldest of them all, on which was a
recumbent ﬁgure. In the dusk she had not noticed it
before, and would hardly have noticed it now but for
an odd fancy that the efﬁgy moved. As soon as she
drew close to it she discovered all in a moment that
theﬁgurewasalivingperson: andtheshocktoher
sense of not having been alone was so violent that she
was quite overcome, and sank down nigh to fainting,
not however till she had recognized Alec d’Urberville
in the form.

He leapt oﬁ the slab and supported her.

‘I saw you come in,‘ he6 said smiling, ‘and got up

4 3

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

there not to interrupt your meditations. A family
gathering, is it not, with these old fellows under us
here? Listen.’

He stamped with his heel heavily on the ﬂoor;
whereupon there arose a hollow echo from below.

‘That shook them a bit, I'll warrant!’ he continued.
‘And you thought I was the mere stone reproduction
of one of them. But no. The old order changeth.
The little ﬁnger of the sham d’Urberville can do more
for you than the whole dynasty of the real underneath.
. . . Now command me. What shall I do?’

‘Go away!’ she murmured.

‘I will—I'll look for your mother,’ said he blandly.
But in passing her he whispered: ‘Mind this; you’ll
be civil yet!’

When he was gone she bent down upon the entrance
to the vaults, and said—

‘Why am I on the wrong side of this door!’

In the meantime Marian and Izz Huett had jour-
neyed onward with the chattels of the ploughman in
the direction of their land of Canaan—the Egypt of
some other family who had left it only that morning.
But the girls did not for a long time think of where
they were going. Their talk was of Angel Clare and
Tess, and Tess’s persistent lover, whose connection
with her previous history they had partly heard and
partly guessed ere this.

‘ ’Tisn't as though she had never known him afore,’
said Marian. ‘ His having won her once makes all the
diﬂerence in the world. "I‘would be a thousand pities
if he were to tole her away again. Mr. Clare can
never be anything to us. 122; and why should we
grudge him to her, and not try to mend this quarrel?
If he could on’y know what straits she's put to, and
what’s hovering round, he might come to take care of
his own.’

‘Could we let him lmow?’

They thought of this all the way to their destina-

464

 

THE CONVERT

tion; but the bustle of re-establishment in their new
place took up all their attention then. But when they
were settled, a month later, they heard of Clara's ap-
proaching return, though they had learnt noﬂﬁng more
of Tess. Upon that, agitated anew by their attachment
to him, yet honourany disposed to her, Marian un-
corked the penny ink-bottle they shared, and a few
lines were concocted between the two girls.

Honovn’nSn-IoolrtoyourWifeifyoudolavehuumuchuehe
dolaveyou. ForeheismputtobynnEnanyintheahapeoia
Friend. Sir,thmisanenea.rherwhooughttobeAwey. Awoman

shmddnotbetry’dbeyondhaSkength,andeontinualdroppingwill
wear away a Stone-my, more—a Diamond.
hon Two WILL-Wm.

This they addressed to Angel Clare at the only
place they had ever heard him to be connected with,
Emminster Vicarage; after which they continued in a
mood of emotional exaltation at their own generosity,
which made them sing in hysterical snatches and weep
at the same time.

END 0? PHASE THE SIXTH

 

 

 

PHASE THE SEVEN TD

FULFILH EN T

LIII

IT was evening at Emminster Vicarage. The two
cus candles were binning under their
shades in the Vicar's study, but he had not been sitting
there. Occasionally he came in, stirred the small ﬁre
which suﬁced for the increasing mildness of the spring,
and went out again; sometimes pausing at the front
door, going on to the drawing-room, then returning
again to the front door.

It faced westward, and though gloom prevailed
inside, there was still light enough without to see with
distinctness. Mrs. Clare, who had been sitting in the
drawing-room, followed him hither.

‘Plenty of time yet,’ said the Vicar. ‘He doesn’t
reach Chalk-Newton till six, even if the train should
be punctual, and ten miles of country-road, ﬁve of
them in Crimmercrock Lane, are not jogged over in a
hurry by our old horse.’

‘But he has done it in an hour with us, my dear.’

‘Years ago.’

Thus they passed the minutes, each well knowing
that this was only waste of breath, the one essential
being simply to wait.

At length there was a slight noise in the lane, and
the old pony-chaise appeared indeed outside the rail-
ings. They saw alight therefrom a form which they
affected to recognize, but would actually have passed

469

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

by in the street without identifying had he not got out
of their carriage at the particular moment when a
particular person was due.

Mrs. Clare rushed through the dark passage to
the door, and her husband came more slowly after
her.

- The new arrival, who was just about to enter, saw
their anxious faces in the doorway and the gleam of
the west in their spectacles because they confronted
the last rays of day; but they could only see his shape
against the light.

‘0, my boy. my boy—home again at last!’ cried
Mrs. Clare, who cared no more at that moment for the
stains of heterodoxy which had caused all this separa-
tion than for the dust upon his clothes. What woman,
indeed, among the most faithful adherents of the truth,
believes the promises and threats of the Word in the
sense in which she believes in her own children, or
would not throw her theology to the wind if weighed
against their happiness? As soon as they reached the
room where the candles were lighted she looked at his
face.

‘0, it is not Angel—not my son—the Angel who
went away!’ she cried in all the irony of sorrow, as
she turned herself aside.

His father, too, was shocked to see him. so reduced
was that ﬁgure from its former contours by worry and
the bad season that Clare had experienced, in the
climatetowhichhehadsorashlyhurﬁedinhisﬁrst
aversion to the mockery of events at home. You
could see the skeleton behind the man, and almost the
ghost behind the skeleton. He matched »Crive1li’s
dead Chrirtus. His sunken eye-pits were of morbid
hue, and the light in his eyes had waned. The angular
hollows and lines of his aged ancestors had succeeded
to their reign in his face twenty years before their
time.

‘I was ill over there, you know,’ he said. ‘I am
all right now.’

47°

 

FULFILMENT

As if, however, to falsify this assertion, his legs
seemed to give way, and he suddenly sat down to save
himself from falling. It was only a slight attack of
faintness, resulting from the tedious day’s journey,
and the excitement of arrival.

‘Has any letter come for me lately?’ he asked.
‘I received the last you sent on by the merest chance,
and after considerable delay through being inland; or
I might have come sooner.’

‘It was from your wife, we supposed?’

‘It was.’

Only one other had recently come. They had not
sent itontohim, knowinghewouldstartforhomeso
soon.

He hastily opened the letter produced, and was
much disturbed to read in T's handwriting the
Ethnents expressed in her last hurried scrawl to

Owhyhaveyoutreatedmesomonstmusly,Angell Idonotdeserve
it. lhavethoughtitallwercarefully,endlcsnnever,nevaforgive
you! Ymknowthatldidnotintcndtowrongym—whybaveyouso

me? Ymmeruel,cruelindeedl Iwilltrytoforpt’y‘ou.
Itissllinjustioelhavereeeivedstyourhandsl .

'It is quite true!’ said Angel, throwing down the
letter. ‘Perhaps she will never be reconciled to me!’

'Don’t, Angel, be so anxious about a mere child of
thesoil? said his mother.

'Child of the soil! Well, we all are children of
thesoil. Iwishsheweresointhesenseyoumean;
but let me now explain to you what I have never
explained before, that her father is a. descendant in the
male line of one of the oldest Norman houses, like a
good many others who lead obscure agricultural lives
in our villages, and are dubbed “sons of the soil."’

He soon retired to bed; and the next morning,
feeling exceedingly unwell, he remained in his room
pondering. The circumstances amid which he had
left Tess were such that though, while on the south of
the Equator and just in receipt of her loving epistle, it

47!

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

had seemed the easiest thing in the world to rush back
into her arms the moment he chose to forgive her,
now that he had arrived it was not so easy as it had
seemed. She was passionate, and her present letter,
showing that her estimate of him had changed under
his delay—too justly changed, he sadly owned,——made
him ask himself if it would be wise to confront her
unannounced in the presence of her parents. Suppos-
ing that her love had indeed turned to diser during
the last weeks of separation, a sudden meeting might
lead to bitter words.

Clare therefore thought it would be best to pre-
pare Tess and her family by sending a line to Marlott
announcing his retm-n, and his hope that she was still
living with them there, as he had arranged for her
to do when he left England. He despatched the
inquiry that very day, and before the week was out
there came a short reply from Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld which
did not remove his embarrassment, for it bore no
address, though to his surprise it was not written
from Marlott.

SIR—J write these few linestosay thatm Daughterisewsyfrom
meetpramhandjamnotmwheushe ' return,buthillletyw
lmowasSoonasshedo. JdonntfeeletlibertytotellyouWhereshe
istemperly hiding. Jehouldsay thatmeend Family have left
MarlottﬁorsuneTime—Youm, Dmsrmn.

ItwassucharelieftoClaretoleamthatTesswas
at least apparently well that her mother's stiﬁ reticence
as to her whereabouts did not long distress him. They
were all angry with him, evidently. He would wait
till Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld could inform him of Tess’s return,
which her letter implied to be soon. He deserved no
more. His had been a love ‘which alters when it
alteration ﬁnds.’ He had undergone some strange
experiences in his absence; he had seen the virtual
Faustina in the literal Cornelia, a spiritual Lucretia in
a. corporeal Phryne; he had thought of the woman
taken and set in the midst as one deserving to be

472

 

 

FULFILMENT

stoned, and of the wife of Uriah being made a queen;
and he had asked himself why he had not judged Tess
constructively rather than biographically, by the will
rather than by the deed?

A day or two passed while he waited at his father’s
house for the promised second note from Joan Durbey-
ﬁeld, and indirectly to recover a little more strength.
The strength showed signs of coming back, but there
was no sign of Joan’s letter. Then he hunted up the
old letter sent on to him in Brazil, which Tess had
written from Flinteomb—Ash, and reread it. The
sentences touched him now as much as when he had

ﬁrst perused them.

Inmstcrytoyminmyhuuble—Ihavenooneelse....Ithinkl
mustdieifymdomtmemwtellmetommetoyou....Pleese,
pleasenottobejust;onlynlittleldndwmel...Ifyouwouldoomel
coulddieinyouraims! Iwmﬂdbewellcontaitmdothatifsobeymhad
forgivmmel...Ifyouwillsendmeonelittlelineandsay,lamcoming
:0M,Iwiustayon,Angd,Osocheei’h1ul...Thinkhowitdohurt
myheartnottoseeymever,everl Ah,’ Icmxldonlymakeyourdear
heartacheonelittleminuteofeachdayasminedoeseva'ydayandal!
day long, it might lead you toshow pity to your pom-lonely one. . . .
Iwouldbecontent,ay,glnd,tolivewithyouasyourservant,iflmay
notasyourwife;sothat1emldonlybenmryou,andgetglimpsesof
you,andthinko£ymasmine....Ilongforonlyone ’ inheaven,
orearﬂi,orunderﬂieeerth,mmeetyou,myowndeerl tome,
cmnetome,andsavemefromwhetthnatensme.

Clare determined that he would no longer believe
in her more recent and severer regard of him; but
would go and ﬁnd h immediately. He asked his
father if she had app 'ed for any money during his
absence. His father returned a negative, and then for
the ﬁrst time it occurred to Angel that her pride had
stood in her way, and that she had suffered privation.
From his remarks his parents now gathered the real
reason of the separation; and their Christianity was
such that, reprobates being their especial care, the
tenderness towards Tess which her blood, her sim-
plicity, even her poverty, had not engendered, was
instantly excited by her sin.

Whilst he was hastily packing together a few

473

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

articles for his journey he glanced over a poor plain
missive also lately come to hand—the one from Marian
and In Huett, beginning——

‘HONOUR’D SIR—Look to your wife if you do love
her as much as she do you,’ and signed, ‘Fnou Two
WELL-Wxsnnsl

LIV

IN a quarter of an hour Clare was leaving the house,
whence his mother watched his thin ﬁgure as it dis-
appeared into the street. He had declined to borrow
his father's old mare, well knowing of its necessity to
the household. He went to the inn, where he hired a.
trap, and could hardly wait during the harnessing. In
a very few minutes after he was driving up the hill
out of the town which, three or four months earlier in
the year, Tess had descended with such hopes and
ascended with such shattered purposes.

Benvill Lane soon stretched before him, its hedges
and trees purple with buds; but he was looking at
other things. and only recalled himself to the scene
suﬂieiently to enable him to keep the way. In some-
thing less than an hour-and-a-half he had skirted the
south of the King’s-Hintock estates and ascended to
the untoward solitude of Cross-in—Hand, the unholy
stone whereon Tess had been compelled by Alec
d’Urberville, in his whim of reformation, to swear the
strange oath that she would never wilftu tempt him
again. The pale and blasted nettle-stems of the pre-
ceding-year even now lingered nakedly in the banks,
young green nettles of the present spring growing
from their roots.

Thence he went along the verge of the upland over-
hanging the other Hintocks, and, turning to the right,
plunged into the bracing calcareous region of Flint-
comb—Ash, the address from which she had written
to him in one of the letters, and which he supposed to
be the place of sojourn referred to by her mother.
Here, of course, he did not ﬁnd her; and what added

475

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

to his depression was the discovery that no ‘ Mrs.
Clare’ had ever been heard of by the cottagers or by
the farmer himself, though Tess was remembered well
enough by her Christian name. His name she had
obviously never used during their separation, and her
digniﬁed sense of their total severance was shown not
much less by this abstention than by the hardships
she had chosen to undergo (of which he now learnt for
thedﬁérst time) rather than apply to his father for more
un .

From this place they told him Tess Durbeyﬁeld had
gone, without due notice, to the home of her parents
on the other side of Blackmoor, and it therefore be-
came necessary to ﬁnd Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld. She had
told him she was not now at Marlott, but had been
curiously reticent as to her actual address, and the
only course was to go to Marlott and inquire for it.
The farmer who had been so churlish with Tess was
quite smooth-tongued to Clare, and lent him a horse
and man to drive him towards Marlott, the gig he had
arrived in being sent back to Emminster; for the limit
of a day’s journey with that horse was reached.

Clare would not accept the loan of the farmer’s
vehicle for a further distance than to the outskirts of
the Vale, and, sending it back with the man who had
driven him, he put up at an inn, and next day entered
on foot the region wherein was the spot of his dear
Tess’s birth. It was as yet too early in the year for
much colour to appear in the gardens and foliage; the
so-called spring was but winter overlaid with a thin
coat of greenness, and it was of a. parcel with his
expectations.

The house in which Tess had passed the years of her
childhood was now inhabited by another family who
had never known her. The new residents were in the
garden, taking as much interest in their own doings as
if the homestead had never passed its primal time in
conjunction with the histories of others, beside which
(to him) the histories of these were but as ‘a tale told

476

 

FULFILMENT

by an idiot.’ They walked about the garden-paths
with thoughts of their own concerns entirely upper-
most, bringing their actions at every moment into
jarring collision with the dim ghosts behind them,
talking as though the time when Tess lived there were

i not one whit intenser in story than now. Even the
spring birds sang over their heads as if they thought
there was nobody missing in particular.

On inquiry of these precious innocents, to whom
even the name of their predecessors was a failing
memory, Clare learned that John Durbeyﬁeld was
dead; that his widow and children had left Marlott,
declaring that they were going to live at Kingsbere,
but instead of doing so had gone on to another place
they mentioned. By this time Clare abhorred the
house for ceasing to contain Tess, and hastened away
from its hated presence without once looking back.

His way was by the ﬁeld in which he had ﬁrst
beheld her at the dance. It was as bad as the house
—even worse. He passed on through the churchyard,
where, amongst the new headstones, he saw one of a
somewhat superior design to the rest. The inscrip-
tion ran thus:

In memory of John Durbeyﬁeld, ri tly d’Urberville, of the once

ulfamilyofthatName,and‘ Descmdantthroughan

ustrious Line fran Sir Pagan d’Urberville, one of the Knighb ofthe
Conqueror. Died March xoth, 18—— .
How mm m Mmm Faun.

Some man, apparently the sexton, had observed
Clare standing there, and drew nigh. ‘Ah, sir, now
that’s a man who didn’t want to lie here, but wished
to be carried to Kingsbere, where his ancestors be.’

‘And why didn’t they respect his wish?’

‘Oh—no money. Bless your soul, sir, why—there,
I wouldn't wish to say it everywhere, but—even this
headstone, for all the ﬂourish wrote upon 'en, is not
paid for.’

‘Ah, who put it up?’

The man told the name of a mason in the village,

477

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

and, on leaving the churchyard, Clare called at the
mason's house. He found that the statement was
true, and paid the bill. This done, he turned in the
direction of the migran .

The distance was too long for a walk, but Clare felt
such a strong desire for isolation that at ﬁrst he would -
neither hire a conveyance nor go to a circuitous line of
railway by which he might eventually reach the place.
At Shaston, however, he found he must hire; but the
way was such that he did not enter Joan’s place till
about seven o’clock in the evening, having traversed a
distance of over twenty miles since leaving Marlott.

The village being small, he had little difﬁculty in
ﬁnding Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld’s tenement, which was a.
house in a walled garden, remote from the main road,
where she had stowed away her clumsy old furniture as
best she could. .It was plain that for some reason or
other she had not wished him to visit her, and he felt
his call to be somewhat of an intrusion. She came to
the door herself, and the light from the evening sky
fell upon her face.

This was the ﬁrst time that Clare had ever met
her, but he was too preoccupied to observe more than
that she was still a handsome woman, in the garb of a
respectable widow. He was obliged to explain that
he was Tess’s husband, and his object in coming there,
and he did it awkwardly enough. ‘I want to see her
at once,’ he added. ‘You said you would write to me
again, but you have not done so.’

‘Because she’ve not come home,’ said Joan.

‘Do you know if she is well?’

‘I don't. But you ought to, sir,’ said she.

‘I admit it. Where is she staying?’

From the beginning of the interview Joan had dis-
closed her embarrassment by keeping her hand to the
side of her cheek.

‘I—don't know exactly where she is staying,’ she
answered. ‘She was—~but—’

‘Where was she?’

478

 

FULFILMENT

‘Well. she is not there now.’

In her evasiveness she paused again, and the
younger children had by this time crept to the door,
where, pulling at his mother's skirts, the youngest
murmured—

‘Is this the gentleman who is going to marry Tess?’

‘He has married her,’ Joan whispered. ‘Go inside.’

Clare saw her eﬂorts for reticence, and asked——

‘Do you think Tess would wish me to try and ﬁnd
her? If not, of course—’

‘I don't think she would.’

‘Are you sure?’

‘I am sure she wouldn't.’

He was turning away; and then he thought of
Tess’s tender letter.

‘I am sure she would!’ he retorted passionately.
‘I know her better than you do.’

‘That’s very likely, sir; for I have never really
known her.’

‘Please tell me her address, Mrs. Durbeyﬁeld, in
kindness to a. lonely wretched man!’

Tess's mother again restlesst swept her cheek with
her vertical hand, and seeing that he suffered, she
at last said, in a low voice—

‘She is at Sandbourne.’

‘Ah—where there? Sandbourne has become a
large place, they say.’

‘I don’t know more particularly than I have said—
Sandbourne. For myself, I was never there.’

It was apparent that Joan spoke the truth in this,
and he pressed her no further.

‘Are you in want of anything?’ he said gently.

f ‘No, sir,’ she replied. ‘We are fairly well provided
or.’

Without entering the house Clare turned away.
There was a station three miles ahead, and paying off
his ooachman, he walked thither. The last train to
Sandbourne left shortly after, and it bore Clare on its
wheels.

479

LV

Ar eleven o'clock that night, having secured a bed at
one of the hotels and telegraphed his address to his
father immediately on his arrival, he walked out into
the streets of Sandbourne. It was too late to call on
or inquire for any one, and he reluctantly postponed
his purpose till the. morning. But he could not retire
to rest just yet.

This fashionable watering-place, with its eastern
and its western stations, its piers, its groves of pines,
its promenades, and its covered gardens, was, to Angel
Clare, like a fairy place suddenly created by the stroke
of a wand, and allowed to get a little dusty. An out—
lying eastern tract of the enormous Egdon Waste was
close at hand, yet on the very verge of that tawny piece
of antiquity such a glittering novelty as this pleasure
city had chosen to spring up. Within the space of
a mile from its outskirts every irregularity of the soil
was prehistoric, every channel an undisturbed British
trackway; not a sod having been turned there since
the days of the Caesars. Yet the exotic had grown here
suddenly as the prophet's gourd; and had drawn hither
Tess.

By the midnight lamps he went up and down the
winding ways of this new world in an old one, and
could discern between the trees and against the stars
the lofty roofs, chimneys, gazebos, and towers of the
numerous fanciful residences of which the place was
composed. It was a city of detached mansions; a
Mediterranean lounging-place on the English Channel;
and as seen now by night it seemed even more im~
posing than it was.

480

FULFILMENT

The sea was near at hand, but not intrusive; it
murmured, and he thought it was the pines; the pines
murmured in precisely the same tones, and he thought
they were the sea.

Where could Tess possibly be, a cottage-girl, his
young wife, amidst all this wealth and fashion? The
more he pondered the more was he puzzled. Were
there any cows to milk here? There certainly were
no ﬁelds to till. She was most probably engaged to
do something in one of these large houses; and he
sauntered along, looking at the chamber-windows and
their lights going out one by one; and wondered which
of then might be hers.

Conjecture was useless, and just after twelve o’clock
he entered and went to bed. Before putting out his
light he reread Tess's impassioned letter. Sleep,
however, he could not,—so near her, yet so far from
her—and he continually lifted the window-blind and
regarded the backs of the opposite houses, and won-
dered behind which of the sashes she reposed at that
moment.

He might almost as well have sat up all night. In
the morning he arose at seven, and shortly after went
out, taking the direction of the chief post-ofﬁce. At
the door he met an intelligent postman coming out with
letters for the morning delivery.

‘Do you know the address of a Mrs. Clare?’ asked
Angel.

The postman shook his head.

Then, remembering that she would have been likely
to continue the use of her maiden name, Clare said—

‘Or a Miss Durbeyﬁeld?’

‘Durbeyﬁeld?’

This also was strange to the postman addressed.

‘There's visitors coming and going every day, as
you know, sir,’ he said; ‘and without the name of the
house 'tis impossible to ﬁnd ’em.’

One of his comrades hastening out at that moment,
the name was repeated to him.

48:

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘I know no name of Durbeyﬁeld; but there is the
name of d’Urberville at The Herons,‘ said the second.

‘That's it!’ cried Clare, pleased to think that she
had reverted to the real pronunciation. ‘What place
is The Herons?’

‘A stylish lodging-house. ’Tis all lodging-houses
here, bless 'ee.’

Clare received directions how to ﬁnd the house,
and hastened thither, arriving with the milkman.
The Herons, though an ordinary villa, stood in its
own grounds, and was certainly the last place in which
one would have expected to ﬁnd lodgings, so private
was its appearance. If poor Tess was a servant here,
as he feared, she would go to the back door to that
milkman, and he was inclined to go thither also.
However, in his doubts he turned to the front, and
rang. e
The hour being early, the landlady herself opened
the door. Clare inquired for Teresa d’Urberville or
Durbeyﬁeld.

‘Mrs. d’Urberville?’

‘Yes.’

Tess, then, passed as a married woman, and he
felt glad, even though she had not adopted his name.

‘Will you kindly tell her that a. relative is anxious ,
to see her?’

‘It is rather early. What name shall I give, sir?’

‘Angel.’

‘Mr. Angel?’

‘No; Angel. It is my Christian name. She'll
understand.’

‘I’ll See if she is awake.’

He was shown into the front room—the dining—
room—and looked out through the spring curtains at
the little lawn, and the rhododendrons and other
shrubs upon it. Obviously her position was by no
means so bad as he had feared, and it crossed his mind
that she must somehow have claimed and sold the
jewels to attain it. He did not blame her for one

482

FULFILMENT

moment. Soon his sharpened ear detected footsteps
upon the stairs, at which his heart thumped so pain-
fully that he could hardly stand ﬁrm. ‘Dear me!
whatwillshethinkofme,soalteredaslaml’hesaid
to himself; and the door opened.

Tess appeared on the threshold—not at all as
he had expected to see her—bewilderineg other-
wise, indeed. Her great natural beauty was. if not
heightened, rendered more obvious by her attire. She
was loosely wrapped in a cashmere dressing-gown of
grey-white, embroidered in half-mourning tints, and
she wore slippers of the same hue. Her neck rose
out of a frill of down, and her well-remembered cable
of dark—brown hair was partially coiled up in a mass
at the back of her head and partly hanging on her
shoulder—the evident result of haste.

He had held out his arms, but they had fallen again
to his side; for she had not come forward, remain-
ing still in the opening of the doorway. Mere yellow
skeleton that he was now he felt the contrast between
them, and thought his appearance distasteful to her.

‘Tess!’ he said huskily, ‘can you forgive me for
going away? Can’t you—come to me? How do
you get to be—like this?’

‘It is too late,’ said she, her voice sounding hard
through the room, her eyes shining unilaterally.

‘I did not think rightly of you—I did not see you
as you were!’ he continued to plead. ‘I have learnt
to since, dearest Tessy mine!’

‘Too late, too late!' she said, waving her hand in
the impatience of a person whose tortures cause every
instant to seem an hour. ‘Don't come close to me,
Angel! No—you must not. Keep away.’

‘But don’t you love me, my dear wife, because I
have been so pulled down by illness? You are not so
ﬁckle—I am come on purpose for you—my mother
and father will welcome you now!’

‘Yes—O, yes, yes! But I say, I say it is too late.’

She seemed to feel like a fugitive in a dream, who

483

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

tries to move away, but cannot. ‘Don’t you know
all—don’t you know it? Yet how do you come here
if you do not know?’

‘I inquired here and there, and I found the way.’

‘I waited and waited for you,’ she Went on, her
tones suddenly resuming their old ﬁuty pathos. ‘But
you did not come! And I wrote to you, and you did
not come! He kept on saying you would never come
any more, and that I was a foolish woman. He was
very kind to me, and to mother, and to all of us after
father's death. He-———’

‘1 don’t understand.’

‘He has won me back to him.’

Clare looked at her keenly, then, gathering her
meaning, ﬂagged like one plague-stricken, and his
glance sank; it fell on her bands, which, once rosy,
were now white and more delicate.

She continued—

‘He is upstairs. I hate him now, because he told
me a lie—that you would not come again; and you
have come! These clothes are what he's put upon
me: I didn’t care what he did wi’ me! But—will you.
go away, Angel, please, and never come any more?’

They stood ﬁxed, their baﬂied hearts looking out of
their eyes with a joylessness pitiful to see. Both seemed
to implore something to shelter them from reality.

, ‘Ah—it is my fault !' said Clare.

But he could not get on. Speech was as inex-
pressive as silence. But he had a vague conscious-
ness of one thing, though it was not clear to him till
later; that his original Tess had spiritually ceased to
recognize the body before him as hers—allowing it to
drift, like a corpse upon the current, in a direction
dissociated from its living will.

A few instants passed, and he found that Tess was
gone. His face grew colder and more shrunken as he
stood concentrated on the moment, and a. minute or
two after he found himself in the street, walking along
he did not know whither.

484

LVI

Mas. Bnooxs, the lady who was the householder at
The Herons, and owner of all the handsome furniture,
was not a person of an unusually curious turn of mind.
She was too deeply materialized, poor woman, by her
long and enforced bondage to that arithmetical demon
Proﬁt-and-Loss, to retain much curiosity for its own
sake. and apart from possible lodgers’ pockets. N ever-
theless, the visit of Angel Clare to her well-paying
tenants, Mr. and Mrs. d'Urberville, as she deemed
them, was sufficiently exceptional in point of time and
manner to reinvigorate the feminine proclivity which
had been stiﬂed down as useless save in its hearings
on the letting trade.

Tess had spoken to her husband from the doorway,
without entering the dining-room, and Mrs. Brooks,
who stood within the partly closed door of her owr
sitting-mom at the back of the passage, could hear
fragments of the conversation—if conversation it could
be called—between those two wretched souls. She
heard Tess reascend the stairs to the ﬁrst ﬂoor, and
the departure of Clare, and the closing of the front
door behind him. Then the door of the room above
was shut. and Mrs. Brooks knew that Tess had re-
entered her apartment. As the young lady was not
fully dressed, Mrs. Brooks knew that she would not
emerge again for some time.

She accordingly ascended the stairs softly, and
stood at the door of the front room—a drawing-room,
connected with the room immediately behind it (which
was a bedroom) by folding-doors in the common

manner. This ﬁrst ﬂoor, containing Mrs. Brooks’s
485

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

best apartments, had been taken by the week by the
d’Urbervilles. The back room was now in silence;
but from the drawing-room there came sounds.

All that she could at ﬁrst of them was
one syllable, continually repeated in a low note of
moaning, as if it came from a soul bound to some
Ixionian wheel—

‘O——O—O!'

Then a silence, then a heavy sigh, and again—-

‘O—O—O!’

The landlady looked through the keyhole. Only a
small space of the room inside was visible, but within
that space came a corner of the brealdast-table, which
was already spread for the meal, and also a chair
beside. Over the seat of the chair Tess's face was
bowed, her posture being a kneeling one in front of it;
her hands were clasped over her head, the skirts of her
dressing-gown and the embroidery of her night-gown
ﬂowed upon the ﬂoor behind her, and her stockingless
feet, from which the slippers had fallen, protruded
upon the carpet. It was from her lips that came the
murmur of unspeakable despair.

Then a man’s voice from the adjoining bedroom—

‘What’s the matter?’

She did not answer, but went on, in a tone which
was a soliloquy rather than an exclamation, and a
dirge rather than a soliloquy. Mrs. Brools could only

catch a. portion:
‘And then my dear, dear husband came home to
me...andIdidnotknowit!. ..Andyouhad

used your cruel persuasion upon me . . . you did not
stop using it—no—you did not stop! My little sisters
and brothers and my mother's needs—they were the
things you moved me by . . . and you said my husband
would never come back—never; and you taunted me,
and said what a simpleton I was to expect him! . . .
And at last I believed you and gave way! . . . And
then he came back! Now he is gone. Gone a second
time, and I have lost him now for ever . . . and he
486

FULFILMENT

will not love me the littlest bit ever any more—only
hate me! . . . 0 yes, I have lost him now-again
because of-you!’ In writhing, with her head on the
chair, she turned her face towards the door, and Mrs.
Brooks could see the pain upon it; and that her lips
were bleeding from the clench of her teeth upon them,
and that the long lashes of her closed eyes stuck in wet
tags to her cheeks. She continued: ‘And he is dying
—healooksasifheisdying!.. .Andmysinwillkill
him and not kill me! . . . 0, you have torn my life
alltopieces.. .mademebewhatlprayedyouin
pity not to make me be again! . . . My own true
husband will never, never—O God—I can’t bear this!
——I cannot!’

There were more and sharper words from the man;
then a sudden rustle; she had sprung to her feet.
Mrs. Brooks, thinking that the speaker was coming to
rush out of the door, hastily retreated down the stairs.

She need not have done so, however, for the door
of the sitting-room was not opened. But Mrs. Brooks
felt it unsafe to watch on the landing again, and
entered her own parlour below.

She could hear nothing through the ﬂoor, although
she listened intently, and thereupon went to the
kitchen to ﬁnish her interrupted breakfast. Coming
up presently to the front room on the ground ﬂoor she
took up some sewing, waiting for her lodgers to ring
that she might take away the breakfast, which she '
meant to do herself, to discover what was the matter if
possible. Overhead, as she sat, she could now hear
the ﬂoor-boards slightly creak, as if some one were
walking about, and presently the movement was ex-
plained by the rustle of garments against the banistersn
the opening and the closing of the front door, and the
form of Te$ passing to the gate on her way into the
street. She was fully dressed now in the walking—
costume of a well-to-do young lady in which she had
arrived, with the sole addition that over her hat and
black feathers a veil was drawn.

487

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Mrs. Brooks had not been able to catch any word
of farewell, temporary or otherwise, between her
tenants at the door above. They might have quarrel-
led, or Mr. d'Urberville might still be asleep, for he
was not an early riser.

She went into the back room which was more
especially her own apartment, and continued her sew—
ing there. The lady lodger did not return, nor did the
gentleman ring his bell. Mrs. Brooks pondered on
the delay, and on what probable relation the visitor
who had called so early bore to the couple upstairs.
In reﬂecting she leant back in her chair.

As she did so her eyes glanced casually over the
ceiling till they were arrested by a. spot in the middle
of its white surface which she had never noticed there
before. It was about the size of a wafer when she ﬁrst
observed it, but it speedily grew as large as the palm of
her hand, and then she could perceive that it was red.
The oblong white ceiling, with this scarlet blot in the
midst, had the appearance of a gigantic ace of hearts.

Mrs. Brooks had strange qualms of misgiving.
She got upon the table, and touched the spot in the
ceiling with her ﬁngers. It was damp, and she fancied
that it was a blood stain.

Descending from the table, she left the parlour
and went upstairs, intending to enter the room over-
head, which was the bedchamber at the back of the
drawing-room. But, nerveless woman as she had now
become. she could not bring herself to attempt the
handle. She listened. The dead silence within was
broken only by a regular beat.

Drip, drip, dn'p-

Mrs. Brooks hastened downstairs, opened the front
door, and ran into the street. A man she knew, one
of the workmen ployed at an adjoining villa, was
passing by, and she begged him to come in and go
upstairs with her; she feared something had happened
to one of her lodgers. The workman assented, and
followed her to the landing.

488

FU LFILMENT

She opened the door of the drawing-room, and
stood back for him to pass in, entering herself behind
him. The room was empty; the breakfast~a sub-
stantial repast of coffee, eggs, and a cold ham~lay
spread upon the table untouched, as when she had
taken it up, excepting that the carving knife was miss-
ing. She asked the man to go through the folding-
doors into the adjoining room.

He opened the doors, entered a step or two, and
came back almost instantly with a rigid face. ‘My
good God, the gentleman in bed is dead! I think he
has been hurt with a knife—~15 lot of blood has run
down upon the ﬂoor!’

The alarm was soon given, and the house which
had lately been so quiet resounded with the tramp of
many footsteps, a surgeon among the rest. The
wound was small, but the point of the blade had
touched the heart of the victim, who lay on his back,
pale, ﬁxed, dead, as if he had scarcely moved after the
inﬂiction of the blow. In a quarter of an hour the
news that a gentleman who was a temporary visitor to
the town had been stabbed in his bed spread through
every street and villa of the popular watering-place.

LVII

MEANWHILE Angel Clare had walked automatically
along the way by which he had come, and, entering
his hotel, sat down over the breakfast, staring at
nothingness. He went on eating and drinking uncon-
sciously till on a sudden he demanded his bill; having
paid which he took his dressing-bag in his hand, the
only luggage he had brought with him, and went out.

At the moment of his departure a telegram was
handed to him—a few words from his mother, stating
that they were glad to know his address, and informing
him that his brother Cuthbert had proposed to and
been accepted by Mercy Chant.

Clare crumpled up the paper, and followed the
route to the station; reaching it, he found that there
would be no train leaving for an hour and more. He
sat down to wait, and having waited a quarter of an
hour felt that he could wait there no longer. Broken in
heart and numbed, he had nothing to hurry for; but
he wished to get out of a town which had been the
scene of such an experience, and turned to walk to the
ﬁrst station onward, and let the train pick him up
there.

The highway that he followed was open, and at a
little distance dipped into a valley, across which it
could be seen running from edge to edge. He had
traversed the greater part of this depression, and was
climbing the western acclivity, when, pausing for
breath, he unconsciously looked back." Why he did
so he could not say, but something seemed to impel
him to the act. The tape-like surface of the road

diminished in his rear as far as he could see, and as
490

FULFILMENT

he gazed a moving spot intruded on the white vacuity
of its perspective.

It was a human ﬁgure running. Clare waited,
with a dim sense that somebody was trying to over-
take him.

The form descending the incline was a woman’s,
yet so entirely was his mind blinded to the idea of his
wife’s following him that even when she came nearer
he. did not recognize her under the totally changed
attire in which he now beheld her. It was not till she
was quite close that he could believe her to be Tess.

‘I saw you—turn away from the station—just
before I got there—and I have been following you all
this way!’

She was so pale, so breathless, so quivering in
every muscle, that he did not ask her a single ques-
tion, but seizing her hand, and pulling it within his
arm, he led her along. To avoid meeting any possible
wayfarers he left the high—road, and took a footpath
under some fir-trees. When they were deep among
the moaning boughs he stopped and looked at her
inqumngly.   ' 

‘Angel.’ she said, as if waiting for this, ‘do you
know what I have been running after you for? To
tell you that I have killed him!’ A pitiful white smile
lit her face as she spoke.

‘W'hat!’ said be, thinking from the strangeness of
her manner that she was in some delirium.

‘ I have done it !—I don’t know how,’ she continued.
‘Still, I owed it to you, and to myself, Angel. I feared
long ago, when I struck him on the mouth with my
glove, that I might do it some day for the trap he set
for me in my simple youth, and his wrong to you
through me. He has come between us and ruined
us, and now he can never do it any more. I never
loved him at all, Angel, as I loved you. You know
it, don’t you? You believe it? You didn’t come back
mme,andeasobligedtogobaektohim. Whydid
you go away—why did you—when I loved you so?

491

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

I can’t think why you did it. But I don’t blame you;
only, Angel, will you forgive me my sin against you,
now I have killed him? I thought as I ran along that
you would be sure to forgive me now I have done
that. It came to me as a shining light that I should
get you back that way. I could not bear the loss of
you any longer—you don’t know how entirely I was
unable to bear your not loving me! Say you do now,
dear, dear husband; say you do, now I have ldlledhim!’

‘I do love you, Tess—0, I do—it is all come back!’
he said, tightening his arms round her with fervid
pressure. ‘But how do you mean—you have killed
him ’

‘I mean that I have,‘ she murmured in a. reverie.

‘What, bodily? Is he dead?’

‘Yes. He heard me crying about you, and he
bitterly taunted me; and called you by a foul name;
and then I did it. My heart could not bear it. He
had nagged me about you before. And then I dressed
myself and came away to ﬁnd you.’

By degrees he was inclined to believe that she had
faintly attempted, at least, what she said she had done;
and his horror at her impulse was mixed with amaze-
ment at the strength of her affection for himself, and
at the strangeness of its quality, which had apparently
extinguished her moral sense altogether. Unable to
realize the gravity of her conduct, she seemed at last
content; and he looked at her as she lay upon his
shoulder, weeping with happiness, and wondered what
obscure strain in the d'Urberville blood had led to
this aberration—~if it were an aberration. There
momentarily ﬂashed through his mind that the family
tradition of the coach and murder might have arisen
because the d’Urbervilles had been known to do these
things. As well as his confused and excited ideas
could reason, he supposed that in the moment of mad
grief of which she spoke her mind had lost its balance,
and plunged her into this abyss.

It was very terrible if true; if a temporary hallu-

- 492

FULFILMENT

dnation, sad. But, anyhow, here was this deserted
wife of his, this passionately fond woman, clinging to
him without a suspicion that he would be anything to
her but a protector. He saw that for him to be other-
wise was not in her mind, within the region of the
possible. Tenderness was absoluwa dominant in
Clare at last. He kissed her endlessly with his white
lips, and held her hand, and said—

‘I will not desert you! I will protect you by every
means in my power, dearest love, whatever you may
have done or not have done!’

They then walked on under the trees, Tess turning
her head every now and then to look at him. Worn
and unhandsorne as he had become, it was plain that
she did not discern the least fault in his appearance.
To her he was, as of old, all that was perfection,

y and mentally. He was still her Antinous,
her Apollo even; his sickly face was beautiful as the
morning to her aﬁectionate regard on this day no less
than when she ﬁrst beheld him; for was it not the face
of the one man on earth who had loved her purely,
and who had believed in her as pure.

With an instinct as to possibilities he did not now,
as he had intended, make for the ﬁrst station beyond
the town, but plunged still farther under the ﬁrs, which
here abounded for miles. Each clasping the other
round the waist, they promenaded over the dry bed
of fir-needles, thrown into a vague intozdcating atmos-
phere at the consciousness of being together at last,
with no living soul between them; ignoring that there
was a corpse. Thus they proceeded for several miles
till Tess, arousing herself, looked about her, and said,
.timidly—

'Are we going anywhere in particular?’

‘I don‘t know, dearest. Why?’

‘I don't know.’

“Well, we might walk a few miles further, and when
it is evening ﬁnd lodgings somewhere or other—in I
lonely cottage, perhaps. Can you walk well, Tessy?’

493

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘0 yes! I could walk for ever and ever with
your arm round me!’

Upon the whole it seemed a good thing to do.
Thereupon they quickened their pace, avoiding high-
roads, and following obscure paths tending more or
less northward. But there was an unpractical vague-
ness in their movements throughout the day; neither
one of them seemed to consider any question of
effectual escape, disguise, or long concealment. Their
every idea was temporary and unforefending, like the
plans of two children.

At mid-day they drew near to a. roadside inn, and
Tess would have entered it with him to get something
to eat, but be persuaded her to remain among the
trees and bushw of this half-woodland, half-moorland
part of the country, till he should come back. Her
clothes were of recent fashion; even the ivory-handled
parasol that she carried was of a. shape unknown in
the retired spot to which they had now wandered; and
the out of such articles would have attracted attention
in the settle of a. tavern. He soon returned, with food
enough for half-a-dozen people and two bottles of wine
-—enough to last them for a. day or more, should any
emergency arise.

They set down upon some dead boughs and shared
their meal. Between one and two o’clock they packed
up the remainder and went on again.

Sh‘I feel strong enough to walk any distance,’ said

e.

‘I thinkwemayaswellsteerinageneralway
towards the interior of the country, where we can hide
for a time, and are less likely to be looked for than
anywhere near the coast,’ Clare remarked. ‘Later on,
whenI they have forgotten us, we can make for some

She made no reply to this beyond that of grasping
him more tightly, and straight inland they went.
Though the season was an English May, the weather-
was serenely bright, and during the afternoon it was

494

 

FULFILMENT

quite warm. Through the latter miles of their walk
their footpath had taken them into the depths of the
New Forest, and towards evening, turning the corner
of a lane, they perceived behind a brook and bridge
a large board on which was painted in white letters,
‘This desirable Mansion to be Let Furnished';
particulars following, with directions to apply to some
London agents. Passing through the gate they could
see the house, an old brick building of regular design
and large accommodation.

‘1 know it,’ said Clare. ‘It is Bramshurst Court.
You can see that it is shut up, and grass is growing
on the drive.’

‘Some of the windows are open,’ said Tess.

‘Just to air the rooms, I suppose.’

‘All these rooms empty, and we without a roof to
our heads!’

‘You are getting tired, my Tess!’ he said. ‘We’ll
stop soon.‘ And kissing her sad mouth, he again led
her onwards.

He was growing weary likewise, for they had
wanderedadozenorﬁfteenmiles,anditbecame
necessary to consider what they should do for rest.
They looked from afar at isolated cottages and little
inns, and were inclined to approach one of the latter,
when their hearts failed them, and they sheered 03.
At length their gait dragged, and they stood still.

‘Could we sleep under the trees?’ she asked.

He thought the season insuﬂiciently advanced.

‘I have been thinking of that empty mansion we
passed,’ he said. ‘Let us go back towards it again.‘

They retraeed their steps, but it was half-an-hour
before they stood without the entrance-gate as earlier.
He then requested her to stay where she was, whilst
he went to see who was within.

She sat down among the bushes within the gate,
and Clare crept towards the house. His absence
lasted some considerable time, and when he returned
Tess was wildly anxious, not for herself, but for him.

495

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

He had found out from a boy that there was only one
old woman in charge as caretaker, and she only came
there on ﬁne days, from the hamlet near, to open and
shut the windows. She would come to shut them at
sunset. ‘Now, we can get in through one of the
lower windows, and test there,’ said he.

Under his escort she went tardily forward to the
main front, whose shuttered windows, like sightless
eyeballs, excluded the possibility of watchers. The
door was reached a few steps further, and one of the
windows beside it was open. Clare clambered in,
and pulled Tess in after him.

Except the hall the rooms were all in darkness,
and they ascended the staircase. Up here also the
shutters were tightly closed, the ventilation being
perfunctorin done, for this day at least, by opening
the hall-window in front and an upper window behind.
Clare unlatched the door of a large chamber, felt his
way across it, and parted the shutters to the width of
two or three inches. A shaft of dazzling sunlight
glanced into the room, revealing heavy, old-fashioned
furniture, crimson damask hangings, and an enormous
four-post bedstead, along the head of which Were
carved running ﬁgures, apparently Atalanta’s race.

‘Rest at lastl' said he, setting down his bag and
the parcel of viands.

They remained in great quietness till the caretaker
should have come to shut the windows: as a pre-
caution, putting themselves in total darkness by
barring the shutters as before, lest the woman should
openthedooroftheirchamberforanycasualreason
Between six and seven o’clock she came, but did noi
approach the wing they were in. They heard he
close the windows, fasten them, lock the door, and go
away. Then Clare again stole a chink of light from
the window, and they shared another meal, till by-
and-by they Were enveloped in the shades of night
which they had no candle to disperse.

496

 

LVIII

THE night was strangely solemn and still. In the
small hours she whispered to him the whole story of
how he had walked in his sleep with her in his arms
across the Froom stream, at the imminent risk of both
their lives, and laid her down in the stone ooﬂin at
the ruined abbey. He had never known of that
till now.

‘Why didn't you tell me next day?’ he said. ‘It
might have prevented much misunderstanding and
woe '

‘Don’t think of what’s past!’ said she. ‘I am not
going to think outside of now. Why should we!
Who lmows what to-morrow has in store?’

But it apparently had no sorrow. The morning
was wet and foggy, and Clare, rightly informed that
the caretaker only opened the windows on ﬁne days,
ventured to creep out of their chamber, and explore
the house, leaving Tess asleep. There was no food
on the premises, but there was water, and he took
advantage of the fog to emerge from the mansion, and
fetch tea, bread, and butter from a shop in a. little
place two miles beyond, as also a small tin kettle and
spirit-lamp, that they might get ﬁre without smoke.
His re-entry awoke her; and they breakfasted on
what he had brought.

They were indisposed to stir abroad, and the day
passed, and the night following, and the next, and
next; till. almost without their being aware, ﬁve days
had slipped by in absolute seclusion, not a sight or
sound of a human disturbing their peacefulness,
such as it was. The changes of the weather were

‘91

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

their only events, the birds of the New Forest their
only company. By tacit consent they hardly once
spoke of any incident of the past subsequent to their
wedding-day. The gloomy intervening time seemed
to sink into chaos, over which the present and prior
times closed as if it never had been. Whenever he
suggested that they should leave their shelter, and
go forwards towards Southampton or LOndon, she
showed a strange unwillingness to move.

‘Why should we put an end to all that’s sweet and
lovely!’ she deprecated. ‘What must come will come.’
And, looking through the shutter - Chink: ‘All is
trouble outside there; inside here content.’

He peeped out also. It was quite true; within was
aﬁection, union, error forgiven: outside was the inex-
orable.

‘And-—-and,’ she said, pressing her check against
his; ‘I fear that what you think of me now may not
last. I do not wish to outlive your present feeling
for me. I would rather not. I would rather be dead
and buried when the time comes for you to despise
me, so that it may never be known to me that you
despised me.’

‘I cannot ever despise you.

‘I also hope that. But considering what my life
has been I cannot see why any man should, sooner or
later, be able to help despising me. . . . How wickedly
mad I was! Yet formerly I never could bear to hurt
a ﬂy or a worm, and the sight of a bird in a cage used
often to make me cry.’

They remained yet another day. In the night the
dull sky cleared, and the result was that the old care-
taker at the cottage awoke early. The brilliant sun-
rise made her unusually brisk; she decided to open
the contiguous mansion immediately, and to air it
thoroughly on such a. day. Thus it occurred that,
having arrived and opened the lower rooms before
six o'clock, she ascended to the bedchambers, and
was about to turn the handle of the one wherein they

498

FULFILMEN T

lay. At that moment she fancied she could hear the
breathing of persons within. Her slippers and her
antiquity had rendered her progress a noiseless one so
far, and she made for instant retreat; then, deeming
that her hearing might have deceived her, she turned
anew to the door and softly tried the handle. The
lock was out of order, but a piece of furniture had
been moved forward on the inside, which prevented
her opening the door more than an inch or two. A
stream of morning light through the shutter-Chink fell
upon the faces of the pair, wrapped in profound
slumber, Tess’s lips being parted like a half-opened
ﬂower near his cheek. The caretaker was so struck
with their innocent appearance, and with the novelty
of Tess’s gown hanging across a chair, her silk stock-
ings beside it, the pretty parasol, and the other habits
in which she had arrived because she had none else,
that her ﬁrst indignation at the eifrontery of tramps
and vagabonds gave way to a. momentary senti-
mentality over this genteel elopement, as it seemed.
She closed the door, and withdrew as softly as she had
come, to go and consult with her neighbours on the
odd discovery.

Not more than a minute had elapsed after her
withdrawal when Tess woke. and then Clare. Both
had a sense that something had disturbed them,
though they could not say what; and the uneasy
feeling which it engendered grew stronger. As soon
as he was dressed he narrowly scanned the lawn
through the two or three inches of shutter-Chink.

‘I think we will leave at once,‘ said he. ‘It is a
ﬁne day. And I cannot help fancying somebody is
about the house. At any rate, the woman will be sure
to come to-day.’ .

She passively assented, and, putting the room in
order, they took up the few articles that belonged to
them, and departed noiselessly. When they had
got into the Forest She turned to take a last look at
the house.

499

TESS OF THE D’URBERVILLES

‘Ah, happy house—good-bye!’ she said. ‘My life
can only be a question of a few weeks. Why should
we not have stayed there?’

‘Don’t say it, Tess! We shall soon get out of this
district altogether. We'll continue our course as we’ve
begun it, and keep straight north. Nobody will think
of looking for us there. We shall be looked for at the
Wessex ports if we are sought at all. When we are
in the North we will get to a port and away.’

Having thus persuaded her, the plan was pursued,
and they kept a bee-line northward. Their long re-
pose at the manor—house lent them walking power
now; and towards mid-day they found that they were
approaching the steepled city of Meldiester, which lay
directly in their way. He decided to rest her in a
clump of trees during the afternoon, and push onward
under cover of darkness. At dusk Clare purchased
food as usual, and their night march began, the
boundary between Upper and Mid-Wessex being
crossed about eight o'clock.

To walk across country without much regard to
roads was not new to Tess, and she showed her old
agility in the performance. The intercepting city,
ancient Melchester, they were obliged to pass through
in order to take advantage of the town bridge for
crossing a large river that obstructed them. It was
about midnight when they went along the deserted
streets, lighted ﬁtfully by the few lamps, keeping oﬁ
the pavement that it might not echo their footsteps.
The graceful pile of cathedral architecture rose dimly
on their left hand, but it was lost upon them now.
Once out of the town, they followed the turnpike-road,
which after a few miles plunged across an open plain.

Though the sky was dense with cloud, a diﬁused
light from some fragment of a moon had hitherto
helped them a little. But the moon had now sunk,
the clouds seemed to settle almost on their heads, and
the night grew as dark as a caVe. However, they
found their way along, keeping as much on the turf as

500

FULFILMENT

possible that their tread might not resound, which it
was easy to do, there being no hedge or fence of any
kind. All around was open loneliness and black
solitude, over which a stiﬁ breeze blew.

They had proceeded thus gropineg two or three
miles further when onasudden Clare became conscious
of some vast erection close in his front, rising sheer
from the grass. They had almost struck themselves
against it.

‘What monstrous place is this?’ said Angel.

‘It hums,’ said she. ‘Hearken!’

He listened. The wind, playing upon the ediﬁce,
produced a booming tune, like the note of some
gigantic one-stringed harp. No other sound came
from it, and lifting his hand and advancing a step or
two, Clare felt the vertical surface of the structure. It
seemed to be of solid stone, without joint or moulding.
Carrying his ﬁngers onward, he found that what he
had come in contact with was a colossal rectangular
pillar; by stretching out his left hand he could feel a.
similar one adjoining. At an indeﬁnite height over-
head something made the black sky blacker, which
had the semblance of a. vast architrave uniting the
pillars horizontally. They careftu entered beneath
and between; the surfaces echoed their soft rustle;
but they seemed to be still out-of-doors. The place
was rooﬂess. Tess drew her breath fearfully, and
Angel, perplexed, said——

‘What can it be?’

Feeling sideways, they encountered another tower-
like pillar, square and uncompromising as the ﬁrst;
beyond it another and another. The place was all
doors and pillars, some connected above by continuous
architraves.

‘A very Temple of the Winds,’ he said.

The next pillar was isolated; others composed a
trilithon; others were prostrate, their ﬂanks forming a
causeway wide enough for a carriage; and it was soon
obvious that they made up a forest of monoliths

sOI

TESS OF THE D'URBERV'ILLES

grouped upon the grassy expanse of the plain. The
couple advanced further into this pavilion of the night
till they stood in its midst.

‘It is Stonehenge!’ said Clare.

‘The heathen temple, you mean?’

‘Yes. Older than the centuries; older than the
d’Urbervilles. Well, what shall we do, darling? We
may ﬁnd shelter further on.’

But Tess, really tired by this time, ﬂung herself
upon an oblong slab that lay close at hand, and was
sheltered from the wind by a pillar. Owing to the
action of the sun during the preceding day, the stone
was warm and dry, in comforting contrast to the
rough and chill grass around, which had damped her
skirts and shoes.

‘I don't want to go any further, Angel,’ she said,
stretching out her hand for his. ‘ Can't we bide here ?'

‘I fear not. This spot is visible for miles by day,
although it does not seem so now.’

‘One of my mother’s people was a shepherd here-
abouts, now I think of it. And you used to say at
Talbothays that I was a heathen. So now I am at
home.’

He knelt down beside her outstretched form, and
put his lips upon hers.

‘Sleepy, are you, dear? I think you are lying on
an altar.’

‘I like very much to be here,’ she murmured. ‘It
is so solemn and lonely—after my great happiness—
with nothing but the sky above my face. It seems as
if there were no folk in the world but we two; and I
wish there were not—except ’Liza-Lu.’

Clare thought she might as well rest here till it
should get a. little lighter, and he ﬂung his overcoat
upon her, and sat down by her side.

‘Angel, if anything happens to me, will you watch
over ’Liza-Lu for my sake?’ she asked, when they had
listene'gua’long time to the wind among the pillars.

so:

FULFILMENT

‘She is so good and simple and pure. 0, Angel
—-I wish you would marry her if you lose me, as you
will do shortly. 0, if you would!’

‘If I lose you I lose all! And she is my sister-in-
law.’ -

‘ at’s nothing, dearest. People marry sister-IaWr
continually about Marlott; and ’Liza—Lu is so gentle
and sweet, and she is growing so beautiful. 0 I could
share you with her willingly when we are spin'ts! If
you would train her and teach her, Angel, and bring
her up for your own self! . . . She has all the best of
me without the bad of me; and if she were to become
yours it would almost seem as if death had not divided
us. . . . Well, I have said it. I won’t mention it again.’

She ceased, and he fell into thought. In the far
north-east sky he could see between the pillars a level
streak of light. The uniform concavity of black cloud
was lifting bodily like the lid of a pot, letting in at the
earth's edge the coming day, against which the tower
ing monoliths and trilithons began to be blackly
deﬁned.

‘Did they sacriﬁce to God here?’ asked she.

‘No,’ said he.

‘Who to?’

‘I believe to the sun. That lofty stone set away
by itself is in the direction of the sun, which will
presently rise behind it.’

‘This reminds me, dear,‘ she said. ‘You remember
you never would interfere with any belief of mine be-
fore we were married? But I knew your mind all the
same, and I thought as you thought—not from any
reasons of my own, but because you thought so. Tell
me now, Angel, do you think we shall meet again after
we are dead? I want to know.’

He kissed her to avoid a reply at such a time.

‘0, Angel—I fear that means 1102’ said she, with
a suppressed sob. ‘And I wanted so to see you again
—so much, so much! What—not even you and I.
Angel, who love each other so well?’

503'

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

Like a greater than himself, to the critical question
at the critical time he did not answer; and they were
again silent. In a minute or two her breathing became
more regular, her clasp of his hand relaxed, and she
fell asleep. The band of silver paleness along the
east horizon made even the distant parts of the Great
Plain appear dark and near; and the whole enormous
landscape bore that impress of reserve, taeilmrnity, and
hesitation which is usual just before day. The east-
ward pillars and their architraves stood up blackly
against the light, and the great ﬂame-shaped Sun-
stone beyond them; and the Stone of Sacriﬁce mid-
way. Presently the night wind died out, and the
quivering little pools in the cup-like hollows of the
stones lay still. At the same time something seemed
to move on the verge of the dip eastward—a mere
dot. It was the head of a man approaching them
from the hollow beyond the Sun-stone. Clare wished
they had gone onward, but in the circumstances de-
cided to remain quiet. The ﬁgure came straight tow-
ards the circle of pillars in which they were.

He heard something behind him, the brush of feet.
Turning, he saw over the prostrate columns another
ﬁgure; then before he was aware, another was at hand
on the right, under a trilithon, and another on the
left. The dawn shone full on the front of the man
westward, and Clare could discern from this that he
was tall, and walked-as if trained. They all closed in
with evident purpose. Her story then was true!
Springing to his feet, he looked around for a weapon,
loose stone, means of escape, anything. By this time
the nearest man was upon him.

‘It is no use, sir,’ he said. ‘There are sixteen of
us on the Plain, and the whole country is reared.’

. ‘Let her ﬁnish her sleep!’ he implored in a whisper
of the men as they gathered round.

When they saw where she lay, which they had not
done till then, they showed no objection, and stood
watching he, as still as the pillars around. He went

504

FULFILMENT

to the stone and bent over her, holding one poor little
hand; her breathing now was quick and smell, like
that of a lesser creature than a woman. All waited in
the growing light, their faces and hands as if they were
silvered, the remainder of their ﬁgures dark, the stones
glistening green-grey, the Plain still a mass of shade.
Soon the light was strong, and a ray shone upon her
unconscious form, peering under her eyelids and wak-
ing her.

‘What is it, Angel?’ she said, starting up. ‘Have
they come for me?’

‘Yes, dearest,’ he said. ‘They have come.’

‘It is as it should be,’ she murmured. ‘Angel, I
am almost glad—yes, glad! This happiness could not
have lasted. It was too much. I have had enough;
and now I shall not live for you to despise me!’

She stood up, shook herself, and went forward.
neither of the men having moved.

'I am ready,’ she said quietly.

LIX

THE city of Wintoneester, that ﬁne old city, aforetime
capital of Wessex, lay amidst its convex and concave
downlands in all the brightness and warmth of a July
morning. The gabled brick, tile, and freestone houses
had almost dried 06 for the season their integument
of lichen, the streams in the meadows were low, and
in the sloping High Street, from the West Gateway to
the mediwval cross, and from the mediaeval cross to
the bridge, that leisurely dusting and ' was in
progress which usually ushers in an old<fashioned
market-day.

From the western gate aforesaid the highway, as
every Wintoncestrian knows, ascends a long and reg-
ular incline of the exact length of a measured mile,
leaving the houses gradually behind. Up this road
from the precincts of the city two persons were walking
rapidly, as if unconscious of the trying ascent—un-
conscious through preoccupation, and not through
buoyancy. They had emerged upon this road through
a narrow barred wicket in a high wall a little lower
down. They seemed anxious to get out of the sight
of the houses and of their kind, and this road ap-
peared to offer the quickest means of doing so. Though
they were young, they walked with bowed heads,
which gait of grief the sun's rays smiled on pitilessly.

One of the pair was Angel Clare, the other a tall
budding creature—half girl, half woman—a spirit-
ualized image of Tess, slighter than she, but with the
same beautiful eyes—Clara’s sister-in-law, ’Liza-Lu.
Theirpalefacesseemedtohaveshrunktohalftheir

natural size. They moved on hand in hand, and never
506

FULFILMENT

spoke a word, the drooping of their heads being that
of Giotto's ‘Two Apostles.’

When they had nearly reached the top of the great
West Hill the clocks in the town struck eight. Each
gave a start at the notes, and, walking onward yet a.
few steps, they reached the ﬁrst milestone. standing
whitely on the green margin of the grass, and backed
by the down, which here was open to the road. They
entered upon the turf, and, impelled by a force that
seemed to overrule their will, suddenly stood still,
turned, and waited in paralyzed suspense beside the
stone.

The prospect from this summit was almost un-
In the valley beneath lay the city they had
just left, its more prominent buildings showing as in
an isometric drawing—among them the broad cathe-
dral tower, with its Norman windows and immense
length of aisle and nave, the spires of St. Thomas’s,
the pinnacled tower of the College, and, more to the
right, the tower and gables of the ancient hospice,
where to this day the pilgrim may receive his dole of
bread and ale. Behind the city swept the rotund
upland of St. Catherine's Hill; further oﬁ, landscape
beyond landscape, till the horizon was lost in the
radiance of the sun hanging above it.

Against these far stretches of country rose, in front
of the other city ediﬁces, a large red-brick building.
with level grey roofs, and rows of short barred win-
dows bespeaking captivity, the whole contrasting
greatly by its formalism with the quaint irregularities
of the Gothic erections. It was somewhat disguised
from the road in passing it by yews and evergreen
oaks, but it was visible enough up here. The wicket
from which the pair had lately emerged was in the
wall of this structure. From the middle of the build-
ing an ugly ﬂat-topped octagonal tower ascended
ag' inst the east horizon, and viewed from this spot,
on its shady side and against the light, it seemed the
one blot on the city’s beauty. Yet it was with this

5°7

TESS OF THE D'URBERVILLES

blot, and not with the beauty, that the two gazets
were concerned.

Upon the cornice of the tower a tall staﬁ was ﬁxed.
Their eyes wa'e riveted on it. A few minutes after
the hour had struck something moved slowly up the
staﬁ, and extended itself upon the breeze. It was a
black ﬂag.

‘Justice' was done, and the President of the Im-
mortals, in Eschylean phrase, had ended his sport
with Tess. And the d’Urberville knights and dames
slept on in their tombs unknowing. The two speech-
lessgazersbentthemselvesdowntotheearth,asifin
prayer. and remained thus a long time, absolutely
motionless: the ﬂag continued to wave silently. As
soon as they had strength they arose, joined hands
again. and went on.

 

Publisher: of BOOKS and 0‘
“Alma Wm:
Elhﬂiﬁvl ah,

 

 

 

57%}: I real“

9" a my:

Stout Had

 

