" i

53 24

 

 

 

 

 

‘4':

 

\VU TH ERING HEIGHTS

AND

AG N ES GREY

POCKET EDITION
or'ru:

LIFE AND WORKS

or

CHA‘RLOTTE BRONTE

(Cukxn BELL).

AND HER SISTERS.

EMILY AND ANNE BRONTt-‘z
(ELLIS AND ACTON BELL).

In Seven Volumes. each containing a Ftonlispiece, baund‘
Half Cloth, with cut or uncut edges.

Priza n. 6d. per Volm

w

The Vdum will 65 W11! mtkly interval; in
' the following gray :—
I. JAN-l I!“ 3y Charla“: Emmi.
a. 3mm. By Chulou: Emmi.
3. mm By Charlotte Bronze.

; m nor-mam: “a row, by Clmlmze Emmi;
Pants, by he! Sisters and Faber.

mwmmmommbymmnmoe. Lama
by Anne Bronx; Will: I 1mm: and Munch of
Audwrs, by Chum: Emmi.

e. 7:. mm 01mm am Hymn-mm,
[Aﬁll
7. nu ms or canwm 330m Byun. GukelL

IJONDON: SMITH. ELDER. & ($0., :5 WATERLOO FLA)

 

[UTHERING HEIGHTS //

BY EMILY QRONTE

AND

AGNES GREY

By ANNE BRONTE'

WITH A MACS 4ND HMO!!! OF BOTH AUTHORS

By CHARLOTTE 1312mm":

LONDON .
HITH. ELDER, a; CO.. 15 WATERLOO PLACE
1889

fa~

 

CONTENTS.

PM!
APHICAL NOTICE OF ELLIS AND ACTON BILL,

v CURREI BELI- . - . . . . . . vii
an anu's menu To wumnmo HEIGHTS . xiv
IERING HEIGHTS. BY ELLIS BELI- . o a o 19

S GREY. DY ACTON Ill—I4 . . o . u 303

 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE

OF

ELLIS AND ACTON BELL.

—-«—-

T has been though: thst 1!! the works pnhliehed under the
runes d Cnrrer, Ellis, Ind Anon Bell. were, in rediey,
Ithepsndnetimtofuneperson. This mitt-he I endeaon no
\nmilybylfcvvordsof diselsimerpreﬁxedtnthethirdedition
of “In: Eyre." Thene, too, it sppesrs, failed to gsin general
cadence, snd now, an the occasion of s reprint of " Wuthedng.
Heights” snd “Agnes Grey,"l sm Idviled distinctly to state
how the use rally sands.

Indeed, I feel myself the it is time the charity mending
tho-em names—Ellis and Anon—val done sway. The little.
mystery, which formerly yielded we htrmlas plusnre, hss.
hits lure-est; drennuancu ere changed. It becomes, then,
My duty to explain brieﬂy the origin and nuthmhiy of the.
huh-rim by Cum, Ellis, 1nd Acton Bell.

i About ﬁve yesn up, my two sisters snd myue‘lf. she: s some

I “In prolonged period of upsrstion. found ourselves reunited,
H II home. Raiders: in 1 remote district, where education.
I“ nude little progress, and where, mseqnendy, there WIS no
“linemen to Seek melt! intacmnse beyond our own domestic.
“Rh-evath on annelva snd each other,
I hooks sud study, in the enan and occupations of life.

. n: higheu stimnlns, u well u the livelien pleasure we hsd
ban from :hildhood nywnrds, lay in streenpts It litany
Won; formerly we used to show each DIM! what we

i m, but of Isle ya: this hnhit of communication and cort-

u

viii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE or

snltaticn had been dismutiuued; hence it ensued, that we ‘-
mutually ignorant of the progress we might respectively hr
made.

One day, in the autumn of 184;. I accidentally lighted at
MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily's handwriting. ‘
course, I was not surprised, knowing that she could and:
write verse: I looked it mr, and something more than surpr
seiaed me,——a deep conviction that these were not comm
eEnsions, not at all like the poetry women generally write.
thought them nondenaed and tetse, vignrous and genuine, 1
my ear, they had also a peculiar musie~wild, melancholym
elevau‘ng.

My sister Emily was nut a person of demonstrative char-am
not one an the recesses of whose mind and feelings, even tho
nearest and dearest to her could, with impunity, intrude I:
licensed; it took hnurs to reconcile her to the discovery
had made, and days to persuade her that such poems merit
publication. I knew, however, that a mind like hers could n
he without some latent spark of honourable ambition, and reins
tn be discouraged in my attempt m (in that spark to ﬂame.

Meantime, my younger sister quietly produced some on
own compositions, intimating that, since Emily's had given I
pleasure, I might like to look at hers. I could not but be
partial judge, yet I thought that time verses, too, had I m
sincere pathos of their own.

We had very early cherished the drum of one day beeomi
authors. This dram, never relinquished even when distal
divided and absorbing tash occupied us, now suddenly acquit
strength and eonsirtency: it took the ehaneterol a reach
We agreed, to 1 small selection of our poems, and,
possible, get them printed. Averse to personal publicity, '
veiled our own names under those‘oi Cutter, Ellis, and Act
Bell; the ambiguous choice being dictated by a sort of a
seientious acruple at assuming Christian names positively men
line, while we did not like to declare ourselves women, heat
—without at that time suspecting that our mode of writing a
thinking was not what is called “ﬁeminine "-we had a veg
impression that authoteases are liable to he looked on w
prejudice; we had noticed howeritia sometimes use for th

ELLIS AND ACTON BELL 1x

istlsement the weapon of penonnliry, and for their rewerd, a
nery which is not true praise.
The bringing out of our little book was had work, Aswts
he expected, neither we nor bur poems were at ell wanted;
It for this we hed been prepared at the outset; thuugh in-
rperienced ourselves, we had read the experience of others.
he gm! puzzle lny in the diﬁculty of getting answer: of any
ind ﬁrm the publishers to whom we Ipplied. Being greatly
erased by this obstacle, I ventured to apply to the Mesa.
Zhamhers, of Edinburgh, for I word of advice; the] my have
the circumstance, but I have not, for from them I
eteived a brief and businessrlilre, but civil and sensible reply,
)n which we acted, and It last made a wry.

The book we: printed: it it ccucely him, and all of it that
merits to be known Ire the poems of Ellis Bell. The ﬁxed eon-
Vittion I held, and hold, of theworth of these poem his not
indeed reeeived the conﬁrmation of much invent-hie criticism;
but! must retain it notwithmnding.

him-{med toernah us: the mere eﬂ’crt to succeed had
givenawonderiul re“ to existence; it must be pursued. We
tuhnettownrhon I proceule: Elli:Bellpmduced“Wuthering
“MS,” Anon Bell “Agnes Grey,” and Cnrrer Bell also wrme
narrative in one volume. These MSS. were persevexingly oh.
Indednpon vcrlons publishers {or the space ofnyearand a half;
Bully, their fate was tn ignominiwt and nbrupt dismisul.

At last “Wuthering Heights" Ind “Agnes Grey” were
taped on terms Inmewhnt impoveriehing lo the two anthurs;
Clue: Bell's book fnnnd acceptance nawhere, nor my «know-
Hment of merit. to the: Iomething like the chill of despair
hill to invade his heart. A: t forlorn hope, he tried one
Mag house more—Messrs. Smith, Elder, at Go. Ere
“It, in 1 much shorter space than that on which experience
M Night him ho ctlcnlnte—there um: 1 letter, which he
gamed in the drary expxtstion of ﬁnding two hard hopclm
Inninde um Meters. Smith, Elder, a: Co. “were not
dupe-ed to publish the ma," and, mm, he took out of the
ﬂhhpel letter at two pages. He read it trembling. Ir de
510d, indad, w pnhlith thnt tale, for hneinue raw, but it
itinned in merits and demerinsomnewntlynoeonsidirately,

a

K BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE OF

in a spirit so rational, with e diseriminatim so enligl
this very refusal cheered the mthor better than

amused Keepm would have done. l: was ad
work in three volumes would meet with careful men

I was then just completing “ Jule Eyre,” at which
working while the nae-volume ale was plodding its v
in London: in three weeks I sent it 06'; friendly
hand: wok ix in. This was in the mmmeneementoi
1847: it came out More the dose or’ October follm
“ Wuthering Heights" end “Agnes Grey,” my sis
which had Ilreudy been in the press int months, :1
under a diﬁennt management.

They appeared It 1:51. Critics {Ailed In do them it
imnmure but very ral powers revealed in " Wutherin
were unruly recognised; it: import and mute were
stood; the identity of its luthor was misrepresented;
that thieves Ill edierand ruder encmpt of the Sim!
hud produced “ Jane Eyre.” Unjust and grievous 4
laughed ntit I! ﬁne, but I deeply hmmt it now. H1
ms: a prejudice egeinst the book. That writer
attempt to pin 00’ an inferior and immature produ
cover of one successful d’ort, must indeed be unduly
the secondary end sordid resqu of authorship, and
Mei-em no its true and honourable need. If re\
the public truly believed this, no wonder that t
derldy on the cheet.

Yet I must not be under-mod no mine these thing!
reptouh or comphint; 1 due not do so; respect fox
memory forbids me. By her my sueh queruloue in

would. hove been regarded u an unworthy and die
nets.

It is my duty, on well a my pleasure, to who
exception to the general rule of One \
(lowed with due keen vilion end ﬁne sympathies of
discerned the Dell suture of “ Wuthering Height,
with equal lunacy, noted it: beautiu end touched 0
Too often do reviewers nemind us of the mob of A
Chuldem, end Soothe-yen seduced We the “

" See the PM” for September x859.

ELLIS AID ACION BELL- :1

detail," and unable to read the characters or make known the

imputation. We have a right to rejoice when a mu seer

can st last, some nun in whom is an excellent spirit, to whom
he been given light, wisdom, and undersanding; who cut
mntely read the “Merle, Mene, Tokel, Uphusin” of In

Iiginal mind (however unripe, however ineﬂiciently cultured

Indpartially expanded tint mind my be); and who can say

v'lh conﬁdence, “ This is the interpretation ther ."

Yet even the writer to whom I allude shares the mistake about

V 1h authorship, and don me the injustice to suppose that there

In equivoque in my former teiection of this honour (as an

bum I regard it). Hey I assure him that I would scam in

dill end in every other case to dal in equivoque; I believe

'. W to hlve been given us to make our matting clear,

Indnot to wrap it in dishonest doubt.

:~' “The Tenant ofWildr'ell Hall,"hyActon Bell, hid likewise an
, lnfavnursble reception. At this I cannot wonder. The choice
1’ ofnbjeet was an entire mistake. Nothing less congruent with

'm, liewrilet‘s nntlu'e could be conceived. The motives which

:4 dialed this choice were pure, but, I think, slightly morbid.

:J She had. in the course of her life, been called on to contemplate,

n. nut-t hand, and (or a long time, the terrible ell'eetsot' talents
In; lined and faculties abused; hers was nnturally a sensitive,

ﬂawed, and dejected nature; what she saw sank very deeply
in: her mind; it did her harm. She blooded over it till she

Mined it to he I duty to reproduce every detail (of course with

“Zions characters, incidents, and situations), as a warning to

allies. She hated her work, but would pursue it. When

Mud with on the subject, she regarded such reasoning; as a

lﬁllvptatitmwself-indulgence. She must be honeat: she must

not varnish, anften. or conceal. This well-meant resolution

3 mm on her miaconetruetion, and some abuse, which the

1

 

 

but, as it we: her custom to hear whatever was unpleasant,
with mild, study patience. She wu a very sincere and
Meal Christian, but the tinge of religious melancholy nom-
llnicated a std shade to her brief, blameless life.

Neither Ellis nor Acton nllowed herself {or one moment to
ink nnrkr want of eneonngement; energy nerved the one, end
dduranee upheld the other. They were both prepared to try

‘xn niociurmcat. NOTICE or

again; I wouldfein think that hope and the sense of pnwe
yet strong within thent’. But a great change approached:
tion came in that shape which to anticipate is died: to
halt on, grief. In the very heat and burden of the day
lebonrers failed over their work.

My sister Emily ﬁrst declined. The details cfher illne:
deep-branded in my memory, but to dwell on them, eith
thought or narrative, is not in my power. Never in all ht
had she lingered over any task the! lay before hEr, and sh
not linger now. She sank rapidly. She nude haste to lea‘
Yet, while physieelly she perished, mentally the grew stn
than we had yet known her. Day by day, when I saw
whet a front she met snﬂ’ering, I looked on her with an an
of wonder and love. I have seen nothing like it; but, in
l have never seen her parallel in anything. Stronger tl
man, simpler than a child, her nature stood alone. The
point was, that while full of ruth for others, on herself sh:
no pity; the spirit was inexorable to the ﬂesh; fron
trembling bend, the unnerved limbs, the faded eyes, the
service was erected as they had rendered in health. To
by and witness this, and not dare to remonstrete, was 3 pa
words can render.

Two cruel months of hope and fear passed painfullyhy
the day came I! last when the terror: and pains of death
tobe undergone by this treasure, which had grown deare
dearer to our hearts as it wasted before our eyes. Toward
dedine of that day, we had nothing of Emily but her mar
mains as consumption left them. She died December 19,

We thought this enough: but we were utterly and pre:
tuonaly wrong. She was not hurled ete Anne fell ill. Sh
not been committed to the grave a fortnight, before we at
distinct intimation that it was necessary to prepare our 1
to see the younger sister go after the elder. Accordingl;
followed in the same path with slower step, end with 1 pa
that equalled the other‘s fortitude. I have slid that shu
religions, and it Wee by leaning on those Christian doetrit
which she ﬁrmly believed, that she found support throng
most painful ionrney. l-witnessed their eﬁeacy in her
hour and greenest trial, and must hear my testimony to th(

ELLIS AND ACTON BELL xiii

triumph with which they brought her through. She died
May :8, 1849.

What more shall I say about them? I cannot and need not
I! much more. In exeernals, they were two unobtrusive
men; a perfectly secluded life gave them retiring manners and
“its. In Emily‘s nature the extrema of vigour and simplicity
rented IBM Under an unsophisticated culture, inartiﬁcial
Maud an nnpretending outside, lay a secret power and ﬁre
knight have informed the brain and kindled the veins of a
be; but she had 'no‘wo'rldl‘y wisdbrn;'her powers were un-
Idlpted to the practical business cf life: she would fail to defend
her m manifest rights, to consult her most legitimate advantage.
An interpreter ought always to have stood between he: and the
Wild. ﬁer will was nut very ﬂexible, and it generally apposed
In interest. Her taper was nugnaninwus, but warm and
nﬂen; her spirit altogether unbending.

Anne’s character was milder and more subdued; she wanted
The power, the ﬁre, the originality of her siser, but was well
dotted with quiet virtues of her own. Lang-suﬂ'ering, self-
hying, reﬂective, and intelligent, a constitutional reserve and
Hn'tnrnity placed and irept her in the shade, and covered her
Hind, and especially her feelings, with a sort of nun-like veil,
which was rarely lifted. Neither Emily nor Anne was learned;
hybad no thought of ﬁlling their pitchers at the well-spring
0‘ other minds; they always wrote from the impulse of nature,
ﬁedictata of intuition, and from such stores of observation as
experience had enabled them to amass. I may sum
'71“ by saying, that for strangers they were nothing, for super-
Bll observers less than nothing; but for those who had known
‘‘ﬁll all their lives in the intimacy of close relatioluhip, they
“I! genuinely good and truly great.

Thinntice has been written, beeause I felt it a sacred duty
'0 wipe the dust of their gravestone, and leave their dear
Mute free from soil.

CURRER BELL.

WW :9, rlso.

EDITOR'S PREFACE

TO THE NEW EDITIOH 0|?

WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

--«-—-
"6,,
I HAVE ius: rad over “Wurhering Heights," and, {or
ﬁrst time, have obtained a. dear glimpse of what are m
(and. perhaps, really are) its faults -, have gained a deﬁniu no
o! how it appears to other people—w stronger: who k
nothing of the author; who we “acquainted with the lo:
where the scenes of the story are laid; to whom the inhabits
the customs, the natural characteristics of the outlying hill:
hamlets iu the West Riding of Yorkshire are things alien
unfamiliar.

To all such “Wuthering Heights" molt Input a rude
strange production. The wild moors of the north of Eng
can for them have no interat; the language, them
very dwellings and household customs of the scattered inhabit
of those disrricts, must he to such readers in a great mu
unintelligible, and—where intelligible—repulsive. Men
women who, perhaps naturally very calm, and with feel
moderate in degree, and little marked in kind, have been tn
from their cradle to observe the utmost evenness of manner
guardedness of language, will hardly know what to make of
rough, strong utterance, the harshly manifested passions,
unbridled aversions, and headlong partialities of unlettered 1:
land hinds and rugged moorland squires, who have grow:
untaught and unchecked, except by mentors a harsh as tl
selves. A large class of readers, likewise, will suﬂ'er grr
from the introduction into the pages of this work of w

xiv

PREFACE. XV

printed with all the‘ lease, which it has become the custom

mnynaenthythe itial andﬁnalletteronly—eblankline

ﬁlingthei'nterul. nnyaswell «ya mthgforthis
IWRBO ufntypnvwertnapologise; ‘ it,

myself, a, minus]. plan to write words It full length Th:
‘ [Incline of hinting by :ingie letters those expletives with which

plufane and violent persons II? wont to garnish their discourse,
' mikes me 5 a proceeding which, however well meant, is welt
and futile. i cannot tell what good it does—what feeling it
M horror it concede.

With regld to the rnslieity of “Wutheriug Heights,” I
dnitthie ehnege, {or I feel the qudity. It is male ell through.
Memorials, and wild, and. knotty as a root of heath. Nor
nit neural the: it should be otherwise; the author being
Intel! 1 native and nursling of the moors. Doubtlesa, had her
lakes as: in u turn, her writings, if she had written at all,
Imld have passed another character. Even had chance or
he led her to choose a similar auhieet, the would have trawl
inherwiae. Had Elli: Bell been a lady or a gentleman
accustomed to what is called “ the world," her view of a remote
ﬁdunudalxned region, as well as of the dwellers therein, would
live diiered greedy Emu: that usually taken by the homehred
canny girl. Danhtlesu it wuuld have been wider—mote com-
pdtenaive : whether it wnnh'l have been more original or nmre
unﬂnlisnnuoeeruin. Aaﬁr u the scenayandlocalityare
med, it wulrl statuer have been so sympathetic: Ellis Bell
dill not describe as one whose eye and taste alone found pleasure
interwar; hauntive hills were fur mare to her than:
Mela; they were what she lived in, and by, a: much as the
'5“ birds, their tenants, or as the heather, their produne. Her
lacriptiona, then, of natural may, are Will! they should he,
Ind all they should be.

where delinnlion of human character is concerned, the case
ildiﬁerent. I am bound to now thnt the hid scarcely mate
Mal knowledge at the peasantry angst whom she lived,
than a nun has of the country people who nmimsyass her
convent gnu. My user’s disposition we: not naturally gt:-
Fniaus; circumstance ﬁwuted and fostered. her tendency to
Nation; except tn go to chunk or take a walk on thehills

xvi PREFACE.

she rarely crossed the threshold of home. Though her feeling
for the people round was benevolent, intercourse with them she
never sought; nor, with very few exceptions, ever experienced.
And yet the knew them: knew their ways, their language, tha'r
family histories; she could hear of them with interest, and talk
of then: with detail, minute, graphic, and accurate; but will
then, she rarely exchanged a word. Hm it ensued that what
her mind had gathered of the real concerning than, was too
exclusively conﬁned to those “131': and terrible traits of whim,
in listuaing to the secret annals of every rude vieinage, the
memory is sometimes compelled to receive the impress. Eu
imagination, which was a spirit more sombre than many, more
powerful than sportive, found in such units material .wheneeit
wrought creations like Heathclifl', like Earnshaw; like Catherine.
Having formed theseheings, she did not know what she had
done. if the auditor of her work when read in manuscript.
ahnddered under the grinding inﬂuence of natures ao telentlesund
implacable, of spirits to lost and fallen; if it was eomplainedtlut
the mere hearing or certain vivid and fearful scenes banished
sleep by night, and disturbed mental peace by day, Eli: Bell
would wonder what was meant, and suspect the complainant
of alienation. Had she but lived, her mind would of itself have
grown like a strong tree, loftier, ﬁreﬁghter, widerepreading, and
in matured fruits would have attained a mellower ripenessaud
snnnier bloom; but on that mind time and experience alone
could work: to the inﬂuence of other intellects, it was not
amenable.

Having avowed that over much of “ Wuthering Heights " there
broods "a horror of great darkness ; ” that, in its storm-heated
and electrical atmosphere, we seem at times to breathe lightning.
let me point to those spots where clouded daylight and the
eclipsed sun still attest their existence. For a specimen of true
benevolence and homely ﬁdelity, look at the character of Nelly
Dean ; for an example of constancy and tenderness, remark that
of Edgar Unton. (Some people will think thaequalin‘es do not
shine rowel! incarnate in a man as they would do in a woman.
but Ellis Bell could met he brought to comprehend this notion :
nothing moved her more than any inainnalion that the “thinl-
ness and clemency, the long-auﬂ'erlng and loving-kindness which

PREFACE xvii

re uteemed virtues in the daughters of Eve, become ioibles in
he sons of Adam. She held that mercy and forgiveness In the
livinest attributes of the Great Being \who made both man and
m, and that what elothes the Godhead in glory, can die
grlee no form of feeble humanity.) There is a dry estuarine
humour in the delineation of old Joseph, and some glimpses of
[me and piety animate the younger Catherine. V Nor ia‘even
their: heroine of the name destitute of a certsin strange bauty
inherﬁereeness, orolhoneaty in the midstot‘petverted passion
and [Intimate perve't'sity. - ' - »

Heatheliﬁ‘, indeed, stands unredeemed; never one swerving
in his "row-straight course to perditiau, from the time when
“m little hlaeh-hsired swsrthy thing, as derlt u if it came from
the Devil," vna ﬁrst nnrolled out of the bundle and set on its
fAtt in the farmhouse kitchen, to the hour when Nelly Dean
loud the grim, stulwlrt corpse laid on its bath in the panel-
Qdoted bed. with wide-glam; eyes that seemed “to sneer at
humanpt to close them, end-parted lips Ind sharp white teeth
dint sneezed too."

Heatheliﬁ hetrsyl one solitary humus feeling. and that it no!
hilltnefor Catherine; which is s sentiment ﬁerce end inhuman ;
t [union such I: might boil And glow in the had essence of
ﬁle evil genius; a ﬁre that might form the tormented centre—
Illeevennﬂ'ering soul of I magnate of the infernal world: and
51h: quenehless and cesseless ravage eﬁ'ect the execution of the
“at: which doom: him to earry Hell with him wherever he
Men. No; the single link that connects Hesthrliﬂ' with
humanity is his rudely-confessed reg-rd for Hareton Esmshsw-
Ilia young nun whom he has mined; and then his lieu-implied
mean for Nelly Dean. These solitary traits omitted, we should
ﬂy he was child neither of Lasar nor giysy, but a man’s shape
mimand by dunon life—I Ghoul—en Mreet.

Whether it is right or advisable to ereste beings like Heatheliﬁ’,
do not know: I searedythinlt it is. But thisl know: the
triter who possesses the native gift owns something of which
i: is not always master—something that. It timcl, strangely wills
ndworlta for itself. He may lsy down rules and devise prin-
iyles, and to rules and principles it will perhsps for years lie in
objection ; and themlnply without my waning ol’ revolt, there

xvm PXEPACE.

comes a time when it will no Inger eanaem to “ herrou
valleys, or be bound with a bend in the furrow"—wlu
"laughs at the multitude 0f the city, sud regtrds not the er
of the drivet"-—wheu, refusing shaalutely to make rupee
of sea-sand my longer, it sets to work on statue-having,
you have s Pluto or 11m, I Tisiphane or s Psyche, 1 Men
or 1 Mann, as Fate or Inspiration direct. Be the workl
or gloriaus, dread. or divine, you have little ehoiae left
quiescent tdoytion. A: for yon—the nominal trait—you s
in it has been to work passively under d'ttates you I:
delivered nor rould question—that would not be uttered n:
prayer, nor suppressed. nut changed st your caprice. If
result be attractive, the World will pnise yum, who little dc
praise: if it he reyulsive, the sun: Warld will bluue you,
almost as little deserve blame.

" Wuthetiug Heights" was hewu in I wild workshnp,‘
simple toals, out ot’ homely materials. The «army {nu
granite block on a solitary moor; gazing thereon, he our
from the cmg might be elicited a head, savage, swsrt,
aform moulded with at lent one element of grandeur—pa
He wrought with s rude chisel, and from no model but thev
of his meditations. With time and labour, the ersg tank In:
shape; and there it stands eolosal, dark, end framing,
statue, hxlf rock: in the former sense, terrible and goth
in the latter, almost beautiful, for its colouring is of me
grey, and moorknd moss clothes it; and heath, with its bit
ing bells and balmy Ltagrance, grows ﬁitlsfully close In
giant’s foot.

CURRER BEL

WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

BY ELLIS BELL.

—-u—~

CHAPTER L

L—l HAVE just returned from a visit to my landlord—the
:Iryneighbonr the: 1 lhﬂl be troubled with. This b oer.
lylhenntilhlconutryl Innil England. Ida not believe
:1 could have ﬁxed on I sian so mpludy removed
It the sf: of society. A pafect minnthmpist'l haven: and
Huthcliﬁ'uid [are such a mum pair to divide the
Non between in, Acnle ﬁeliowl He littin imagined
uny heart turned toward: him'whcn I beheld his black
l'llhdnwsa mnpidbusly under their brows, u I rode up,
lwhenhinﬁnga: sheltered “tannins. whhnjenionnuo-
m.nil.lﬁutherinhiswdstnont, usinnnaunnodmyname. 
‘Mr. Heatheliﬂ’l" I said.
that was tha answer.
‘Mr. Lockwood. your new tenant, sir. I do myult‘ the
w of calling I: soon as possible after my Irrivnl, to ex-
llth: hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my per-
ulnae in soliciting the occupation of 'I'hrushcross Grange: I
Nymdnyyonhtdhadwmethunghm"-— .
’Thrmlm Orange is my own, Hr,” he interrupted.
icing. “I Ihould not allow any one to inconvenlunoe me.
could hinder it—wnlk in l”
l'he'wrnlk in" was uttered with closed teeth, and expressed
ruminant. "Go to the deuceﬂeven the gate over which
but mutated no sympnthising movement to the words:
i 1 think that circumstance determined In: to accept the
Min: 1 felz‘intasud in a man-who seemed noreeng-
mdiy relayed than myrell.
Nita: he saw my home's breast fairly pushing the barrier, he

no WING moms.

did pmau his hand lamina“ the: sum
meuplhemy,uning.asuemmudthem-
ukeMr.WSba2;andhinznpmevim

"Hue-ellvetheihlcmlddm
pose.“ was mm W by link my:
"Novondaﬁhemmupbumthebp.
anthmlyhedpcunas'

Jaeﬂ:v§andda‘ly.ny,anoﬂm:vaydt
Wilden-1M. "mhxdbdp1n!"hes
humdwvﬂmvhﬂeldieﬁn‘
m: Wagmnﬁminmyhusumlymu
cmjecmedhemhnneednldivineﬁdmdigst
udh'spimscjamhxionhdnoxdmkomyl
advent.

Wuhaingﬁdﬂmisdnmdhk.ﬁumdi€x
"Wndlaing"ha‘nglligniﬁam Munch
ﬁndlhelmuphuicmmnhlovhichiumku
sway-ultra. Pme.hadngmﬂaﬁm!heymm
maﬂm,hdeed:onemygnssﬂ§emu
windbbwingovelhzedge,bymeveshm
Whateenddflhhwse;udhyamg
mﬂmgmdrﬁmhonemymsitmvi:
them mppﬂthenmhimhadfmsigmmbum
(hammwindmnuedeeplyseﬂndnwaﬂandt
defended with krgejuning sums.

Mote psinglhethmholdJ parsed landmixe
of Wu: urving lavished are: lhe ﬂout. Ind
about lb: principal door; above which' among a
of crumbling griﬁm and shameles little boys. I dc
date " 1599," and the Mme “ Harmon Earnshnw."
hanmdealewwmmenu,udmumdlshon
the place {mm the surly mm; but his “thud: I
appeared to dqnud my speedy enzyme, or complete
mdlhadnodednmaggnm hisimpatiuwe;
impectingzhepenetrah’m . .

0n: sup bmughtnsimothehmily sitting-mmw
inWylobbyorpuugeuheyuﬂﬂhm”!
waninemly. Xtiuludes kitchen-mi parlouer
lhdievem Wuthering Hdghu the kilchenis‘fcfoed
altogediu imo number quarter: at least I dislin
chatter ol- tongua. and a claﬂer of culinary mu

WUTBEXING HEIGHTS. 2!

ind I observed no signs of roasting. boiling. or baking,
: huge ﬁre~place; nor my glitter of copper nueepnm
cullenders an the walls. One end. Indeed. reﬂected
yboth light Ind heat from nnks of immune pewter
nerspensed with silver jugs and tankards. main; m
'.on avast ukdrsserdo theverymof. The latter
:r been underdnwn : its entire nrmorny lay here to an
eye. except where n frmeof wood lnden with 0‘1!qu

hers of legs of beef. mutton, and ham. conceded it.
e chimney were sundry villainous old guns. and I couple
pistols : and. by wnyof omnrnent. three gendin painted
disposednlmtgitsledge. neﬂoorwnsofsmooth,

one; the chairs. high-bucked. primitive structures.
green: one or two heavy black am lurking ln the
In an arch under the dresser, reposed a huge. liver-
bitch painter. sun-munded by a slum o! equaling

and other dogs haunted otha' reeeses.

mment Ind furniture would have been nmhlng utm-
ns belonging ta nhomely.northem Innuenwitha

countenance. and sulwurt lith set out to advantage

breecha Ind gniters. Such an individual sealed in
chainhismug ofalefrmhlng on Lheround able
im,istobeseeninnnycimmofﬁveorslxmﬂes
use hllls. if you go It the right time the dinner. But
thcllll' forms a singular eantmst to his abode and style
He is a dark-skinned gipsy in upon. in dresl Ind

n gentlemen: that is. umuchngentlunhnnnnnyn
quire: rather slovenly. perhaps. yet not looking amiss
negligence, because he has In erect 1nd handsome
ndrnther morose. Possibly. some people might suspect
degree of under-lied pride ; l have nsympntheticehmd
m \ellsmeit ls nothing of the sort: l hm, by
hisresetve springs from an aversion to showy displays
{—ta manifatatiolts of rntttual kindllnele. He‘ll love
1 equally under met. and steam It a speci: of
nice to be loved or hated aguln. No. I'm running on
I bestow my awn attrlhutes ovu- llhenlly on him.

thcllﬂ‘ my have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping
out of the way when he meet: I wwld-be Inquan-

:hoee which Actuate me. Let me hope my constitution
. peculiar: my dear mother used to say I should never

22 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

have A comfortable home; and only last SLIme 1 pro“
myself pafectly unworthy of one.

While enjoying a month of ﬁne walker at the sea-conﬂ-
was thrown into the company of a man Eudnating until!
nrenl goddess in my eyes,“ longushe took no meat
me 1 “never told my love" vecally: still, it looks but
language. the merest‘idiot might have guessed I was over bu
and earszsheunderstood me at lamnndlooked Item
the sweeust of all imaginable looks. And what did I i
I confas it with shame-shrunk icin into myself. like e mi
at evuy glance retired colder Indfuther; tillﬁnallythepo
innocent was led to doubt her own senses, and. overwhelm
with confusion at he: supposed mistake, persuded ha mull
zodecamp. By this unions tum of dinpositionl hangnin
the reputation of delibaate henxﬂusm; how undue-veil.
alone can appreciate.

ltook aseat at the end of the hearthstoneopposite that tan:
which my landlord advanced, and ﬁlled upan intervalol' ﬁlm
by attempting to caress the canine mother. who had left i
nursery, and was sneaking wolﬁshly to the hack of my 12:
her lip curled up. and her white teeth watering for a uni:
My caress provoked a long. guttuml gnarl.

“ You'd helm let the dog alone." growled Mr. Heath-l
in unison. checking ﬁerce! dunonstrationa with a punch
his foot. “She's not accustomed to he spoiled—not hr
{at a pet." Then. striding to a side door, he shouted at
.. Jmph I ..

Joseph mumbled indistinntly in the depths of the eellnr. t
gave no intimation ofascending; so his master dived down
him. leaving me M‘s-dwi: the ruﬁianly bitch and a pair of gr
shaggy sheep-dogs. who shared with her a jmlous gundil
ship overall my movements. Not union to come in com:
with their fangs. I sat still ; but. imagining they would we
undmtand tacit insults, I unfortunately indulged in winking I
making fees at the trio, and some turn of my physiognu
so irritated madam. that she suddme broke into a fury I
leap! on my knees. lﬁnngberhadx.and hastened mint
pose the table between us. This promding roused the wh
hive: halite-dozen four-footed ﬁends. of various sits and as
issued from hidden dens to the common centre. I felt my he
and coat-lap: peculiar subjects of assault ; and parrying 0E '

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 23

mmmsudrecmuyuxmwimmpokmxm
Inn-lined to dunand, aloud. assistance from none of the
huehold in re-establiahing peace.

Kt. Heatth and his man climbed the oellu steps with
union phlegm: I don't think they moved one second faster
than usual. though the hearth was an absolute tempest of
“ﬂying and yelping. Happily. an inhabitant of the kitchen
land: more despatch: a lusty dame, with tucked—up gown.
but ems. and ﬁre-ﬂushed cheeks. rushed into tho midst of
In ﬂourishing a trying-pan: and usod that weapon. and her
3m.bmchpnrpose,thatthemmmbsidedmagially.
f admonlynemninad.heavingiikeaunat‘teahigh wind.
| vb he man! entered on the some.

' “Whatﬂlodcvililthematter?"heukod.eyeingmeina
r
l
I
l
l
|

 

Inna: that I could ill endure alter this inhospitable treatment.

“What the devil. indeed l" I muttered. "The had of
M swine could have had no vase Ipirits in them than
hannimalaofyonn. air. You nightaawellluvenstnnget'
will a hood of tigers l"

“Tiny won't meddle with potions who touch nothing," he
matted, patt'mg the both before me. and restoring the dis-
pkeadtable. "Thedogsdoright whovigilant. Take a

! lI-ohvine?"

- " No. thank you."

i “ Not bitten. are you? "

Y “thadbeul.lwottldhaveaetnryaignetouthebiler."

{ W1 countenance reamed into a grin.

‘ “Cane. come.“ he said. “you ale ﬂurried, 'Mr. Lockwood.
Bee, tako a uni: wine. Guests ale so exceedingly rare in
Ibis house that I and my dogs, I am willing to own. hardly
hwho'tormeive them. Yourhealih. sir!"

I honed and wood the pledge; beginning to perceive
M itwonld be foolish to lit Milking {or the misbehaviour of
apck ol‘con: besides, I felt loath to yield the fellow further
"mummy upenseninoe hi: humour took that turn.
lie—prohth swayed by prudential consideration of the folly
of ﬁnding n good tenant—relaxed a little in the laconic
tyb of dllpplng oﬁ' hi1 pronouns and auxiliary verbs. and
introduced what he supposed would be a subject of interest to
nr—o diacoune on the advanqu and disadvantage of my
mt plus of retirement. I found him very intelligent on

:4 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

the mph: we touched; and More I went home.
W so far as to volunteer mother visit to-mm
evidently wished no repetition of my intrusion. 1 she
withstanding. It is astonishing haw sociable I 11
compared with him.

CHAPTER II.

Yummy.“ afternoon set in mbty and cold. I h
mind to spend it by my study ﬁre. instead of wndin
health and mud to Wuthering Heights. 0n coming
dinna' however (N.B.——I dine between twelve and on
the housekeeper, n matronly Indy. taken I5 I ﬁxture i
the home, owl/:1 not. or would not. comprehend n
tint I might be served I! ﬁve), on mounting the i
this lazy intention. Ind stepping into the room. I saw
girl on her knees surrounded by brushes and can
and raising Ill infernal dun Is she extinguished I
with heaps of Cinders. Tim's spectade drove me but:
ately; I took my hat. and. after a {air miles' walk.
Heatheiiﬂ“: gerden gate just in time to scape the in
ﬂats of n snow-shower. »

On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard witl
frost. and the air made me shiver through every lim
unable to remove the chain. I jumped over, and. n
the ﬂagged musewny bordered with straggling I
bushes. hundred vainly {or edmittanbe. till my launch
and the dogs howled.

"Wretched inmatal" I ejaculated mentally. “Jt
perpetual isolation from your species {or your churl
piulity. At least. I Wild not keep my doors her
day-lime. I dun't WI will get in l " Solemlved,
the latch and shook it vehemently. Vinegar-faced Jt
jectedhisheadtmmemmdwindmofthebem

“W'het are ye for?" he shouted. "'1" mislet’
t‘ (mid. 60 round by th' end of laith, if ye went
to him."

“Is there nobody inside to open the door?" I
responsively.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 23

‘e's nobhnt t' missia; and shed“ not oppen't an ye
ﬂnysome dim till neeght."
1? Cannot you tell her who I am. eh, Joseph?"
~ne Incl I'll hoe no hend wi't," muttered the head,
y, -
now began to drive thickly. I seized the handle to
other trial; when a young man without coat. and
ing a pitchl'orlt, appealed in the yard behind. He
: to follow him, and, alter marching through a wash-
nd a paved area containing a. nonlethal. pimp. and
at. we at length arrived in the huge. mm. cheerful
it, where I was formerly received. It glowed delight-
he radiance of an immense ﬁre. compounded of coal.
l wood; and neor the table. laid for n plentilul evening
'as pleased to observe the " missis." an individual whose
! had never previously supectod. I bawedand wnimd.
she would hid the take a seer. She looked at me. lean-
in her chair. and remained motionlal and route.
{h weather!" I remarked. " I‘m afraid. Mrs. Heath-
doormnstbeertheconsequenoeolyonrserunls'
tendnnee: I had hard work to make them hear me."
veropened her mouth. I W’she staredako: at
shekepthereyesonrneinnoool. regardless manner.
gly carbon-sing and disagreeable.
own." said the young man gmfly. " He'll be in soon."
ed; and hemmed. and ﬁlled the villain Juno, who
at this second interview, to more the extreme tip of
in token or owning my acquaintance.
autiful animal l " l commenced again. “ Do you intend
with the little ones. madam? "
I are not mine." said the anliahle hostess. more repel-
In Heathelirl' himself could have replied.
your {mourns are among thae?".l mtinned. turning
mire cushion full of something like cats. . v
uge choice of favourita l " she oboerved momqu .
kily, it was a heap of dad rabbits. 1 hemmed once
.d drewcloser to the hearth. repudng my comment on
15s 0! the evening. » '
should not have come out." she said. rising and
from the chimney-piece two or the painted canisters.
isitian before was sheltered from the light; now. I had

26 wtm-naumc HEIGHTS-

ndistinctvlewnfhawhole ﬁgurelnd counteunee Snell
slender, and apparently sun:er put girlhood: u: admin“
form. and themostuquisiteuxuefmedm I honeyed-1th:
plmrenfbeholdiug: nuallfeunmsneryfnir; barium.
or rather golden. hanging loose on her delicate neck: and 9!.
had they been agreeable in Wu. the! mld hubs
irresistible: fortunately {or my susoqnible been. the only all-
tuent theyevinced hoveredbetweensmu. Ind nkiudnfdupal-
tlon. singularly “mantra! to be timch there. The curb!
mdmstoulofhamh; Imadeamodontoaid hank
tumedupen men-miss might turn it Anyoneampurlb
assist him in counting his gold.

" I don'tmt your help," she snapped; " I on get thunk
myself."

" I beg your pardon l" I hastened to reply.

"Were you asked to In?" she demanded, tying an ape-
overberneat black frock. and standing with a spooninloﬂll
leaf poised over the pot.

"I shallbe glad tohaveacup,” I answered.

"Were you asked?" she repeated.

“No,” I said, ball! smiling. " You are the pmperpersnnlﬁ
nslc me."

She ﬂung the lea buck. spoon and all. and resumed her ch?
in a pet; her forehead car-rugated, and her red under-lip push“
out, like a child'r ready to cry.

Munvhile, the young man had slung on to his perm”
decidedly shabby upper garment, 1nd, erecting bimelf be!”
the blue. looked down on me from the corner of his eyu. b
all the world as if there Were wine mortal lend unevengd
between us. I began tn doubt whether he were 3 serum ‘
not: h'u am: Ind speech wae both rude. entirely devoid?
the superiority observable in Mr. and ME Heulbdiﬂ': 3'
thick, brown curls were rough 1nd uncultivated. h‘B whisk
cncrouchcd beariahly over hi3 cheeks. and his hands were an
browned like those of n common kbmner: still his brain
was free. Almost haughty. Ind he showed none of A domeaic'
assiduin in attending on the Indy of the house. In the (hectic
of clear proofs of his condition. I deemed it best to lbshi
from noticing his curious conduct; and. ﬁve minutes IRE
wards. the cute-nee of Hmhcliﬁ' relieved me, in some M
from my umfurnble Mt.

WIRING HEIGHTS. 27

"You see, air. I um home, Ioeardlng to prmnisel" I
Mngechea-hd;“undlfeurlnhauhe
tenths-bound for mum. if you an AM me shelter
hiring that space."

"Hahn-horn?" he said. shaking the white ﬂakes Iron: his
dothu; " 1 wander you should select the thick of 3 mm
Innubleubuutiu. Doyouknowthutyaurunurlskofbeing
hﬁltheunnhu? Peaplefamiliurwith thaemoorsoheu
listlhrirroudonsucheveningnudluntellyouthueis
halts-nee of a maze ut ML"

"Pahapslmugetuguldemougyourlads.uud he might
myettheGnngetlll momhg—couldyouspuremeone?"

"No, I mild not"

“Oh, indeed! Well. then. I must trust to mymngacity."

uumPh in

“Are you golngto rank th’ m?" drummed heofthe shabby
“it. milling his feroclaus game from me to the young lady.

“I! A: to have my? " she uslm‘l. Ippealing to Heuthclill'.

"Gait my. willyuu?" VII: the answer. uttered souvugely
“hurled. ’I'hetone in which thewordzwmmidmaled
Hemline bud nature. I no longer felt inclined to cull Hath-
diﬂ'u capital fellow. Wham the prepurutiona were ﬁnished. he
invited me with—N New. sir, bring forward your chair." And
null. including the maxi: youth, drew round the table: an
we: silence prevailing while we dismissed our meuL

lthmrght, if 1 land tamed the cloud, it was my duty to make

In dart to dispel it. They could not every day sil so grim and
'admin: and it was impossible. however ill-tempered they
Whathnttheunlversulmltheyworemstheirevery.
“1mm

"It is smge," I begun, In the interval of swallowing one
ﬂip of ten uml receiving another—“it in stnnge how cutorn
unmould our tnsts and ideas: manyde not imagiuethe
mdhnppineu in uliie of such complete exile from the
“In I: ynu :peud. Mr. Heathcliﬂ': yet l‘ll venture to my.
M meld by your family. Ind with your amiable lady
II the praiding genius over your home Ind hem”—

"My umlahle lady I " he interrupted, with an Ilmosl
Shelia! sneer on his face. “ Where is she—my amiable

yr.

"Mrs. Hmthcliﬁ‘, yaur wile. I mean.”

28 WUTHERING HEIGHTS. .

"Well, yes—0h. you would intimate that her spirit In! 1
talks: the post of ministering angel. and guards the fortune! ‘
of Wuthering Heighs even what her body is gum. Is
that it?"

Perceiving myself in n blunder. I attempted to correct it. I
might have seen there was too great a disparity betwea: the
ngesoftheparliestomakeitlikelythattheyveremnnud
wife. One was”th forty: a period at mental vigour II
which men seldom cherish the delusion of being martial it
love by girls: that dream is reserved for the solace of our
declining yars. The other did not look seventeen

Then it ﬂashed upon lne-—“ The clown at my elbow. who
is drinking his ta out of a basin and eating his brad with
unwashed hands, may be her husband: Heathcliﬁ‘. junior; of
course. Here is the consequence of being buried nhvcrshe
has throw-n herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance
that better individuals uistedl A sad pity—I mun W
how I cause her to regret her choice." The last reﬂection
may seem conceited; it wus not. My neighbour struck In:
as bordering on repulsive; I knew, through experimoe, tilt
I was tolernhly attractive

"Mrs. Henthcliﬁ‘ is my daughter-in-law.” said Hathdiﬂ.
corroborating my surmise. He turned, us he spoke. a peeulilr
look inherdirection: nhokot'hatred; unisshehnsnrnm
perverse set of facial muscla that will not. like those of othu
people, interpret the language ofhis said.

“Ah.oertninly—Iseenaw: youarethc tavouredposscsoroi
the bencﬁoeut fairy.“ I remarked, turning to my neighbour.

This wns worse than before: the youth grew crimson. and
clenched his ﬁst, with every appearance of a mediated ass-tilt.
But he seemed to reeollect himself presently. and smothered the
storm in a brutal curse. muttered on my behalf: which. howevu.
I took are not to notice.

“ Unhappy in your eonjectum. sir.” observed my host; " vIe
neither of us have the privilege of owning your good iniry; her
mateis and. I said shewns my dnnghter-in-law, therefore, she
must have married my son." ' .

" And this young man is ——

“ Not my son, annually.

Heathclid'srniled ngnin. uil’itwererather tnobold aim to
atth the paternity of that bar to him.

 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 29

"Myname is Hm Ear-sham" mled the other: “and
i’deumsdyoutompectiu"

“ I‘ve shown no disrupect." was my reply, laughing internally
1t the dignity with which he announced himself.

He ﬁxed his eye on me longer thnn I cared toreturn thestam,
hiathnightbetemptedeithertohoxhiseen «render my
hierity audible. I begin to feel unmistakably out of place in
M plenum family circle. The dismal spiritual atmosphere
Mme. and more than neutmlised. the (Towing physiml
mfortsrvundmezand lrelolvedtobeantioushowl
ventured under those rafter: a third time

Thehusiness of eating being concluded. end no one uttering
award at sociable conversation. I approached rt window to
unite the Weather. A sorrowful sight 1 3w: dark night
min; dawn pier-namely, and sky and hills mingled in one
lituwhirl of wind and suﬂ‘omtiug snow.

"I don't think it possible [or me to get home now without a
Ride." I could not help emlniming. " The road: will be
Iliad-had“ and. ifthey were hare. I mtldmly dis-
ﬁnnish a foot in advance."

“Human. drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch.
Mbewvered ifleftinthet'oldellnight: Ind putaplnnk
Wuhan." aid Heethch'ﬂ.

“How must I do?“ I continued. with rising irritation.

This: was no reply to my question; and on looking round X
“only Joeeph bringing in I pail of porridge for the dogs, Ind
Mm Hamill! leaning over the ﬁre. diverting herqu with
iInning I bundle of lunches which had flllen from the chimney-
Musherenoxedthete-mister tn itsplnoe. Thefannu’.
Mhehaddepaited his harden, tookncritlcalsurveyof the
M. and in melted tones. gated out—-

"AI wonder how ynh an which to stand that l' hlleness
Funnwhen all an'em‘sgoenoutl Bud yah're a nowt,ud
I(Humane tnlking—ynh'll niver- mend o' yer ill ways. but goo.
tht‘divil, liloeyermothernforeyei"

lilnagined, for a moment. that this piece of eloquence was
“ﬁned to me: and. snﬁciently enmged. stepped towards the
I” run! with an intention of kicking him out of the door.
"a. Hmhcliﬁ. however. checked me by he: nnswer.

"You undalous old hypocrite l " she replied. " Are you not
Iiiid of being carried “my bodily, whenever you mention the

3O WUTHERING HEIGH‘IS.

devil'snune? Ivan mtoreﬁﬂnﬁommddngmml
ask your abduction as I special hm. Slop! look hm
Japh," she continued. taking 81033. dllk book {rum ndldl
"I'llshowyouhowhrl'vemgrasedinlhethkAn: Ish-
soonbecomperun to maketh home ofit. Theredw
didn'tdiehy dance: andywrxheumn‘smm hudlyh
reckoned among provide visitation: |"

"Oh. wicked. wicked!" gasped the dds: "may the La!
deliver us from evil i " '

"No. «probate! you me a mummy—be off. or I‘ll bun
you seriously! I'll have you I“ muddled in wax nd day;
and iheﬁrsi whopmthelimizslﬁx, shall—4111mm
whnrhe shall be done no—bm. you'llseel Go, I'mlooldngll
you I "

neliulewitchpmamckmalignltyinmhcrbanﬁﬂ
eyes. and Joseph, trembling with Liam horror. hurried a!
praying and ejaculating “wicked” as he went. l M! be
oondm must be prompted by a specie of drug fun; Ind-
now that we wae alone, I endeavoured to intmheinmy
d‘streﬁ.

" Mrs. Hemhcliﬂ‘." I said unmady. “you must name In
{or [rumbling you. I presume, because, with an! (me, I’m sum
you cannot help being good-hearted. Do point out lame land
mark: by which I may know my my home: I hue no man
idea how lo get there thnnyon'mld have howtoguo
Londonl"

"Tnke the mod you came." she answers]. enhancing head
in achair. with : undie. and the lug bunk ope: bale-e ha
"ll is hriefadvice. but u mind I: I m give.”

"Then, if youhcnroi‘mebeingdiseovend dad innbo‘t
a in} full of snow. your conscience won‘tvhkpe: that it is put!
your fault P "

“Howso? l cannot escort you Theywnldn‘tlet me I
to the and of lhe garden-wall.“

" You! Ishould he sorrytoaskyaumm thazhreshnli
for my convuaimce, on such a nigh." I cried. " I win: you!
ltllmemy my, notmxlmo ii; orelaclo persuadeMr. Hail
cliﬂ'to give me a guide."

“Who? There is himself, Eumshaw. Zillah. Joseph and
Which would you have?"

"Are there no boys at thefzmn?"

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 3!

" No; those Ire :11.“

“ Then, it follow: that I am compelled to stay."

"net you mysettle with yourth I hue nothing to do
with it."

"Ihopcitwillbealesantoyouwmkemmnremsh

Ms on thse hills.” uied Hmthdiﬁ's stem voice from the
Helm: ate-nee. “A: to staying here. I don‘t keep accom-
nodnions for visitors: younnst shamabedwith Hareton or
Joseph. if you d4"

"1 an Ileep on 1 chair in this room," I replied.

“No,nol Amer il I strings, be he rich or poor: it
'iﬂnotsuitmeto permit uyonethe range of the planewhile
lmd‘glnrdl" raid, the unmanme wretch.

With this insult. my patience use It In end. I uttered an
Wu of dlrgmt, and pushed past him into the yard,
mniegngninst Enmnhawinmyhute. Itwassodarkthat
Imldnotlee the menu d' exit; and, as I wandered round.
I haul and): spedrmn of their civil behaviour nmangst each
diet. At ﬁrst the young man appealed about to befriend me.

" I'll go with hirn as far as the park." he said.

“You’ll go with him to hell!" emlzimed his mater, or
Mammhebare. “Andwhnistalookaﬂerthe

’ lines. at?"

"A man's life is of me consequence than one evening's
Eden of the horses: somebody must go." murmured Mr;
W. more kindly than I expected.

“No: It your wand!" retorted Mon. “If you set
not: on him, you‘d better be quiet," .

"Thu: ! hnpe his ghost will haunt you; and I hope Mr.
inﬂmgetlnmhatenutullthet‘nnngeisa
rain I" she meted shuply.

“ Hear-hm. heathen. shod: cursing on 'etn !" muttered Joseph.
Inn-1h whom I had been stem’ng.

He set within animal. milking the cows by the light of n
lantern. which I seized unocmnnniously, and. calling out that I

d send it back on the marrow. rushed to the nearest postern.

" ‘ster. maister. he's staling t' lanthern ! " shouted the
ancient, pursuing my retreat. “Hey. Gnasberl Hey. dog!
Hey. Wolf, holld him, holld him I"

0:: opening the little door. twohnirymonstersﬂew at my throat.
baring rue down Ind extinguishing the light; while a mingled

32 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

gufﬁw from Heathcliﬂ' and Hareton. put the copestone

rage end humiliation. Fortunately. the beasts seemed
bent on stretching thdr paws and ynwning. and Mur‘ﬁhin
tails. than devouring meslive ; but they would suﬂer no re:
tion. and I wns forced to lie till their Ineligth master: ;
to deliver me: than. listless end truubling with wrath. I o
the miscreants to let me out—on thdr peril to keep ll
minute longer—with several incoherent threats ofretaliatioc
in their indeﬁnite depth of virulency. smacked of King L4

The vehemeuce of my agitation hmugbt on a oopimu bl
at the nose. and still Heathaliﬁ‘hughed. and still I Mold
don't know what would have concluded the scene. had Lht
been one person at hand rather more rational than myse:
more benevolent than my entertainer. This wus Zilln
stout housewife; who at length issued forth to inquire in
nature of the uproar. She thought that some of them ha:
lnying violent hands on me; and, not daring to arm
master. she turned her vocal artillery against the yr
mandrel.

“ Well, Mr. brushnw." she cried. “ l wonder what
have agnit next l Are we going to murder folk on our very
stones? [see th‘s house will never dnfor rue—look at I
lad. he‘s fair chokiugl Wisht. wisht! you rnun'n‘t go I
Come in. and HI cure that: there now. hold ye still.“

With these words she suddenly spluhed a pint of icy
down my neck, and pulled me into the kitchen. Mr. Ha
followed. his amidental Incrrlrnent expiring quicklyth he
menus.

I was sick exceedingly, and dizzy and faint; and thus
pelled perforce to anoept lodgings under his roof. He told
to give me n glass of brandy. end then prism on to the
room: while she eondoled with me on my sorry predic:
and having obeyed his orders. whereby l was somewhat re
ushered me to hed. .

.4...—

CHAPTER III,

Wmer leading the way upstairs, she recommended I
should hide the candle. and not moire a noise: {or he: I
hsdunoddmtionnboutthechambershewould putmeii

“mHERlNG HEIGHTS. 3;

IVE let nnybody lodge there willingly. I sired the reason.
Ile did not know, she answered: she had only lived there I
yur or two ; and they had so many queer goings on, she could
in hegin to be curious.

Too stupiﬁed to be curious myself. I fastened my door and
glanced round {or the bed. The whole furniture consisted of a
ﬁair. a clothes-N, and a large oak case. with squares cut out
mar the top membling coach windows Having approached
‘lliisstmcttn‘e I looked inside. Md perceived it to be a singular
unfold-fashioned couch. very conveniently designed to obviate
the acuity for every member of the family having a room to
hinnelf. In tact. it formed a little closet, and the ledge of a
Vindow. which it enclosed. served IS a table. I slid back the
pundled sins. got in with my light. pulled them together again.
Ind Ht secure against the vigilance o! Henthcliﬂ‘. and every
Indie.

'llle ledge, where I placed my candle, had a few mildewed
hooks]:le up in one corner; and it was covered with writing
hundred on the paint. This writing, however. was nothing
,bm lame repeated in all kinds of characters. Inge and small
‘Cnlﬁen'ne Earn/law. here and there varied to Catherine
Mandi]; and then again to Catherine Linton.

ln rapid listlesenss 1 Ian! my head agninst the window.
Ind condoned spelling over Catherine Enmshnw—Heathdiﬂ‘
-Linton. till my eyes closed; but they had not rested ﬁve
minus when n. glare of white letters started from the dark as
. “Vida: spectra—Al» nir swarmed with Catherines: and rousing
myself to dispel the obtrusive name, I discovered my mndle
'itk reclining on one of the antique volumes. and perfuming
the place with In odour a! roasted alt-skin. l snuffed it of,
and. very ill at me under the inﬂuence 0! cold nnd lingering
lama. sat up and spread open the injured torne on my knee
Inns 1 Testament, in lean type, and smelling dreadfully musty :
Any-leaf horethe inseription—" Catherine Enrnshavv. her book.”
andndnte some quarterof noentnrybaclc I shut il.a.nd took
up another, and mother. till i had examined all. Catherine‘s
library was select, and its state of dilapidntinn proved it to have
bar well used ; though not altogether for a legitimate purpose:
Neely one chan had escaped n pen-and-inlt commentary—at
last. the appannoe of one—covering every morsel of hlnnlr

lint the printer had left ﬁlm were detached sentences ; other
i)

34 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

omstooktheionnafnregulnrdinry.mwledionunion
daildishhand. At thetopot‘sn extra. pogo (quite a out
probably. when ﬁrst lighted on) I won gmtly nomad to he
an excellent caricature of my friend Joseph—rudely ya no
fully sketched. An immediate inlet-at kindled within me to
unknown Catherine, and I began forthwithto dedﬂgr hat
hieroglyphics.

" An awful Sunday I" commenced the mph bent
"I wish my father were back again. Hindley Islam:
substitute—his conduct to Heathcﬁﬂ' ls Iranians—H. Ind:
going to rcbeHe took our initiatory step this evening.

"All day had been ﬂooding with rain; we couldnotg
church, so Joseph must needs get up I. woman in
garret: and. while Hindley and his wife hushed down:
before a comfortable ﬁre—doing anything but reading :
Bibles. I'll answer {or it—Heathcliﬂ', myself. and the not:
plough-boy, were commanded to take our Prayer-hooks,
mount: we were rangedinarow, on I sack of corn,”
and shivering. and hoping that Joseph would shiver too. so
he might giveus a. short homily for his own sake. A vnin it
The service lasted precisely three hours ; and yet my hrmher
the face to arelnirn, when he saw IE descending, ‘Whot. (
already? On Sunday evenings we used lobe permitted to}
if we did not make much noise ; nowa mere titter is snﬁda
send us into comets l

" 'You forget you have 2 master hm.’ says the tyrant.
demolish the ﬁrst who puts me out of temperl I insist on pe
sobriety and silence. Oh, boy I was that you? Frances. dnr'
pullhis hairnsyougoby: Ihenrd him snaphisﬁngus.’ Fr-
pnlled his hnir heartily. and then went and seated herselfot
husband's knee; and there they were. like two babies. k!
and talking nonsense by the haul-«foolish palzvcr that we sh
be ashamed of. We made ourselves as snug u our rn
allowed in the arch of the dresser. I had jmt Instead
pinnl'ores together. and hung them up for a. curtain. whe
comes Joseph on an errand from-the stablu. He tats c'
my hondywork. hem my cars. and crooks-

“ ‘ T' maister nobbut just buried. and Snth no o'ened.
1' sound 0' t' gospel still i' yer lugs, and ye dart be lzil:
Shame on ye I sit ye down. ill childerl there's good book at:
if ye'll read 'em: sit ye down. and think 0' yer sowls I ‘

wv'mmmc HEIGHTS. 3;

'Sgying this. he compelled us so to square our position: that
we might reeelvefrornthefnr-oﬂ' ﬁreadun nytoshowus the
tatofthelumberhethmstuponus. Iwuldnotbearthe
aployrnmt. I took my dingy volume by the scroop, and hurled
it into the dag-launch vowing I hated it good book. Heatth
kicked his to the same place. Then there was I llubhnb l

" ' mister Hindley l ' shouted our chaplain. ' Mailer. coom

hitherl Miss Cathy's liven th' back on" ‘Th' Helmd o‘ Salva-
tiou.‘un' Henthdiﬂ’s pawsed his ﬁt into t' ﬁrst part 0' ‘T Broad
Way ta Dstmch'on I ' It's fair ﬂaysome that ye let 'em 30 on
this pit. Echl th' owd man wad ha’ laced 'em pmpa’ly—but
he's [on I '

"Hindley hurried up from his paradise on the hearth. and
tiring one of us by the collar, and the other by the arm. hurled
both into the buck-kitchen; where, Joseph assevemted, ‘owd
Nik’ would {etch us I: sure as we were living: and, so
Wed, we each sought a separate nook to await his advent.
hushed this book. and a pot ofinl: {rum a shelf. Ind pushed
the home-door: njnr to give me light, nnd l have got the time on
'ithwtiting for twenty minutes ; but my companion is impatient,
and purposes that we should Appropriate the dairywomnn’s cloak.
and have a sumper on the moors, under its shelter. A pleasant
Won—and then. if the surly old man come in. he may
believehi: prophecy veriﬁed—we cannot be damper. or colder,
inlheninthnnwenre here."

. . . . . . . .

Inppose Catherine fulﬁlled her project, for the next sentence
not up another subject: she waxed lnchrymnse.

"HM! little did I dream that Kindley would ever make me
Wnl“she wrote. "My head Aches, till I cannot keep it on
lhe palm: ; and still I ain't give over. Poor Heathcliﬁ‘ l Hindley
calls him I. ngabond. and won't let him sit with , nor eat with
Barrymore; and. he says, he and I must not play together, and
Wastomrnhimautofthehmrse ifwe brnkhisordets. He
ha been bluning our father (how dared he P) for treating H. too
My ; nnd swears he will reduce him to his right place"—

lhegnn to and druwsily over the dim page: my eye wundered
Fm transcript to print. I saw A red ornamented title—
“Seventy Times Seven. and the First of the Seventy-First. A
Film Discourse delivered by the Reverend anes Bnnderhnm,

36 WUTHERING HEIGHN.

in the Chapel of Gimmerden Snug " And while I WIS.
consciously, worrying my brain to guess what Jahes Branded
would malt: of his subject, I sank back in bed, and fell as!
Alas, for the effects of bad ta and bad temper] what elseo
it he that made rne pass such a terrible night ? I don’t rennet!
another that 1 can at all compare with it since I was cap
of suﬁ'ering.

I began to dream, almost before I cased to be sensible o:
lomlity. X thought it was morning; and I had set out or
way borne. with Joseph for a guide. The snow lay yards t
in our road; and, as we ﬂoundered on, my companion we:
me with constant reproaches that I had not brought a pilgl
staﬁ': telling rue that I could neVer get into the house wit'
one. and hoastfully ﬂourishing a heavy-headed cudgel. whi
understood to be so denominated. For a moment I consid
it absurd that 1 should need such a weapon to gain admitt-
into my own residence. Then a new idea ﬂashed across me
was not going there: wewere journeying to hear the fan
Jabes Branderham preach from the text—" Seventy T
Seven ;" and either Joseph, the preacher, or I had comm;
the " First of the Seventy-First," and were to be publicly exp
and excommunimted.

We came to the chapel. I have passed it rally in my w:
twice or thrice ; it lies in a. hollow, between two bills : an elev
hollow, near I swamp. whose peat] moisture is said to are
all the purposes of embalming on the few corpses deposited tl
The roof has been kept whole hitherto; but as the clergym
stipend is only twenty pounds per annum, and a house with
rooms. thratening speedin to determine into one. no clergy
will undertake the duties of pastor: especially as it is cum
reported that his ﬂock would rather let him starve than incr
the living by one penny from their own pockets. Howeve
my dram, Jabes had a. full and nttentive congregation ; ant
preached—good God I what a sermon : divided into/barium
and ninety parts. each fully equal to an ordinary addrss i
the pulpit. and each discussing a separate sin I When
searched for them, Leannot. tell. He had his private mm
of interpreting the phrase, and it seemed nemary the bra
should sin diﬂ‘ra'ent sins on every occasion. They true of
most curious character: odd transgressions that I never img
previously.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 37

Oh. how wary I grew. How I writhed. and yawned. and
nodded, and revived! How I Finched and pridted myself. and
mhbed my eyes. and stood up. and sat down again. and nudged
Inieph to inform me if hewould ever have done. I was con-
dunned to hear all out: ﬁnally. he reached the " Fin-r oft/1e
Sam-9.1mm" At that crisis, a sudden inspiration descended
on me: I was moved to rise And denounce Jabes Branderham
as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon.

"ﬁr," I uchimed. "sitting here within these four walls, at
weaned), I have endured and forgiven the four hundred and
ninety heads of your discourse. Seventy rims seven times have
[ﬂushed up my hat and been about to depart—Seventy times
we: tints have you preposteroust forced me to resume my
lit The four hundred and ninety-ﬁrst is too much. Fellow-
Ilrtyrs. hue at him! Drag him down. and crush him to
man. that the plane which knows him may know him no
In!"

"Tm an! the Maul" cried Jabs. after u solemn pause.
hiring over his cushion. "Seventy times seven times didst
lbw glpingly contort thy visage—seventy times seven did I
like counsel with my soul—Io. this is human wmkness: this
the may he absolved I The First of the Seventy-First is come.
hhren. execute upon him the judgment written. Sich honour
have all His saints l "

With that concluding word. the whole assembly. enlting
Ihei pilgrim's staves. rushed round me inzbody; and I. having
“upon to raise in selﬂdelence. commenced grappling with
lolph. my nearest ind most ferocious assailant. for his. ln
“conﬂuence of the multitude, several clubs crossed: blows,
line! at me. fall on other sconces. Presently the whole chapel
mulled with nippings and eounter-nppings; every man's
balm ngninst his neighbour; and anderhnm, unwilling
taranain idle, poured forth his ml in a shower of loud tape on
lhlbourds of the pulpit. which responded so smartly that. nt
1m. to my unspalmble relief. they wake me. And what was it
that had suggested the n-emendaus tumult? What hnd played
1158‘: part inthe row? Merely, the branch of a ﬁr—tree that
Inhed my lattice. as the blast wailed by. and rattled its dry
Mes against the pnnul I listened doubtineg an instant:
“acted the disturber. then turned and dazed. and drum!
Iain: if possible. still more disagreeany than before.

38 WUmERING HEIGHTS.

'l'histimelremembered Iwaslylug in theoake
1 hard diﬂilwﬂy the guty wind, and the driving of '
Ihmmmeﬁr-boughrepmitstasingw
ascﬁhedlttotherightcause: but itannoyedme son
I rsolved to ﬂame it, it' possible; and. I thought, I
endeavoured to unhasp the easement. The .hoolt we:
into the staple: a circumstance observed by me “ﬁt
but forgotten. "I must stop it. neverthelessl" I
knocking my knuckles through the glass, and stretchit
out to seize the importunate branch; instead of I
ﬁngers closed on the lingers of a little. ice-cold hat
intense horror of nightmare came over me: I tried
back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most in
voice sobbed. “Let me in—let me in l" “Who an
asked. struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself. "
Linton." it replied shiverineg (why did I think of 1
had read Eanukaw twenty times for Linton) ; “ I'm co:
I'd lost my way on the moor!" As it spoke. I l
obscurely. a. mild: {are looking through the window
made me cruel: and, ﬁnding it useless to attempt sh
emture off, I pulled its wrist on to the broken x
rubbedittoundﬁ'otilltheblood mudownandst
bedclothes: still it wailed, "Let me in 5" and main
tenacious gripe. almost maddening me with fear. "
I l " I said At length. “ Let me go. ifyou want me I
in l" The lingers rdnxed. I snatched mine through
hurriedly piled the books up in a pyramid again:
stopped my ears to exclude the lamentable prayer.
to keep them closed above a quarter of en haur;
instant I listened again. there was the dolei’ul cry mo:
“Begonel” l shouted. "I‘ll nevu- let you in. not it
for twenty years." "It is twenty yurs." mourned t
"twenty years. I’ve been a waif for twmty years!"
began a {eehb scratching outside, and the pile of boo
as if thnut forward. I tried to jump up: but could
limb: and so yelled aloud. in n frenzin fright. Tt
fusion, I discovered the yell was not ideal: hasty
approached my chamber door: somebody pushed it o
a vigorous hand, end a light glimmered through the s
the top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet1 and w
perspiration from my forehead: the intruder app

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 39

Mile. and muttered to himself. At inst, he said in a half-
Illispu‘. plainly not expecting an answer, “ Is any one hue?"
handled it but tnwnf my presence: for I knew Heath-
-ﬂ's anemia, and feared he might surch further. if I kept
ﬁt. With th'u intention. ! turned and opened the panels. I
Minot soon forget the eﬁect my action produced.

Huthohﬁ‘stoodnear the enhance. in his shirt and trousers:
With 1 undle dripping over his ﬁngers, and his face as white
nth: null behind him. The ﬁtst wk of the oak startled
hlihndoctric shockl the light leaped from his hold to a
handsome tact, and his agitation was so extreme, that he
at“ hardly pick it up.

"It is only your gust, sir," I muld out. desirous to spare
“in the humiliation of exposing his cowardice further. ” I had
themHortune to scream in my sleep, owing to n frightful night-
lﬂle l'nt sorry 1 disturbed you."

“Oh. God confound you, Mr. Lockwood! I wish yon were
IMF" commenced my host. setting the candle on a chair.
halite found it imposinle to hold it steady. “And who
bid you up into this room?" he continued. crushing his
lib into h'u palms, and grinding his teeth to subdue the
luﬂlsry convulsions. “Who was it? I've a good mind to
m then out ofthe house this moment?"

"It was your servant, Zillah," I replied, ﬂinging myself on
to the door, and rapidly resuming my garments. " I should
not can if you did. Mr. Hathcliﬁ' ; she richly deserves it. I
ﬁlm-e that she wanted to get another proof that the place
maintained, a: myexputse. Well, it is—swarrning with ghosts
Mgobﬁnsl You have reason in shutting it up, I name you.
Neonewillthankymforadazeinsuchndenl"

"Whnt dnynn man?" asked Heathcliﬂ‘, “and what are you
lining? Lie down Ind ﬁnish out the night, since you are hen: 1
but. for Heaven's sakel don’t repeat that horrid noise: nothing
mlldeatcuse it, miss! you wae hnving your throat cut ! ”

"If the little ﬁend had got in at the window. she probath
would have strangled met" I returned. "I'm not going to
mine the penantions of your hospitable ancestors again.
Was not the Reverend anes Branderhntn akin to you on the
W5 side? And that minx. Catherine Linton, or Earn-
-lhw. whovevct she was called—she must have been a change-
W little null! She told me she had been walking

  
  
  
 

4o wurnnnm'o HEIGHTS.

the earth those twenty years: n just punishment for ha I
transgressions. I've no douht l "

chely were these words uttered. when I recollect:
Issoeiation of Heathnliﬁ's with Catherine's rum: in the
which had completely slipped from my murtory, till
nwalrened. l blushed at my inconsidemiou; but, w.
showing further consciousness of the oil'ence. I hastened tr
—“ The truth is, sir. I passed the ﬁrst part of the night in
Here I stopped ntrsh—l was about to say “ perusing tho:
volumes." then it would have nvmled my knowledge of
written, as well as their printed, contents: so, correctingn
I went on. " In spelling over the name scratched on thnt win
ledge A monotonous occupmion. calculated to set me I
like counting. or"—

"Whnt can you main by talking in this way to are!"
dercd Hcsthclitf with savage vehemence. “ How—how day
under my weft—God! he’s mod to speak so I " And he 1
his {orehad with rage.

I did not know whether to men: this language or 3
my explanation: but he seemed so powerfully nﬂected I
took pity and proceeded with my dreams; nﬁrming I had
hard the appellation of "Catherine Linton" before, but
ing it often over produced an impression which personiﬁed
when I had no longer my imagination under control. Ha
gradually fell back into the shelter of the bed. as I spoke ; l
sitting down almost concealed behind it. I guessed, hot
by his irregular and intercepted breathing. that he strugg
unquish an ems: of violent emotion. Not liking to shot
that I hnd hard the conﬂict. I motioned my toilette :
noisily, looked nt my wntch. and soliloquised on the lenl
the night: “ Not three o‘clock yet! I could have taken
it had been six. Time stagnates here: we must surely
retired to rest at eight I"

"Always at nine in winter. and rise at four." said my
suppressing a. groan: and, as I fancied, by the motion
lrm's shadow. dashing n tearfrom his eyes. " Mr. Lockw
he added. "you may go into my room: you’ll only be
my, coming downstairs so early; and your childish onto
sent sleep to the devil {or me."

" And for me, too," I replied. “ I'll walk in the yard til
light. nndthenl‘llbcoﬁ'; and youneed notdrud a rep-

WUTHERING HEIGH’IS. 4!

of my iutnkion. I'm now quite cured of seeking pleasure in
society. be it country or town. A sensible man ought to ﬁnd
Mt company in himself."

: " Delightful company I " muttered Heathclim " Take the
undle. and go where you please. I shall join you directly.
Keep out of the yard, though. the dogs are unehained ; and the
house—Juno mounts sentinel there, Ind—nay, you can only
rumble about the steps and pamges. But. away with you!
I'll earn: in two minutes!"

I obeyed, so far as to quit the chamber : when. ignorant where
Illnarrow lohhia led. I stood still, and was witnan. involun-
hrily. to n pieee of superstition on the part of my landlord.
Ihieh belied, oddly. his apparent sense. He got on to the bed.
udwmnhed open the lattice..hnrsting. as he pulled at it. into
uncontrollable passion of tars. "Come inl come in l" he
thed. "Cathy. do come. Oh do—once motel Oh! my
heart‘s darling! hm rne Ibis time. Catherine. at last! " The
spectre showed 3 spectre's ordinary eaprice : it gave no sign of
being; but the snow and wind whirled wildly through, even
tuthing my station, and blowing out the light.

There was such angu'nh in the gush of grief thu accompanied
this roving. that my compassion made me overlook its folly. nnd
ldrewoﬂ', half angry to have listened at All. and vexed at having
tiled my ridiculous nightmare. since it produced that agony;
“ugh why. was beyond my comprehension. I descended
Bastionst to the lower regions, and landed in the back-kitchen.
lilac n gleam of ﬁre. raked compantly together, enabled me to
Hindi: my undle. Nothing was stirring except a hrindled, grey
ﬁt. which crept from the nshes. and saluted me with a quant-
lm new,

Two benches, shaped in sections of a circle, narly enclosed
1i! hennh; on one of these I stretched myself, and Grimalltin
mounted the other. We were both of us nodding. ere any one
Ended our retreat. end then it was Joseph, shuttling dawn n
nodal ladder that vnthed in the roof, through a trap: the
Icenttohlsgmet. I suppose. He cast a sinister lookntthe
Manna which I had enticed to play between the rlhs, swept
ill: at from its elevation, and bestowing himself in the vacancy.
unnamed the opention of stuﬁng a threevinch pipe with
ﬁll-coo. My presence in his sanctum was evidently esteemed n
Mot impatience too shameful for remark: hesilently applied

a a

42 WWII-[BRING HEIGHTS;

the lathe to his lips. folded his arms. and puﬁ'ed any. I
enjoy the hmryunannayed: and shaking out!
wrath. and heaving a profound sigh. he gut up, amt (i
as solannly as Income.

A more elastic {comer} entered um :. and mill ope:
month for is “good morning,"hut cloned itnguin. these]:
nnnehieved; for Harmon Earmhnw wu pea-toning his :
ml!»vaa,innsa'ies of curses directed Igninst everyoh
touched, while he rummaged a. corner for I spade (2 sh
dlgmranghthedriﬂs. Heglnnoedoverthebnckoﬂhe
dilating his nostrils. and draught slime of enehnnging c
with me as with my companion the cat. I gamed. by l
puntious. that egress was allowed, and, leaving my hand
made a movement to follow him. He noticed th'u. end
at an inner door with the end of his spade. intimldng
inmicnlate sound that ihere was the plusewhete I must
changed my locality.

lt opened into the house, where the (anal: werenlzud
Zilleh urging ﬂakes of (issue up the chimney with I. c
bellows ; and Mrs. Heathcliﬁ. kneeling on the heath. in
book by the aid 0‘ the blue. She held her band int:
between the fumhut and. he: eys. and seemed ahooi
her occupation; desisting from it only to abide the sen
covering her with sparks, or to push nmya. dog, may
that snoozled its nose aver-forwydly into ha- hoe.
smprisedwseel-Ieathcliﬂ‘therezlso. Hestoodhythel
back towards me, jm ﬁnishing a stormysoene to poor
who ever and non interrupted her labour to pine): up the
of her apron. and heave an indignant groan.

" And you. you worthlss "—— he broke out as l entered. t
to his daughter-in-law, and employing an epithet'as horn
dunk. orsheep,but generallyrepnsemed by: dash—a ‘
youaremt your idle tricks Igninl The rest of themr‘
their bread—yon live on my charity! Put your tnsh aw:
ﬁnd something to do. You shall pay me for the plague of
you eternally in my sight—do you hear, damnahle jade?‘

“ I'll put my trash away, because you can make in
refue."answered theyoung lady. dmingherboek, :ndth
it on a chair. "But I'll not do anything. though you
swear your tongue out, except what i please l "

Heathch lifted his hand. and the speaker sprang to

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 43

Mace, obviously acquaintedwith its weight. Having nndedre
tnheentemined bye mane-dog combat, I stepped forward
hthly,nsi{¢gatopamhethewmthofthohearth,md
innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted dispute. Each
Menough decorum Io mpend W hostilitiu: Heathdiﬁ
nicedhis ﬁsts. out at“ temptation. in his pockets; Mrs. Heath-
cﬁﬂcuried her lip.n.ndwntlned toeseatfarcﬂ'.where :heltept
hermdbyplaying the part of a statue during the reminder of
Illystay. That was not long. I declined joining their break.
fan. Ed. at the ﬁrst glean of dawn. tooir an opportunity of
Gaping into the free air. now clear, and still, and cold anim-
pnlphie ice.

My hudlord hallooed for me to stop, ere I reached the
Marthe garden, and offered to accompany me across the
mar. It was well he did. for the whole hill-back was one
511on, white omn ; the swells and falls not indicating corru-
yondlng rig: and deptusions in the ground: many pits. a:
lasewee ﬁlled to: 1evel:a.nd entire ranges of mmnds, the
mind the quarries, blotted from the chm which my yuter-
thy'lnlk leﬂ pictured in my mind. I had remarkedon one
ideoftheroad. ntintervnlsofslxor seven yards. alineol’np-
ﬂzht nous. continued through the whole length of the her-ten:
Ihsewereerccted. and daubed with lime on purpose to serve
unﬂaln the dark; and alsowhen a fall, like the present,
mlonnded the deep swamps on either hand with the ﬁrms-
vulh: hut. eacepting a dirty dot pointing up here and there,
in true: of their existence had vanished: and my companion
found it my to wan: rne frequ'enuy to steer to the right in
19“. when I imagined 1 runs following, correctly, the windings
01th: road.

We “ﬂanged little conversation. and he halted at the
Glance of Thrusheross Park, saying. I nould make no error
Me Our adieu: were limited to a hasty bow. and then 1
Med forward. trusting to my own resources; for the porter‘s
lodge'u untennnted as yet. The distance from the gate to the
Gauge is two miles: I believe I managed to makcit four: what
With losing myself among the trea, and sinking up to the neck in
now: a predicament which only those who have experienced it
unappreciate. At any rule, whatever were my wanderings, the
darkchimed twelve as I entered the house ; and that gave molly
Ilhcurforeveryrnile of the usual way from Wuthering Heights.

44 WU‘I'I-‘IERING HEIGHTS.

My human ﬁxture and her satellites rushed to welcome u'
exclaiming, lnmultuously, they had completely given me u
everybody conjectured tint I perished last night ; and ti
were wondering how they must set about the search for 1
remains. I hid them be quiet. now that they 9!! rue return:
and. benumhed to my very hem. I dragged upstairs; wheat
after putting on dry clothes, Ind peeing to and fro thirty
forty minutes, to restore the animal but. I am adjourned
my study. feeble as a kitten: almost too much so to enjaytl
cheerful ﬁre and smoking notice which the servant has preput
for my refrubment.

-——“~—-

CHAPTER IV.

WHAT vain weathereoclts we are! I. who had determined'
hold myself independent of all social intercourse. and thank
my star: that. at length, I had lighted on n spot where itvn
next to impracticable—I, weak wreteh. after maintnining t
dusk a struggle with low spirits and solitude, was ﬁnnllyeot
polled to strike my colours: and, under pretenoe of gainit
information nonceming the “(rarities of my establishment.
desired Mrs. Dean. when she brought in supper. to sit dm
while I ate it : hoping sincerely she would prove a regulargnssi
and either rouse me to animation or lull in: to sleep byhernl

"You have lived here I considmble time," I comment:
"did you not say sixteen years?"

"Eighteen, sir: I came, when the mism was married.
wnit on her; after she died, the master retained me for l
housekeeper."

“ Indeed."

There ensued a pause. She was not a gossip, I {are
miles about her own aﬁ'airs, and those omild hardly interat 1!
However. hnving studied for an interval. with a ﬁst on eitt
knee. und a cloud of meditation over her ruddy oounteuam
she ejaculated—

" Ah. times are greatly olianged since then ! "

"Yes." I renurked. "you‘ve seen u good many dietitians
suppose?"

“I have: and troubles too.” she said.

"Oh. I‘ll turn the tall: on my landlord's family!“ I then:

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 4;

vi myaeJI. "A good subject to start! And that pretty girl-
widow, Ishouldlllretoknowbet‘history: whethershe hen
ntiveetthe country. or, as is more probable. an exotic rhnt the
Indy indigrna will not recognise for kin.“ With this intention
luked'Mrs. Dem why Heltheliﬂ'let Thnrshcross Grange. Ind
pictured living in a situation and residence so much inferior.
"lshenot rich enough to keep the state in good order?" I

. bani-ed.

i “Ridt, sir!" she returned. “He has. nobody knows what
money. And every ya: it increases. Ye. yes. he’s rich enough
folivein 1 ﬁne house than this: but he‘s very near—close
handed; and, irhehadmnt toﬂit to'l‘hmshmoss Grange.»
muhehnrd ofagood tenant hecould not have borneto
mintheehnnoe ofgetting a few hundreds more. It is strange

rwpieshouldbesogreedy.when theyarealpne in the
erd l'I

"Helm! own. it seem?"

"Yes. he had one—he is dead."

"And that young lady. Mrs. Huthcliﬁ'. '5 his widow? "

"Yul.

"Where did she came from originally? "

"Why, ﬁr. she is my late master’s daughter : Catherine Linton
“Shu- maidenname I nursed her. poarthingl Idid wbh
Mt. Henrhclitf would remove here, and then we might havebeen
“Ether uglin."

"What! Catherine Linton?" I exclaimed. astonished. But

‘ ‘ [time's reﬂection convinced me it was not my ghostly
Cllhcrine. " Then," I continued. “ rny predecessor's name was
“man?”

"It was."

"And who is that Enrnshaw: Hamon Eamshaw. who lives
v‘nh Mr. Heaxhcliff? are they relations? "

“No; he is the late Mrs. Linton‘s nephew."

"The young lady’s cousin. then i’"

' “Yes; and her husband was her cousin also: one on the
We. the other on the Ether”: side : Heathcliﬂ‘ married Mr.
Liam's-rim."

"I lee the house at Wuxhering Heights has 'Enrnshaw'
ﬁned over the front door. Are they on old family?"

"Va, old. sir; and Hareton is the lust of them. as our Miss
Myisoful—Imeanotthe Linwns. Haveyoubeento

46 W85 HEIGHTS.

Wuthering Heights! I hq pnrdonl’nrsking; but 1 din
liketohenrhowsheisl" V

“st. Hathcliil‘? Shaloohedveryweanndveryhnndm
yet, I think. not very happy."

"Oh dear. I don't wonder! And how did you like:
master?"

' ‘Arongh fellow. rather. Mrs. Dam. Isnotthathis dismal

" Rough as a saw-edge. and hard as whinslnncl Theler
meddle with him the bette.’ ' >

“He must have had some.an and downs in life to make hi
such I ohurl. Dayan know mything 11' his history?"

“ It's A cuckoo‘s. sir—I know all about it: wept where hem
born. and whowerehis parents, and howhegnth'smmq,1
ﬁrst. And Homonhasbemust out likeuunﬂedgeddnnnnd
The unfortunate lad is the only one in all this parish that vb
not guns how he hm been dialed."

"Well. Mrs. Dem. it will be a. charitable deed to tell u
something of my neighbours: I feel I shall not rest, it I gm
bed: so be good enough to lit and chat on hour."

“Oh, certainly. sir! I’ll just fetch a little sewing, and [hi
I’ll sit as long as you plane. But you've taught cold: I an
you shivering, and you must hue some grnel to drive it out.‘

Theworthy woman hustled of. and l crunched nearu'theﬁn
my head felt hot. md the rest of me chm: moreover. I was e
cited. almost to a pitch of foolishneg. through my nerves II
brain. This mused me to feel. not uncomfortable. but nth
fearﬁll (as [am still) of serious eﬁects from the incident: of t
day Ind yesterday. Shereturned prsently. bringingamkix
basin and a basket of work: and. having placed the formert
the hob. drew in her seat, evidently pleased to ﬁnd me so out
pnnionahle.

Before I came to live here, she oammemed—niting I
further invitation to herstory—l was Almost nlwny: at Wmheril
Heights; because my mother had nursed Mr. Hindley Earnshm
that was Hareton's hither, and I got used to plnying with I!
children: l run errands too, and helped to make hay. u
hung about the farm ready for Anything that nnybndywnld 1
me to. One ﬁne Iumrner morning—it was the beginning
harvest, I remember—Mr. Enrnshaw, theold mum. endow

manna llme 47

Iain. dmsed fortjoumcy: and after he had 101d Imp}: whn
nu: hedone duringthcdny, he turned in Hindkyand Clthy,
name-{u I matth porridgewhhﬂmn—and heaid.
lining to his m. "Now my bunny mu. I'm going» Liver-
yaoho-cby. mm Itringym? You may chamevhnyon
like: tablet i1 beﬁnhﬁxlshnuwdkthete-nd hack: sixty
mach way. that is a long span 1 " Kindley named: ﬁddle,
udlhnheudeis Cathy; shcwuhardly six years 01d. hm
Should ride uyholsein the able. and she chute a whip.
Hedid not target me: for he had a kind hart. though he WIS
mum mains. Hz: plumbed to bring men pocket-
iﬂdlpplsndpelxs.lnd1heu he kissed his chﬂdm,snid
Mtge. Ind m MT.

ll leaned Ibngvlhﬂe ‘0 In nil—the three day: of his Ihsencc

and“ did little Cllhy nsk when he would be home Mrs.
Famhu apeaed him by supper—ﬁne on the third evening.
with: put them] oﬁhuunfm-ham': there were no signsor
him-hing. hm, and .1 last the children got tired of running
ﬁnwmegnemlook. Then it grew/dark: shewmldbavc
Mmmhad, but (heybeggedndly to benﬂowed to layup;
Ind. just about eleven o‘clock. the door-latch mu miss! quieﬂy
andme the master. Hedmh'nnselfinboldmr.
Justin: Ind gunning. and hid than allmnd oﬂ'. fmhewns
lady killed—I: could nu have such anon“: walk for the
humans.
‘ "M n Mend diz,tobeﬂighmd malth ! " hemid. open-
“! his grunt-coat, which he held bundled up in his arms. " Soc
kernel I wasneverlo beaten with anythingin mylh'e: but
Mme'an take i! In: giﬁn! God: thong: it‘s 15 Ml;
Muiritumeﬁmthedwil."

Wemdadvound. mam Mi: thy'shad. Ihad a pa»
Ilndinygnggd, Had-hhdchild; big myabath mwﬂk
31d talk: indeed. its {we looked old: than Camel-inf“ yet.
mumumiufeetJimry smdmmimdrepenmd
“Hand on: again some gibbaish, that howdy eouid under-
Fand. lesirightaiedmnd Mrs. Winn: mdytoﬂing
'l on: of doors: she did ﬂy up, asking how he could fashion to
Hum mm: into it: houz,whcn1heyhndxhclrown
hhmrwmmlmr Wthe mamudowimismud
Wham m? The Inth muphinthem:
h: hens mﬂy‘hﬂf dead with (nine. and all that I could

48 WWII-[BRING HEIGHTS.

make out. amongst her scolding. was 1 tale of his A:
starving, and houseles. and as good as dumb. in the at:
Liverpool: where he picked it up and inquired for its
Not n soul knew to wharn it belonged, he said ; Ind his
end time being both limited. he thought it better to tslrei
with him at once, than run into vain expenses there: he:
was determined he would not lave it as he found it. W.
conclusion was that my mistras grumbled herself min
Mr. Enrnshnw told me to wash it, and give it clean thing
let it sleep with the children.

Hindley Ind Czthy contented themselvs with lookin
listening till peace was restored: then. both begun set
their father's pockets for the presents he had promised
The former was a boy of fourteen. but when he drew on
had been I ﬁddle crushed to morsels in the graham
hiuhhered island; and Cathy. when she learned the mast
lost her whip in attending on the stmger, showed her h
by grinning and spitting nt the stupid little thing; anti
her pains a sound blow from her fnthu- to teach her t
manners. They entirely refused to have it in bed with th
evenintheirmm; nndlhadmmoresense.solputir
landing of the stairs. hoping it might be gone on the in
By chance. or else attrncted by hearing his voice. it crept
Earnshaw's door, and then he found it on Quitting his ehr
Inquiries were made as to how it got there .- [was ohli
eonfas. and in recompense for my cowardiee and inhur
was sent cut of the house.

This was Hethcliﬂ‘s ﬁrst introduction to the family
coming back nfew days afterwards (for I did not cousin
banishment perpetual) I found they had christened him " l
dim" it was the name of a son who died in childhood,
has served him ever since. both for Christian and surname.
Cathy and he were now very thick ; but HindIey hated him
to say the truth I did the same; nndwe plagued and w:
with him shamefully : for I wasn't rmsonable enough to i
injustice, and the mistras never put in a word on his
when she saw him wronged.

He seemed I sullen. patient child; hardened, perhaps.
trutment: he would sand Hindley’s blow: without wink
shedding 3 rear. and my pinches moved him only to dn
breath and open his eyes, as if he had hurt himself lay It

WUTHEIUNG HEIGHTS;

‘ Ind nobody was to Home This endurance nude old Earnslnw

irious, when he discovered his son persecuting thepoor. father-
hchild. as he ﬁlled him. He took to Henthch'ﬂ' strangely.
Mining all he said (for that nutter. he said precious little, and
my the truth). and petting him up far nhove Cathy. who
in no mischievous and wayward for a favourite.

Sn. {mm the very beginning, he bred lnd feeling in the house ;
In! at Mrs. Enrnshnw's dam. whid) happened in in: than two
yuls It‘ter. the young muster had learned to regard his father
Inn uppressor tuber than a friend. and Healhcliﬂusa usurper
d’h‘u parent's aﬁections and his privileges; end he grew bitter
'ﬁhhnoding aver thde injuries. I sympothised I while; but
whathe children fell ill of the measles, and Ihad toteud them.
MakeonmethecaresofnwomnatonceJehangedmy
Has. Helthclih'wu dangaously sick : and while he lAy at the
vent he would have me constantly by his pillow: I suppose he
Htldidngood deal for him, and he hadn't wit to guess that
In: compelled to do it. However. I will say this. he was the
quiet: child that ever nurse watched over. The difference
balmhim and Iheothetsforeed me tobelnspnrtinl. Cathy
and he brother harassed me terribly: It: was as uncomplairu'ng
at n hmh; though hardnm. not gentleness, made him give
little mbk.

He got thmgh, and the doctor Iﬁnned it w“ in u great
mewingtomemnd praised mefor myure. Iwnsvuin
0‘ his commendation, and softened towards the being by whose
man: I med them, and thus Hindley lost his last nlly: still
[unldn't date on Hmthnliﬂ'. and I wondered am what my
Mar saw to admire so much in the sullen boy. who never. to
“recollection, repaid ht indulgence by any sign of gratitude.
1km not lmolent to his benefactor. he was simply lnsasible'.
Mb knowing perfectly the hold he had on his hart, end
Wmhehad onlytospuk and all the home would be
Obliged to bend tohlswlshes. Assn instance, 1 member Mr.
blush-w one: bought a coupled colts at the parish fair. and
(IV: the lads eueh one. Heatheliﬂ took the haudsornal. but it
can tell Inme, and when he discovered it. he said to Him-Hey-

"Youmustexclungehmses with me: Idon'tlike mine; and
“you won't I shall tell your inther of the three thrashing: you've
Mme this week. and show him my nm, which in black to
new." Hlndley put out his tongue and uniﬁed him over

$0 WING mums.

Ihemrs. "You'd bemu- dc it at once," be pm. m
tothepotuhﬂheymin thesuhle): "yoan invetoznd
iflxpeak ofIMehlu-s. you'll get thin uglinwithhnnﬂ.‘
“03', dug!" u‘ied Hindley. ﬁrming hill with an ill
weight need for weighing potatoes and hay. “Thur ifh
replied. standing still, “and. then I'll tell baryon build M
yauwouldturnrneomot'doorsnsmnnthedied.udn
whether he will not tin-n you out directly." Hindley thmio
hitting him on the brest, and dawn he tell. but staggered Q
immediately. breathlus end white; and. had not I prevail!
it,hewanldlnvegmeinstsotothem.amigufll
revengeby letting his condition plan {or him, intimﬁqllb
had caused it. "Tnkemy colt, gipsy. Ihenl"nid yamgli‘nrl
shaw. “And I pray that he may hmkyonr neck: Kahlil.
and be damned. you Mggnrly interloper l and wheedle my rate
on: of all he has: only afterwards show him what you Ire. imp
of Satan—And take that, I hope he'll kick out your hrninsl“
Heathcliﬂ' had gone to loose the beast, and shit! it to his all
stall: he was passing behind it, when Hindley ﬁnishd 3
speech by knocking him under its feet, nnd without naming b
examine whether h's hopes were fulﬁlled, m away IS {uni
he could. I was surprised to witness how molly the dill
gathered himself up, and went on with his intention : ennui“
saddles and all, and then sitting down on n bundle of hnyw
overcame the quzlm which the violent blow ceasiumd. Mal
he entered the house. I persuaded him easily to let the lay a
blame of his bruises on the horse: he minded little what ml
was told since he had what he wanted. He complained I
seldnm. indeed. of such stixs As these. that I rally thought hi!
not vindictive: l was deceived completely, nsyou will hat.

ﬂ..—

CHAP’I‘ER V.

IN the course of time, Mr. E-n-nshaw began to (nil. He in
been native and healthy. yethis strength left him suddmly: nil
when he was conﬁned to the chimneymer he grew grievonsl:
irritable. A nothing vexed him: and suspected slight; of hi
authority nearly threw him into tits. This was spurinlly to h
rein-ﬂied if any one umpted to impose upon. or mains:

WING um 51’

invaurite: hem painfullyjmlms 1m nwudnhould
imisstohinaz'neerrringm huegutimohishendthe
mm helihed Heddiﬁ..ﬂhmd.mdhn¢ed to
n’illtun. llwldiﬂmhﬁh the lad; for the
mudidunlwiduolretthemter.mwehumnd
my: adds-t hill-naming as rich nonrishmenuo the
idenndlﬂanktanpen. Stillitbecameinnmmner
: twice, orthriee. Hindlcy's mifeumim of scam,
Cztha'wasneur, ran-ed \heoldmnn tonl'nry: heseized
ostrihehimmndshookwithngethmhecauldnotdoit.
,onrmmehehadacnntethenwhamldethe
swer by mdﬁng the little Lian and Mam.
in; his hit of had himself) advised that the young
lid be run to college; and Mr. Eunsbtw W,
ith a heavy spirin for he said—" Hindlq was naught,
d nevu- thrive a: when he wandered."
:l bprtily we should have peace now. It hurt me to
we should be made uncomfortable by his own
:i. 1 fancied the discontent afageanddiaauarose
hmily disagreements: u he would have it that it did :
In hour. sir, it was in his sinking (tame. We might
on mlenbly. notwitlmnding, but for two people.
nynnd Imph. the servant: younw him, I may.
5‘. He "Is. and is yet most likely. the wearimmesz
mphar'aee that ever nnsneked n Eible in nkethe
tohinlsdf nnd ﬂing the curses to his neighbours. By
of sermonisingand pious dinooursing. hecomrived ID
gm: impressiononMx.Eamslmv: anthem
:maﬁa'bemne.themeinﬂnencehegnhe¢ He
ulcsinworryinghimaburthbsonl'seoncemmnd
in; his children rigidly. Hemced himtn ward
as a reprohnte; and. night after night. he regularly
in: I long string dais-glint Henthcliﬂ'nnd
:2 ahmy minding to ﬂatter Earnshnw‘s weakness by
he ham blame on the latter.
Lly. she ind my: with her sud) as I never saw I child
dare: nndshepntallofusmturputimﬁfytimes
in in l day: {run the hnnrsheenrne dowruuks till
she went tn bad. we bid not a minute's security that
Ih‘t he in Her spirits were nlwlyl ﬂ lith-
ui. her tongue always going—dinghy. my. Ind

52 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

plaguing everybody who would not do the same. A wild. wi
slip she was—but she had the bonniest eye, use sweetnt Ii
and lightest foot in the parish : and. an: all. I believeshe In
no harm; [or when onceshe madeyou cryingood urn:
seldom happened that she would not keep you oompany.
ohlige you to be quiet that you might comfort her. She
much too fond of Heathcliﬂ'. The greatest punishment we e
invent {or her wastolteephersepuntefmm him: yet she
chided more than any of us on his account. In play. she)
exceedingly to act the little mistress : Ising her hands freely.
commanding her companions: she did so to me. but I would
bar shopping and ordering; and so I let her know.

Now, Mr. Eumshuw did not undmtaml jokes {mm
children: he had always been strict and grave with than;
Catherine, on her part. had no idea why he: tuther shook
arose: and 15: patient in his ailing condition. than he w:
his prime. His peevish reproofs wukened in her a nan
delight to provoke him: she was neverso happy as with
were all scolding hm- nt onoe. and she defying us with her!
saucy look. and her ready wards ; turning Joseph's relil
curses into ridicule, baiting me, and doing jut what herﬁ
hated most—showing how her pretended insolenae. whld
thought real. had more power over Heathcliﬂ'than h'uhindn
how the boy would do lter bidding in anything. and h':
when it suited his own inclination. After behaving as hull
possible all day. she sometimes more fondling to make it u
night. " Nay. Cathy," the old man would shy. " I cannot
thee : thou'rt worse than thy brother. Go. say thy prayers, ti
and ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue
weaver-reared thee!" Thatmade hercry.nt ﬁrst: andv
being repulsed continually hardened her, and she laughed il' 1
her to say she was sorry {or her faults. and beg to be inrgiw

But the hour came. at last, that ended Mr. Eunshaw‘s trail
on earth. He died quietly in his chair one October even
seated by the ﬁreside A high wind blustered round the ha
and roared in the chimney: it sounded wild and stormy. y
was not cold. and we were all together—I. it little removedl
the hearth. busy at my knitting, and Joseph leading his I
near the table (for the sew-nu generally sat in the house 1'
utter their workwas done). Mix Cathy hnd been sick. and
made her still ; she lcnnt against her father s knee. and Hail

WUTHBRING HEIGHTS. s ;

Ilying on the ﬂoor with his head in her lap. i remember the
mar. before he fell into a doze. stroking her bonny hair—it
him rarely to see her gentle—and snying—" Why enlist
not always hengood Inst. Cathy?" And she turneth
up to his. and laughed. and answered, “Why cannot you
,3 be e good man, father?" But as soon as she saw: him
ngnin. she klssed his hand. and said she would sing him
M. She began singing very low, till his ﬁngers dropped
Inks, end his had sunk on his breast. Then I told her to
Hand not stir, for far she should wake him. We all kept as
I: u mice n lull half-hour. and should have done so longer.
llyjnteph, having ﬁnished his chaptu. got up nnd said that
harm rouse the master for prayers end bed. He stepped
lined. and milled him by name,nnd touched his shoulder;
Hhe'ould not move. so hetook the candle Ind looked at him.
I Wt there in: something wrong Is he set down the light ;
Nailing the children each by Ill arm. whispered them to
"ﬁlm: upehin, Ind make little din—they might pny Alone
linterning—he had summut to do."

"I dull hid father good-night ﬁrst." said Catherine, putting
hulls round his neck. before we could hinder her. The poor
“it; discovered her loss directly—she screamed our—" Oh.
ll‘l deed. Heathcliﬂ'l he‘s deadl" And they both set up 1
Wiring cry.

I joined my wail to thelrs, loud and bitter; but Joseph asked
'lltve could be thinking of to roar in rhnt way over n saint in
km. He told me to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton
hthedoclor nod the person. I could not guess the usethax
Mann“ he of. then. However, I went. through wind and
Nil. Ind brought one. the doctor, back with me ; the other said
5! mid come in the morning. leaving Joseph to explain
“has; I run to the children‘s room: their door was njnr, I
"they had never laid down, though it was past midnight;
hut theywere calmer, and did not need me to console them.
Thelittle souls were comforting eneh other with better thoughts
"In i could have hit an: no person in the world ever pictured
ham so beautifully on they did. in their innoeent talk: and.
Wild sohhed and lhtened, I could not help wishing we were
Ill the safe together.

 
   
  
   

N

34 \VDTHERING 31:le

CHAPTER VI.

Mu. HINDLEY came home In the funnel; and—e thir
amazed us. and set the neighbours gushing right and]:
brought n wife with him What she was, and where s‘
born, he never informed us: probably she had na'thu'
nor name to recommend her, or he would scarcely hi!
the union from his father. .

She was not one that would have disturbed the house
on hut own Account. Every object she saw, the manic
crossed the threshold, nppeared to delight her: and en
cumstanoe that took place about her: except the prepcl
the burial. and the presence of the mourners. I thong
was half silly, from her behaviour while thnt went on: i
into her chamber. and made me come with her, though I
have been dream; the children : and there she sat shim-ii
dnsping her hunds. and asking repeatedly—"Are the;
yet?" Then she began describing with hystaical emotl
eﬁ'ect it produced on her to see black : and stoned. and tree
and, at last, fell n-weeping—nnd when I asked what u
matter? answered, she didn't know: but she felt so an
dying] I imagined her as little likely to die as myseil
was rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexioned, n
eys sparkled as bright as diamonds. I did remark. It: 11
that mounting the stairs made her brathc very quick: ll
least sudden noise set her all in n quiver, and that she or
troublesomely sometimes: but I knew nothing of what
symptoms portended, and had no impulse to sympatth
her. We don't in general tnlre to foreigners here. Mr.
wood. unlas they take to us ﬁrsL

Young Enrnshnw was altered considerably in the threr
of his absence. He had grown sparer, and lost h'u color
spoke and drssed quite diﬂ'erently ; and. on the very day
return. he told Joseph and me we must thenceforth quart
selvs in the hack~kitchcn, and leave the house {or him. I
hewould have carpeted and popered a small spare rorn
parlour ; but his wife expraed such platsure at the whit
and huge glowing ﬁre-place. at the pewter dishes Ind del
Ind dog-kennel. and the wide space there was to move
invhel‘e they usually at. that he thought it unnecﬁsary
Wm, And so dropped the intention.

WIRING HEIGHTS. $5

Wm.too,uﬁndinga§smmgham
m;andshe pnmed Io Cuba-ins. and Iii-ad he.
laboutwﬂhha.lndgavehcrqunﬁxiso€r8nls.
ginning. Her nﬁction uqu very-soon. ham. and
be new peev‘uh, Hinqu beam: Win]. A few
Eromhcr,cvindngldisﬁketoﬂa1hdillmenangh
einhimallhisoldhnuedonheboy. Hedmvehim
dlwmpanylolhesuvnnu. deplivedhimofllu instruc-
ftheamu.-andins'medthaxheshouldhbunromof
m:eompdﬂnghinto dowuhmdnlmyodm-
dictum.

Wmhkdcgndnﬁonpmtywdluﬁn.heunse
Inch! himwhatshehrnhandwukadorphyadvilh
"JAM Theybolh pmm'sed kitmgrovupasmd:
g5; Ibeyonngmastabeingenmdy Ingling how they
tnndwhaxdrydid.sotheykepldasolhim. He
notcven nausea.de their going lochumh onSnndays.
Hephandlhecunurepﬁmnnddhiamwhen
WW6; andlhatruninddhimtaorder
“slingingnndcmhzrineafanﬁomdmasnppa.
mmoftbdrchidm‘mmismmmmlhem
mningudmmninlhmaﬂday.mdtheaﬁetpunish~
Mamihinglolanghat. Tbccnmcmightsetu
:hlpiasuheplusediorCatha-inclogabyhm.md
nighlmnshﬂnlhdjﬁdu hisamuhcdgihqugot
ing the minute thgy were wgethe again: a! Imt the
they hadwnirimd some mnghty plan of my; and
Him I'veu’iedtomysclfmwacchthcmgmwing mare
“Mum I not daring to spnklsyﬂzhleJoriearol
hmﬂpowlsﬁnmzinedomlhennfriendedm
undaycveningjt danced lbaxlheywaebmishedfrom
ling-room. for making a noise, or 1 light «fence of the
nndvhenlwemmcalhhemcosxppedemlﬂdiswvu
what. We arched the house. nborve and below. and
dandsublu: theywa! invisible: “dad-5!. I-Iindleyina.
Imldnsmbonlhedoommdsworenobodyshoﬂdlathm
nigh-t. ThebmsdwldwenuobednndIJoonnxiousm
rumpus! myhnicemd pun:th aux whadnm.
lilninﬂl: determined to admit than: inspiu of the pro-
n. should they return. In I while. I distinguished mp!
updated. and thelight oral-men: gnawed WI:

56 wurnanmc HEIGHTS.

the gate. I threw a thawl over my head and run to prev
from waking Mr. Earnshnw by knocking. There was H
hyhirnself: itgavcmenstarttomehlmnlone

" Where is Miss Catherine ? " I cried hurriedly. " No
! hope?" "At Thrushuos Grange," he answered;
would hive been there too. but they had not the mun:
me to stay." "Well, you will catch itl" I said: "yo\
be content till you're sent about your busineu Wh:
world led you wandering to Thnisheross Grange?’ ‘
get at! my wet clothes. and I'll tell you nll about it. N
replied. I bid hirn beware of rousing the mater, end
undrﬁsed end I waited to put out the candle. he cor
“ Cathy and I escaped from the wash-house to have a 1
liberty. 1nd getting a glimpse of the Grange lights, we
we would just go and see whether the Untons pas
Sundsy evenings standing shivering in corners, while th
and mother sat ating and drinking. and s‘nging and l
and burning their eys out before the ﬁre. Do you t}
do? Or reading sermons, and being catechised by th
servant, end set to learn a column of Scripture name
don‘t nnswer properly?" " Probably not." I responded.
are good children. no doubt. and don't deserve the I
you receive. for your bad conduct.” “Don‘t cant, N
said : "nonsense! We ran from the top of the Heigh
park. without stopping—Catherine completely beaten in
because she was barefoot. You'll have to seek for her
the bog to-rnorrow. We crept through a broken hedge
our way up the path. and planted ourselves on a ﬂower-p
the drawing-room window. The light came from then
llnd not put up theshutters, and the curtains were only ha
Both of us were able to look in by standing on the basen
clinging to the ledge. end we eaw-nhl it was ha
splendid place carpeted with crimson, and crimson-cover
and tables. and 3 pure white ceiling bordered by gold.
of glassdrops hanging in silver chnins from the cer
shimmering with little soft tapers. Old Mr. and Mrs
were not there ; Edge: and his sister had it entirely to the
Shouldn't they have been happy 7 We should have thov
selves in heaven l And now. guess what your good chi]:
doing? Inbella—I believe she 'u eleven. a yur youn
Cathy—lay screaming at the ﬁrther end of the room, :

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 57

i Minimizes wee running red-hot needles into her. Edgar stood

cube hunt. weeping silently. and in the middle of the table
Ill little dog. shaking its paw and yelping; which. from their
mutual muons. we understood they had nnrly pulled in two
between them. The idiotsl That was their Measure 1 to qtnrrei
'50 should hold a heap of worm hair. and each begin to cry
beam both. me: struggling to get it. refused to take it. We
hnghed outright at the petted things: we did despise them!
when would you catch me wishing to have what Catherine
tuned? or ﬁnd us byourselvt-s, seeking entertainment in yelling.
Ind sobbing. and rolling on the ground. divided by the whole
man? I'd not enehnnge. for a thmmnd lives. my condition
he. tor Edgar Linton's at Thrushcross Grunge-mot il I might
hnthe privilege of ﬂinging Joseph off the highest gable. and
Filling the house-front with Hindley's blood I "

“ Hush, hush l " l interrupted. " Still you have not told me.
Hatheliﬂ‘, how Catherine is left behind P"

"I told you welnughed," he answered. " The Linton: heard
In. Ind with one ecoord. they shot like arrows to the door : there
“silage. end then: cry, 'Oh. mammn. momma! Oh. papa!
0h. momma. come hue. 0h. papa. ohl' They really did
bailout something in that way. We made frightful noises to
Eltify them still more. and then we dropped of the ledge.
bmse somebody was drawing the bars. and we felt we had
his leg I had Cuthy by the hand. and was urging her on.
“In nil st once she fell down. ‘ Run. Heathcliﬂ', runl' she
whine-ed. ‘ They havelet the bull-dog loose. end he holds me! '
Thedevil had nixed her ankle, Nelly: I heard his abominable
liming. She did not yell nut—no] she would have scorned to
‘0“. it'she hadbeeu opined on the horns of: mad cow. I did.
l“thigh: I vocifernted cum enough to annihilate any ﬁend in
Christendom; and I got a stone end tlmrst it between his jaws.
I “mmmullmymighttocrun itdowu his throat. Abeest of
' III-vent came up with a lantern. II. last, shouting—‘ Keep fast.

W, keep futl' He changed his note. however, when he
ll Skullreﬂ game. The dog was throttied of; his huge.
P'Pk tongue hanging half a foot out of his mouth. had his
Student lips scanning with bloody sisver. The man took
my up: she was sick: not from fear, I'm certain. but from
I'll. Hewried her in ; I followed, grumbling exemtions and
late-nee. ‘Whut prey. Robert?“ hailooed Linton from the

$8 \VUTHEIING HEIGHXS.

entrance 'Skulher has caught a little girl. sir,’ he repllr
'and there's a lad here,’ he edited, ranking echneh at me, '1:
looks an “tend-outer l Very like, the rosz were is: putt!
them through the wlndowtoapenthedoorsmthcgnngnﬁc
were asleep. that they might minder In It their use. ﬁt
your tongue, you faul~mouthed thief, yonl you m go tn t
gallows for this. Mr. Linton, sir, don't lnyhy yourgun.’ 'N
no. Robert,’ said the old fool ‘ Therascals knew that yam!
was my rent—day: they thought to have me cleverly. Cami
l'll furnish them a reception. There. John, tester: the till
Give Skulker some water. Jenny. To hard I magimteinl
stronghold. and on the Sabbath, too 1 Where will their insole!
stop? Oh. my dear Mary, look here! Don't be afraid. it
but a boy—yet the villain seowls so plainly in his face: m
it not be a kindnss to the country to hang him It dune. hdl:
he shows his nature in acts as well as i’eeturu?’ He pulled r
under the chandelier, and Mrs. Untan placed her spectndsl
her not Ind raised her hind: in honor. The cowardly child!
crept neuter also. lsahelln lisping—‘Frightful thingl Path
in the cellar. papa. He‘s exactly like the son of the form
teller thnt stole my tame pheasant. Isn't he, Edgar?‘

" While they mined me. Cathy tame round; sheheudl
last speech, and laughed. Edgar Linton, alter m inquﬂti
sure, collected sulﬁeienr wit to recognise her. They see in
church, you know, though we seldom meet them elsewk
‘ That's Miss Farnshnw l ’ he whispered to his mother, ‘I
look how Skulirer hes bitten her—how her foot bleeds I '

"‘Miss Enrashnvr? Nonsensel' cried the dnme; 'M
Earnshnw scouring the country with n gipsyl And yer. i
dear, the child is in mourning—surely it is—nrrd she may
lamed far life l'

" ' Whit culpable carelessness in ha- brother ! ' welsh!
Mr. Linton. turning from me to Catherine. ' I've unclean
from Shielders'“ (that was the curate. sir) “'thnt he lets]
grow up in absolute heathenisrn. But who is this? Where!
she pick up this companion? Oho! I declare he is that suit
nequisirion my late neighbour made, in his journey to Live?!)
—a little Lnsear, or an American In Spanish “away!

" ‘ A wicked boy. at all events.‘ lemerked the old lady. ' I
quite unﬁt for a decent housel Did you natlee his huge:
Lintnn? I’m shocked that my children should have hard it

wurmzkmc Hues-is. 59

" I mmmenoed cursing—don't be angry. Nelly—and so
Rabat was ordered to take me OE I refused to go without
My; I: dragged me into the garden. pushed the lantern into
lyhnnd, usual me that Mr. Earnshaw should be informed of
It] mm, and, bidding me march directly. seem-ed the
“regain. The minis were still looped up at one earns,
and I minted my station as spy; heunse. if Catherine had
wished to letnrn, ! intended shattering their great glass pan: to
.miilionot'frngments. nulx they let her out. She sat on the
“My. Mrs. Linton took oﬁ‘ the grey cloak of the dairy-
l-id which we had borrowed for our excursion. shaking her
had and expostnlnting with her. I suppose: shewasayoung
Judy. and they made I distinction between her tmtment and
min. Then the womwvant brought a basin of warm water.
Ildwubd herfeet; and Mr. Linton mixed a tumblerofnqus.
lad label]: pu'ed a platdul ofnnkes into her lap. and Edgar
mod upping at I distance. Afterwards. they dried and combed
he handful hair, Ind gave her a pair of enormous siippas. and
Mun-unheﬁre; andlleﬁhermsmerryussheeouldhe,
dividing her food between the little dog and Skulker. whose nose
“I: pinched as he ate; and kindling n sped: of spirit in the
'Iantblneeyud’the Batons—nah: rdection from her own
Quintin; fun. I saw they were full of stupid ndmintim:
{'2 "I so immhly supa'ior to them—lo everybody on earth.
I he not. Nelly P "

"Tine will more come of this businas than you reckon on." I
lined. eovering him up Ind extinguishing the light. “ You
mhcunﬂe. Heathdiﬂ‘: and Mr. Hindley will have to proceed
hmunitis. see it he won't." My words came truer thnn 1
“did. The lunkles advmture made BANE-haw {man And
'5! Hr. Liam. to mend manners. paid ns 3 visit himself on
“Ina-mt; and read the youngmastersuchn lecturean the
fudhegnided his family. that he was stimd to look about him.
“ m Hamel“! received no ﬂogging, but he was told that
hum word he spoke to Miss Catherine should ensure a dis-
.hl: Ind Mrs. Parrish”: undertook to keep her sister-in-law
. due tau-lint when she renn-ned home: employing art. not
kn: with {one the would have found it impossible.

—oe———-

6a wumnnmc HEIGHTS.

CHAPTER VII.

CATHY stayed at Thrushcross Grange ﬁve week : till Christ
By that time her nnlrle was thoroughly cured. and her mu
much improved. The mistress visited her often in the late
and commenced her plan of reform by trying to raise her
respect with ﬁne clothes end ﬂattery. which shetooltreadily
that. instead of a wild. listless little savage jumping int:
hause. and rushing to squeeze us all hmthless. there 'li'
from a handsome black pony a very digniﬁed person, with h
ringlets falling from the cover or n feathered beaver. Ind a
cloth habit. which she was obliged to hold up with bath hi
that she might sail in. Hindley lifted her from her horse
claiming delightedly. " Why, Cathy. you are quite 1 beauty
should scarcely have known ymi: yau look like a lady |
Isabella Linton is not to be compared with her. is she, Print:
"Isabella. has not her natural advantages." replied his I
" but she must mind and not grow wild againhere. mien.
Miss Catherine oﬂ‘ with her things—46y. dear. you win
arrrange your curls—let me untie your hat.”

I removed the habit, and there shone forth beneath. a g
plaid silk frock, white trousers, and burnished shoes : and”
her eyts sparkled joyfully when the dogs came bounding n
welcome her, she dare hardly touch them lat they should i
upon her splendid gmnents. She kissed me gently: I we
ﬂour making the Christmas cake. and it would not have t
to give me a. hug; and, then, she looked round for Heath
Mr. nnd Mrs. Farnshaw watched anxiornly their meeting; I!
ing it would enable them tcjudge, in some measure, what gm
they had for hoping to succeed in separating the two friends

Heathclil'f was hard to discover. at ﬁrst. If he were can
and unwed (or, before Catherine's ahSenee. he had been
times more so, since. Nobody but I even did him the kind
to call him a dirty boy, and hid him wash himself. oneeaw
and children of his age seldom have a natural pleasure in :
nnd water. 'l'herefure, not to mention his clothes. which
seen three months' service in mire and dust, and his thick
combed hair, the surface of his face and hand: was (fun
heclauded. He might well sitqu behind the settle. on behol
such a bright. graceful damsel enter the house. instead of a ru
headed counterpart of himself. as he expected. “ Is Henri

wry-mums HEIGHTS. 61

  
     
  
  

here?" she denuded. pulling off her gloves. and displaying
wondufully whiluwd wixh doing nothing and slaying

"Halhcliﬁ‘. you may come forward." cried Mr. Hindley,
his discomﬁture, and gratiﬁed to see wha! a forbidding
blackguard he would be compelled to present himself.
3 “You may come and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like (he
. as.

Cathy, catching u glimpse of her friend in his concealment,
membrane him; she bestowed seven or eight kiss on his

inso I lmlgh. cumming. “Why. how very black nd
to. yon look! And how—how funny and grim! But that's
Manse I‘m used to Edgar md Isabella Linton. Well, Hath-
ﬂl‘. hue you forgotten me?"

She had some reason 10 pm the queslion, for shame and
I'd: Ihm double gloom over his countenance. and kept him

. “Shake hands. Huthcliﬂ'.“ said Mr. Enrnshaw. condescend-
' WY: " once in n ﬂy, that is permitted."

"1 dull not," replied the boy, ﬁnding his tongue I! ins! ; " 1
' lhlllwuundmbehughed an Ishnll notbearitl"

. All-i he would have broken from the circle. but Miss Cathy
' EH him ngnin.

» “laid not mean to laugh at you." she said; “ I could no!
1 “Ida myself: Hathcliﬂ. slnke hands at least! What are you
ll] for? I! wls only Kiln you looked odd. If you wash your
hindhrush yomhairirwiilbenllrighi: bulyouucsodirxyl"

Shegugd oonnemedly In the dusky ﬁngers she held in her
"I. Ind also It her dial; which she feared had gained no
Glimmer“ from its 00an with his. .

"You needn't hue touched me I " he answered. following
km and snatching uway his hand. " I shall he as dirty as
lung: and I like u: be dirty. and I will be dirty."

With Ihnl he duhed head foremost out of the room. amid the
lumen! of tho mnsur and misuss. and to the serious disturb-
Ia of Catherine; who could not comprehend how her remarks
Mid hue pr!)an such an exhibition of bad temper.

Mia playing lady's-maid to the new-corner. and pulling my
in in the oven. sud making the house and kitchen cheerful
I“ grant lira. beﬁtting Christmas eve. I prepared to sit down

6: WVTHERING moms.

and amuse myself by singing urols. all alone; m1
Joseph's aﬁrmntious that he oonsihed the nary runs 1 ch
as next door to songs. He had retired to private prnyuil
chamber, and Mr. and Mrs. Eamshaw were mm m
attention by sundry gay triﬂe: hmght for he to present MI
little Lintons. as an acknowledgment of their kinda: '1!
had invited them to spend the marrow a! Wutherln' Hdgl
and the invitation had been accepted, on one condition: i
Linton begged that her darlings might be kept cueluﬂyql
from tha " naughty swearing boy."

Under these circumstances I remained solitary. I 1m.
rieh scent of the hosting spied: uud admired theihiniugﬂiﬂ
utensils, the polished clock. decked in holly. the like Ill
rangedonatmyreadytobe ﬁlledwith mulledule format
and above all. the speckless purityof my particular ale—t
scoured and well-swept ﬂoor. I gave due inwnrd applia-
every object, and then I remembered how old Banish-w I
to come in when all was tidied, and call me u cant lass. end i
n shilling into my hand as a Christmas-box: Ind from M
went on to think of his fondness for Heathcliﬁ'. and his dn
lest he should suffer neglect alter dun: had removed him: I
that naturally led me to consider the poor lad's situation at
and from singing I changed my mind to crying. It m'
soon, however, there would be more sense in endeavouring
repair some of his wrongs than shedding tars over them: it
up and walked into the court to seek him. He was not far
found him smoothing the glossy coat of the new pony lu‘
stable. and feeding the other beasts, nocording to custom.

"Make haste. Heathcliﬁ'l" I said. " the kitchen is m e:
fortnble: and Joseph is upstairs: make haste, and let use dr
you smart before Miss Cathy comes out. and then you an
together. with the whole hearth to yourselves. and hoveak
chatter till bedtime.“

He proceeded with his task and never turned his hl
towards me.

" Come—are you coming?" I continued. "There’s a lﬂ
ealte for each of you, nmrly enough; and you'll need hulk
hour's donning."

. I waited ﬁve minutes. but getting no answer 12R ll
Catherine supped with her brother and sixteen-low: Jo-
and l joined at In unsociable meal. seasoned with reptunfl

wumEmNG HEIGHTS. 63

oneddenndnudneu on the other. His take andchetsere-
mined on the tabled! night for the fairies. He managed to
continue work till nine o'clock, end then marched dumb and
m to his dumber. Cathy sat up late. having a world of
tingltnordafor the reception of her newfriends: shecarne
hotbekin‘henoneetospaktoherold one; but hewasgone,

Ildsheonly stayed tonskwhatwnsthemntter with him. nnd then

Inthnck. Inuxemorningheroeeurly: nndasitwnsaholiday

cried him-humour onto the moors: not re-aprpenx-ing till the

ﬁlthy were depued tor church. Fasting Ind reﬂection seemed
l II hoe bought him to I better spirit. He hung about me fora
I ‘hik. Ind having-trend up his courage. exclaimed Ibruptly—
“Ndly, make me decent, I'm going to be good."
"High time, Henhcliﬂ.” I said; " youhxrx grieved Cutherine:
j. lhe's lorry she ever came home. I dare sayl It lools as if you
envied her, because she '5 more thought of than you."

Thenmiou den-vying Catherine was incomprehensible to him.
htthe notion of grieving her he understood clnrly enough.

“Did the any she In: grieved?“ he inquired. looking very
lions

“She cried when I told her you were off again this morning."

"Well. I aied hat night." he returned, " and I had more
mn b cry lhlll she."

“Yes: yonhad the reason ot‘goingtohedwith a proud hart
III III anpty stomach." said I. “ Proud people breed sad
, Ito-lme Pht.ifyoubeashamedofyourtouchi-
ll. you mutt ask pardon, mind, when she comes in. You
In 30 up and oﬂer to En her, and say—you know best what
by; only do it hardly. and not us if you thought her con-
Itttd into 3 Range by-her grind dress. And now, though !
“dinner to get Indy. I'll steal time to orange you so that
up Linton shall look quite a doll halde you: nnd that he
then. You or: younger. Ind yet. I'll be bound. you are taller
Ind twice n blood across the shoulders: you could knock him
lawn in I twinkling? don't you feel that you could?"

Hathcliﬂ': bee brightened I moment ; then it was ovcmst
M, utd he sighed.

“an. Nelly. if I knocked him down twenty times. that
“Minnie hint less handsome or me more so. I wish I had
W heir end e fair skin. and was dressed and behaved as well,
lid had A chance 0! being as rich as he will he I "

,'II .

s

AHA-“1J1”

4-4..

—-..wvw—nz ##—

64 WUTHERING EIme

“ And cried for momma at every turn." I added. "and ma-
bled if a country lad heaved his ﬁst against you. and sat It
home all day for a shower of rain. Oh. Heathdiﬂ', you In
shom‘ng a poor spirit) Come to the glass. and I1! let yous!
what you should wish. Do you mark thou two ﬁns hot-u
your eyes; and those thick brows. that instad of rising nrelnd.
sink in the middle: and that couple of black ﬁnds. so that
buried, who never open their windows boldly, but lurk glint'q
under them, like devil's spies P Wish and lat-n to smooth only
the surly wrinkles, to raise your lids frankly, and dung: III
iiends to conﬁdent, innocent angels. suspecting and dmhti‘
nothing. and always seeing friends where they or: not Int: J
foes. Don't get the expression of a vicious cur that nppanh
know the kicks it gets are its desert. and yet hate: all the odd
as well as the kicker. for what it suﬁ‘els."

” In other words. I must wish for Edgar Linton's grat H-
cyes nnd even forehmd." he replied. "I do—and thntmn'l
ht‘lp me to them.”

“ A good heart will help you to a bonny face. my lad." 1 cm-
tinued, " if you were a regular black; and I had one will In!
the bonniest into something worse than ugly. And now tlI
we've done washing. and combing, and staking—tell meth
you don’t think yourself rather handsome? I'll tell you. I rh
You‘re ﬁt for a prince in disguise. Who knows but your W
was Emperor of China, and your mother on Indian gum. at
of them able to buy up, with one week's income, Wntha'lt‘
Heights and 'lhrusheross Grange together? And you III
kidnapped by wicked sailors and brought to Englnnd. W521
in your place. I would frame high notions of my birth; and tin
thoughs of what I was should give me courage and dignityb
support the oppressions of rt little formerl "

So 1 ehnttered on; and Heathcliﬂ' gradually lost his from
and began to look quite pleasant, when all at once our convu-
s.\tion was interrupted by: rumbling sound moving up the rd
and entering the court. He ran to the window and I to til
door, just in time to behold the two Lintons descend from til
family carriage, smothered in cloaks and furs. and the Eomshlﬂ
dismount from their horses : they often rode to church in winta.
Catherine took a hand of ouch of the children, and brought M
into the house and set them before the ﬁre. which qnieltlypnt
colour into their white trims.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 65

urged my companion to hasten now and show his amiable
our, and he willingly obeyed ; but ill luck would have it that,
e opened the door leading from the kitchen on one side,
dley opened it on the other. They met, and the master.
lied It seeing him clean and cheerful; or. perhaps, eager to
9 his promise to Mrs. Linton. shoved him back with a sudden
at, Ind angrily bade Joseph " keep the fellow out of the
m—eatd him into the garret till dinner is over. He‘ll be
mining his ﬁngers in the tarts and stealing the fruit, it‘ left
3: with them a minute."
’Ney, sir." I could not avoid Answering. " he'll touch nothing.
la: and I suppos: he must hove his share of the dninties n:
In: we."
'He shall have his share of my hand. if I catch him down—
k: till dnl' ." cried Kindley. “ Begone. yon Vagabond!
It! you are “tempting the coxcamh. are you? Wait till
ct hold of those elegnnt locks—see if I won't pull them n
in gas.
'They are long enough already," observed Muster Linton.
pingfrumthe doorway; " I wonder they don't make his head
e. It’s like a oolt's me over his eyes 1"
{e ventured this remark without any intention to insult; but
:thdiﬂ‘ I violent nature was not prepared to endure the
m of impertinenee from one whom he seemed to hate.
u then, as n rival. He seized n tureen of hot Apple sauce (the
tthing that crime under his gripe) end doshed it full against
repaker's face and neck ; who instantly commenced a lament
thought Isabella and Catherine hurrying to the place Mr.
melts. matched up the culprit directly and conveyed him to
chamber; where, donhtla, he ndrninistered a rough remedy
cool the ﬁt 04' passion. for he nppazed red and breathless I
t the d‘uh-doth, and rather spiteful» scrubbed Elgar's nose
d rnomh, [ﬁrming it served him right for meddling His
ll hem weeping to go home, and Cathy stood by con—
cluded. blushing for nil.
"Yon should not have spoken to him i ” she expostnlated with
Ilzr Linton. "He ms in a had temper. end now you've
oilyourvisit: nndhe'll beﬂogged'. I hatehirn tobeﬂoggedl
an at my dinner. Why did you spmk to him, Edgar? "
"Ididn’t." tabbed the youth. escaping from my hands, and
withing the remnlnder of the puriﬁcation with his cambric
c

66 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

pocket-handkerchief. " I promised m that I woul
one word to him. and I didn't."

“ Well, don’t cry." replied Cntba'ine oontunptuutsly, '
not killed. Don't make more mischief: rny broth: is t
be quiet l Hush l Isabellal Has anybody mm 1‘"

“There. there. children—to your ml" cried 1-.
bustling in. " That brute or: lad bummed are ﬁnely
time, Muster Edgar, take the law into yourown ﬁts—in
you an appetite l "

The little pony recovered its equnnimity at sight of tbei
fast. They were hungry after their ride. Ind asily ct
since no real harm had befallen them. Mr. Ensla-
bountiful plateaus. and the mistress made them men-y 'i'
tulle I waited behind her chair. end we! pained to
Catherine. with dry eyes and an indiﬁerent air. ﬂow
up the wing of a goose before her. " An unheling e
thought to myself; "how lightly she dismisses ha- ol
mate's troubles. I could not have imagined her to beso‘
She lifted a mouthful to her lips; then she Set it down
her cheeks ﬂushed. and the tears gushed over them. SI!
her fork to the ﬂoor. and hastily dived under the cloth to
her emotion. I did not call her unfeeling long; for I p
she was in purgatory throughout the day, and varying
an opportunity of getting by herself. or paying 1 visit to
cliff, who had been locked up bytbe master: 1: I d'uoov
endeavouring to introduce to him a private m of vlctt

In the evening we had a dance. Cathy begged that I:
be liberated then. as Isabella. Linton had no purine:
treaties were vain. and I was appointed to supply the d:
We got rid of all gloom in the excitement of the unwise.
plusure was increased by the arrivalof the Gimmerton bu
tering ﬁfteen strong: a trumpet. a trombone, clarionets. ht
French horns. and a bass Viol, besides singers. The;
rounds of all the respectable houses, and receive eontr
every Christmas. and we esteemed it n ﬁrshnte trent to be
After the usual carols had been sung. we set them to so
glee; Mrs. Earnshaw loved the music. and so theygave t:

Catherine loved it too: but she said it sounded swede
top of the steps, and she went up in the dark: I followed
shut the home door below, never noting our absence. ll
full of people. She made no stey at the stairs’ head. but I

WUTHERING Heroin-s 67

trther. to the gnrret where Hwheliﬁ' was conﬁned, and called
im. He stubbornly declined enswering for: while; she per.
meted. and ﬁnally pensmded him to hold communion with her
broogh the boards. I let the poor things converse unmolested,
m I supposed the songs were going to cease. and the singers to
pt some refreshment; then, I clambered up the Main to warn
her. Instead of ﬁnding her outside. I heard her voice within.
The little monkey had crept by the skylight of one germ. along
the root, into the skylight of the other. and it was with the utmost
Iliﬁenlty I could coax her out again. When she did come
Huthelil' cane with her. and she insisted that I should take
him into the kitchen. as my fellow-servant lad gone to I. neigh-
Wx to be removed from the sound of our "devil’s psztlmody,"
lit planed him toutll it. I told them I intended by no means
Encourage their tricks; but u the prisoner hld nevu' broken
his ﬁst since yesterdny’s dinner. I would win]: at his cheating
Mr. Hindley that once. He went down: I set him a stool by
iheﬁle, and offered him a. quantity of good things; but he was
ﬂdtmd could eat little, and my attempts to entertain him were
ﬂown nway. He learn his two elbows on h's knees. and his chin
mhis hands, and remained wrapt in dumb meditltion. On my
inquiring the subject of his thoughts, he mswered gravely—

"I'ln trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley heck. I don't
mellow long I unit. in can only do it at last. I hope hewill
mdiebdore Idol"

“For shame, Heathcliﬁ'! " said I. " It is for God to punish
wicked people: we should learn to forgive."

" No. God won't hove thetatisl‘oction that I shall,” he returned.
"lady wish I knew the best way l Let me alone, and I'll plan
it out: while I'm thinking of that I don't {eel pain."

on, Mr. Lockwood. I forget these mamnot divat you. I'm
annoyed how I should dmm of chattering on at such n nte ; Ind
your gruel cold, and you nodding for bed! I could have told
I'htheliﬂ's history, all that you need hear. in heme-dozen words.
Thuima-mPﬁng herself, the housekeeper rose. and proceeded
“by nside her sewing ; but I felt incapable of moving from the
harm, end I was very far from nodding. " sn still. Mrs. Dun."
Iuied, "do sit still, another half-hovan You've done just right
to tell the story leisurely. Thnt is the method I like; and you
not ﬁnkh it in the same style. I am interested in every char-
acter you have mentioned. more or less."

68 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.-

" The clock is on the stroke of eleven, sir.’

. “ No matter—I'mnot accustomed togoto bed in the long hours
One or two is early enough for a. person who lies till ten.“

" You shouldn't lie till ten. Thae's the Vu'y prime of III
morning gone long before that time, A person who has no
done one half his day's work by ten o‘clock, runs a chanced
leaving the other half undone."

“ Nevertheless. Mrs. Dean. resume your chair; bemuse to
marrow I intend lengthening the night till afme I m-
nostimte for myself an obstinate cold, at less "

“ I hope not. sir. Well. you must allow me to leap over In!
three years ; during that space Mrs. Drushxw"——

“ No. no, 111 allow nothing of the sort! Are you acquaint!!!
with the mood of mind in which. if you were seated alone. Ind
the «at licking its kitten on the rug before you. you would ntdl
the operation so intently that puss's neglect of one car would [It
you seriously out of temper?"

"A terribly lazy mood, I should say."

" On the contrary. a tiresomely active one. It is mine, a
present ; and. therefore, continue minutely. I perceive M
people in these regions acquire over people in towns theulne
that a. spider in a dungeon dos over a spider in tr cottage. to dis“
various occupants ; and yet the deepened attraction is not entilﬂ!
owing to the situation of the locker-on. Theyda live mill
umest. more in themselves, and less in surface, change, Id
frivolous external things. I could fancy a love {or life here alluﬁl
possible; and I was a ﬁxed unbeliever in any love of aye-{S
standing. One state "senile setting u hungry man down to I
single dish. on which he may concentrate his entire appaiteﬂ'
do it justice; the other. introducing him to a table hid oath!
French cooks: he can pahnps extract as much enjoyment flﬂl
thewhole; but eaehpartis a mere atom in his regudnndl'e
membranee."

" 0h! here we are the sarneas anywhere else, when you gem
know us," observed Mrs. Dean. somewhat puzzled at my speed!

" Excuse me." I responded ; “you, my good friend, Ire!
striking evidence against that assertion, Excepting n few pro
vincialisms of slight consequence. you have no marks of tlI
manners which I I‘ll habituated to consider as peculiar to you
tins. I am sure you have thought a great deal more than th
generality of servants think. You have been compelled to culti

WUTHERING HEIGHTS; 69

1: your reﬂective fatalities for want of occasions for frittth
ur life awny in silly triﬂs."

Mrs. Dan laughed.

" I certainly esteem myself a steady? reasonable kind of body,"
Ie said; " not exactly from living among the hills and seeing
ne set of faces, and one series of actions. from year's end to
ur‘s end .' but I have unda'gone sharp discipline. which has
Might me wisdom : and then, 1 have read more than you would
they. Mr. hickwood. You could not open a hook in this library
lat I have not looked into, and got something out of also: un-
usithethatnngeoIGreekand Latin. andtlntothench; and
Me I know one from another: itisas much as you can expect
uhpoor man's daughter. However. if I am to follow my story
intro: gossip's fashion, 1 had better go on : and instead of leaping
three yars, I will be content to pass to the next summer—the
summer of rﬁS. that is. nearly twenty-three ymrs ago."

....

CHAPTER VIII.

0!! the morning of n ﬁne June day. my ﬁrst bonny little nursling.
III! the last of the ancient Earnshnw stock. was born. We
wee busy with the hay in a far away field, what the girl that
wally brought our hteakﬁsts. came running an hour too soon,
lame the meadow and up the lane. calling the us she ran.

“0h. Such a grand hﬂrn l " she panted out. “The ﬁnest lad
Meyerbrenthed l But the doctor says missis must go : he says
Ille'theen in a. consumption these many months. I heard him
tell Mr. Hindley: and now she has nothing to keep her. and
M be dead before winter. You must come home directly.
Ym’leto nurse it, Nelly: to feed it with sugnr and milk, and
khan of it day and night. 1 wish 1 were you. because it will

heallyours when there is no missisl"
“But is the very ill?" I asked. ﬂinging down my rake. and
kI’Ixmyhonnet.

"l gnes she is ; yet shelooks bravely," replied thcgir , " and
Shank n if she thought of living to see it grow a man. She's
Md her head for joy it's such a bautyl If I were her. I'm
main 1 should not die : I should get better at the bare sight of
3|. in spite of Kenneth. l was fairly mad at him. Dame Archer
blnuglit the cherub down to master, in the house, and his {see

7o WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

just began to light up, when the old canker steps tot-weld. In
says hc—‘ I'Inrnshnw. it's a blesing your wife has been spent“
leave you this son. When she came, I felt convinced welhmﬂl‘
keep her long: and now, I must tell you. the'intervill p»
bubly ﬁnish her. Don‘t take on, nnd fret about it too mu
can't be helped. And beside. you should lune known he.
thnntochooscsucharushofalnssl'"

" And what did the master mu?” 1 inquired.

“I think he swore: but I didn't mind him. I “sle-
sce the hnirn." nnd she began again to daaihe it npturud].
I. as zealous as herself. hurried ugerly home to admin, on I]
part : though I was very sad for Hindlzy's hike. He lad NC
in his heart only for two idols—his wife and himself : be M
on both, and adored one. and I couldn‘t conceive how he“
bear the In.

“'hen we got to Wuthcring Heights. than he stood It II
front door; and. as I passed in. I asked. " How was the baby?-

" Nezu-ly ready to run about. Nell ! " he replied. putting out
cheerful smile.

" And the mistress?" I ventured to inquire ; " the dot”
says she‘s "—

"Dnmn the doctor!" he interrupted. reddening. "Fruﬂ
is quite right : she'll be perfectly well by this time nut week All
you going upstairs? will you tell her that I'll come. ifshe'll plumb
not to talk. I left her because she would not hold her town:
and she must—~tcll her Mr. Kenneth says she must be quiet"

I delivered this message to Mrs. Earnshnw; she scarred i
ﬂight] spirits. and replied merrily——

"I hardly spoke a word, Ellen. and there he has gone all
twice. trying. Well. say I promise I won’t speak : but till
dos not bind me not to laugh at him ! "

Poor soul! Till within a neck of her death that guy hut
never failed her, and her husband persisted doggedly, nay
My, in shinning her health improved every day. WM
Kenneth warned him that his medicines were useless II tha
“a of the malady. and he needn't put him to further «pens
ﬁnmding her. he retorted—

“I how you need not—she's well—she does not went ll
"Mina: from you! She never was in n consumptia
‘-.kvcr; and it is gone: her pulse isuslmvasmlnenol
‘kebek u cool."

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 71

He lnld his wife the same story. and she seemed to believe
in: hm one night, while learning on his shoulder, in the net oi
.yhgshe drought she should be able to get up to-mon'ow, n
itd' coughing took her-s very slight one—he raised her in his
; :1: put be two hands about his neck. her face changed,
ad die III deed.

A! (1': girl had Inﬁdpnted. the child Hareton fell wholly into
my land; Mr. Earnshaw, provided he saw him halthy and
II: lie-rd him cry, was contented. as far as regarded him. For
III-sf. he grew desperate: his sorrow was of that kind that will
minus". He neither- wept nor prayed : he cursed and deﬁed :
“ted God sud man, and gave himself up to reckless disi-
pfnn. The servants could not hm his tyrannical and evil
whet long: Joseph and I were the only two that would stay.
I” not the heart to leave my charge ; and bsides, you know
1 Ed been his theta-sister, and excused his behaviour more
Radily than I W would. Joseph remained to hector over
me and labourers; md bemuse it was his vacation to be
mite Ind plenty of wickednas to reprove.

Ti: men’s bed ways and bad companions formed a pretty
auan [or Catherine and Heathcﬁﬂ‘. His treatment of the
his 1!: enough to make a ﬁend of a saint. And, truly. it
waxed if the lad were messed of something diabolical
I! M period. He delighted to witness Hindley degrading
Elli! pet redemption; and became daily more notable for
Inge sullenn and ferocity. I could not half tell what an
ﬁn! house we had. The curate dropped calling. and no-
body deco! tame near us. at last; unless Edgar Linton‘s visits
bliss Cathy might be an exception. At ﬁfteen she was the
Mdtheoanntryside; she had no peer; nnd she did turn
Mthnghty. headstrong crature! I own I did not like her,
his: infancy was past ; and I vexed her frequently by trying
to hing down her arrogance : she never took an aversion to me,
though. She had a wondrmn constancy to old attachments:
ﬂu Hatheliﬁ'kept his hold on her aﬁeetions unaltembly; and
yang Linton, with all his superiority, found it difficult to make
In equally deep impresion. He was my late master: that is his
Malt over the ﬁreplace. It used to hang on one side. and his
VH1 on the other; but hers has been removed, or else you
lilhtsee something of what she was. Can you make that out?

Mrs. Dean raised the candle, and I discerned a soil-featured

72 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

face, exceedingly resembling the young lady at the Haiku. II
more pensive and amiable in exprasion. It formed a. :1
picture The long light hair curled slightlyon thetemﬂa;1
eyeswerelargeandserious; theﬁgure almost mgr-odd.
did not marvel how Catherine Enrnshnw could forget her-
friend for such an individual. 1 marvelled much how lie-I
a mind to correspond with his pawn. could fancymy lthd
Catherine Eamshaw.

"A very agreable portrait," I observed to the W
" Is it like?"

"Yes." she answered; “ but he looked better when he!
nnimated; that is his everyday countenance : he wanted Iii.
in general."

Catherine had kept up her acquaintance with the mum'—
her ﬁve weeks' raidence among them ; and as she had natal-
tion to show her rough side in their company. and had the—
to be ashamed of being rude where she experienced soeh ind
able courtesy, she imposed unwittingly on the old lady I
gentleman, by her ingenious cordinlity; gained the ndmiuﬁ
of Isabella, and the heart and soul of her brother: neqrdiﬁl
that ﬂattered her from the ﬁrst, for she was full of ambition. I!
led her to adopt a double character without exactly interith
deceive any one. In the place where she heard Hmthdlflml
a "vulgar young rulﬁnn." and "worse than 1 brute." shetﬂ
we not to act like him; but at home she had small inelimﬂ
to practise politenas that would only he laughed at. and rent!
an unruly nature when it would bring her neither credit norml

liIr. Edgar seldom mustered counge to visit Wuthai
Heights openly. He had a terror of Earnshnw's repumic
and shrunk from encountering him; And yet he wns :1“
reached with our best attempts at civility: the master him
«aided offending him, knowing why he tame: and if heal
not begmciws. kept out of the way. 1 Ether think his apps
use there was distasteful to Catherine : she was not artful, w
played the coquerte. and had evidently an objection in her t
Iliad: meeting It all z for when Heatth expressed water
41 um in his pruenoe. she would not half coincide. Is shel

hﬁlhlence: and when Linton evinced disgust and “tip-l
OW. the dnred not treat his sentiments with indiﬁuu
.I W of her playmate were of scarcely nnycou
Flak. I've had many a laugh at her perplexth-

WING HEIGHTS 7 3

ntnlduonhles. uhhhshevainlystmverohidefmmmymoekery.
ﬂ-tmdsiIl—natmed: hntshevnssopmnd. ithecamereally
'Ipodbletopilyhadhrmtiﬂsheshonldbechastened
home humility. She did bring herself. ﬁnally. to cools.
pdloonnﬁdein me: therew not nsnnl else that shemight

Ilr. mndlqhadgouefrmhomeonenﬂemoon, and Hath
dil'nsnnnitogivehimselfnholidnyonthestnngthotit.
Hehadrunhedthezged'sixtmnlhcn. Ithinkmndwithont
Iain; M taunts. or being deﬁcient in intellect, he contrived
hennveyan impression ofinward and outward repuls'veness
Mhisprrsmtnspectretninsnotnesof. in theﬁrst place.
kind by that time lost the beneﬁt of his early ednmtion: eon-
“hardmrkbegunsoonnndeoncludedlzle.hadextin—
ﬁlled-n] uniosity he once passed inpnrsuit of knowledge.
ﬂan] love {or hauls or learning. His childhood‘s sense of
Quinn-iv, imilledinlo him by the ﬁvonrs of old Mr. Earnshaw,
new nway. He struggled long to keep up an equality with
Clllla'ine in he- stndis, and yielded with poignant though silent
m: but he yielded completely; and there was no prevailing
In him to hire a stepinthewayol' moving npnnrd, when he
ﬁnd he mnst, necessarily. sink beneath his former leveL Then
ml npparnnee sympathised with mental deterioration: he
“Firedan gnitmnd ignohle look: his naturallyre
and was exaggerued into an almost idiotic excess
«mm: mm; and he tool: a grim pleasue. appu-
Hlly, in exiting the aversion mher than the esteem of bk few
luminance.

(Marine and he were comm companions still at his seasons
{minim lahonr; but he hadoeased toexpress his fond-
Hﬁx he in words, and reeoiled with angry suspicion from her
ﬂrl'uh caresses. as if consdnrus there could be no gratil‘nation in
“tithing such marks of :ﬂ'ection on him. On the before-named
Mm he came into the house to announce his intention of
ding nothing. while I was misting Miss Cathy to arrange her
he: she had not reckoned on his taking it into his had to
be idle; and imagining she would have the whole pince to her-
ldf. the managed, by some means. to inform Mr. Edgar of her-
What's absence, and was then preparing to receive him.

" Cathy, are you busy. this afternoon 2‘“ Mked Heathcliﬂ'.
"Are you going anywhere P "

c :

74 \VUTHERING HEIGHTS.

" \‘o. it is raining," she answered.
\ hy have you that silk {rock on. then?" be said. " Noll
coming here. I hope?"

" Not that I know of," summer-ad Miss: "Inn younhaald
ul the field now. Heathclin'. It is an hour pest dinna time
titungltt you were gone."

" llindley does not often {tee us from his accused pram
.tlwrved the boy. “ I‘ll not work any more today: I‘ll!
with you.“

‘- Oh. but Joseph will tell," she suggested ; " you'd Mug

“ Joseph is loading lime on the further side of PennistowCﬂ
1t will take him till dark, and he‘ll never know."

Susaying, he loungcd to the ﬁre. and sat down. Cutie:
lt‘lll'ﬂl‘li an instant, with knitted brows—she found it new
.numth the my for an intrusion. “ isabelh and Edger UH
Ltlthl of ﬁling this afternoon," she said, at the oonclnsiﬂlt
minute's silence. “ As it rains. I hardly expect them: but Ii
.n.tv mute. and if they do. you run the risk of being st:on
nu gtth"

" (inlet Ellen to say you me cngeged. Cathy." he persist

‘titMl'l tum me out for those pitiful. silly friends ofyoursi '
on Iilt‘ point, sometimes, of complaining that they—but
mu --

" l'lut they what?" cried Catherine, gazing at him wit'
«I mnntennnce. “ Oh. Nelly l " she added petuhn
l‘l‘ haul away from my hands. "you‘ve combed my]

.uly’ out of curl! That's enough; let me alone. What
tn .ut the point of complaining about. Htmthciiﬂ'?”
«hing—only look at the almanac on that wall ;"
\N‘Ih'll In a framed sheet hanging near the window, and t
dual ~ “The cross are for the evenings you have spent t
.‘ tmnuts. the dots for those spent with me. Do you s
w ‘Nllkl'liﬁvl'fy day."

w. very foolish: as if I took notice!” replied Cather
a I swish tone. " And when is the sense of that? "

p‘. .tmw thet I do take notice." said Huttheliﬂl

\utl should I always be sitting with you?" she demanc'
in»; mirritated. " What good do I get? What do

.\ «Von? You might be dumb, or a baby. {or anything
Q vow m2. or for anything you do. either 1"

\3 “am told me before that I in]de too little. or that

  

 
 

 

mums moms. 75

Mind my company. Cnthy l" exduimed Huthcliﬂ'. in much
ngltntion.

" It's no company It all, when people know nothing end my
nothing," she muttered.

Her eompnnian roseup, but he hndn't timewexpmahbfeeh
ings furthm'. for a horse’s feet were heard on the ﬂags, end buying
knocked gently. young Linton entered. his [nee brilliant with
delight Ittheumpeeted lnmmom he had received. Donbdul
Catherine mnrkedthe diﬂ'aence between Mmdl, Is one came
innndtheotherweutout. Theoonummbledwhnt yansee
humnglngnblmk, hilly.oonl countryfor n bautiful mu
valley: and hiswoioe and greeting were is opposite us his now.
He had nueutJowmnnner of soaking, and pronounced his
wadsuyoudo: that‘slessgruﬁ'thnnwemkhere.nndsoﬂer.

"I'rn not come too loan. am I?" he said, tasting u look II
11ml had begun tnwlpethe plate. nndtidysornednwenntthn
In and in the times.

N“ No," W Catherine " What are you doing there.
eﬂy?"

“My work, rules." I replied. (Mr. Hindiey hnd given me
dilution: to mate a. third party in any private vino Linton
due to pay.)

She ﬂzpped behlnd me nndvhispaed «only. "Take yourself
Myourdustersoﬂ; whenoompanynreinthehoue, mudm't
mmeneeseouringnndclaning Inthemom wbuetheyml"

“ It's: good opportunity. now thnt mi: away," Iannwcred
Iliad: "he hates me to be iidgeting over this: thing: in his
Moe. I‘m sure Mr. Edgar will unite me."

“I hnte you to be ﬁdgeting in my presence," exclaimed the
Mag lady imperiomly, not allowing her guest time 10 spank:
It: had failed to recover -her equanimity since the little dispute
Vilh Hathcliﬂ'.

" I'm sorry for it. Miss Culberlne," was my response; Ind 1
Med assiduously with myoccupationd

She. supposing Edgar could not tee he. snatched the cloth
ﬁun my hand. Ind pinched me, with n prolonged wrench. very
Wild-lily m the am. I’ve mid I did not love her. and nther
wished mortifylng humility now and then: Imelda. the burr
humanly; so I started up from my knees. end nae-ma out.
"01!. wins. thnt'l 3 any trick] You have no right to nip me.
1nd l'ln not going to hear it."

76 WWI-[BRING 1-!qu

" I didn't touch you. you lying creature i " ﬂied she.
ﬁngers tingling to repeat the ant. and her an redwith in
She never had power to consul her passion. it always set
whole complexion in a blue.

- "What's that. then?" I ntnrted. showing a decided pm
witnas to refute her.

She stamped her foot. wavered :- moment. Ind than
impelled hy the naughty spirit within her. slapped in: on
cheek: n stinging blow that ﬁlled both eyes with water.

"Catherine. love I Catherine l " interposed Linton, 3n:
shocked at the dauble fault of falsehood and violence which
idol had committed. -

" Leave the room. Ellen!" she repeated. trembling I“ are

Little Hinton. who followed me everywhere. and m in
nut me on the ﬂoor. at seeing my teens commeneed crying h
self, and sohbed nut complaints against "wicked aunt Call:
which drew her fury on to his unlucky head: she sa'mi
shoulders. and shook him till the poor child waxed livid.x
Edger thoughtlessly lnid hold of her hands to deliver him.
an instant auewaswrung free. and the astonished ymmg 11
felt it applied over his own ear in n way that could not be ll
taken for jst. He drew back in consternation. I lifted ﬂu!
in my arms. and walked oﬁ‘ta the kitchen with him. having
door of communication open. for I wns curious to watch hovt'
vould settle their disagreement. The insulted visitor moved
the spot where he had laid his hat. pale and with uquivering

" That's right l " I said to myself. “ Take warning x
muel It's : kindness to let you hive a glimpse of
genuine dispositimi."

"Where are you going?" demanded Catherine. ndvnncint
the door.

He swerved aside, and attempted to pass.

"You sum not go | " she exclaimed energetically.

" I must and shall l " he replied in a subdued voice.

“No,” she persisted. gasping the handle: “not yet, Ed
Wu: sitdown: youshallnotleavemeinthzttemper. Islu:
“Mi: all night. and I won’t be miserable for you I "

“Can I any AM: you have struck me?" asked Hilton.

aha-inc was mute.

uYu'n made me afraid and ashamed ofyou." hceontinu

'ul'l ﬂ can! here again I “

W'UTHERING HEIGHTS. 77

as began to glisten, and her lids to twinkle.
you told a deliberate untth l" he said.
n't l " she cried, recovering her speech ; " I did nothing
:ly. Well. go, if you please—get away! And now I'll
try myself sick i " I
rppod down on her knees byn chair, and set to weeping
earnest. Edgar persevered in his resolution as far as
; there he ﬁngered. I ranlved to encourage him.
is dreadfully wayward, sir." I- called out. " As bad as
ed Chndi you'd better be riding home, or else she will
ily to grieve us."
it thing looked nskanoe through the window: he p09
2 power to deport. as much as a at possess: the power
mouse half killed. or in bird half eaten. Ah. I thought,
be no saving him : he‘s doomed. and ﬂies to his fate!
was : be armed abruptly, hastened into the house again,
loar behind him; and when I went in a while after to
em that Earnshaw had come home rabid drunk. ready
:whole plnce about our ears (his ordimry frame of mind
ndition). I saw the quarrel had merelyeﬁected a closer
—hnd broken the outworlu of youthful timidity. and
hem to forsake the disguise of friendship. and confess
:s lovers.
enoe of Mr. Hindley's arrival drOVe Linton speedin to
and Catherine to her chamber. I went to hide little
and to take the shot nut of the master’s fawling-piece,
was fond of playing with in his insane excitement. to the
the lives of any who provoked. or even attracted his
vmuch: and I had hit upon the plan of removing it.
ight do lea mischief if he did go the lam-h of ﬁring

——u—

CHAPTER IX.

ed. mifemting oaths dreadful to bear; om! caught
act of slowing his son away in the kitchen cupbogrd.
was impressed with n wholsulne tu'ror of counter-
his wild beast'e fondnus or his mndnlnn’s rage ; {min
n a charm of being squeezed and kissed to duth; and
let at being ﬂung into the ﬁre. or dashed ngainst the

73 \VUTHERING HEIGHTS.

wall; and the- poor thing remained perftxtly quiet when:
chose to put him.

“Than. I've found it out at Inst l " cried Hindlcy, pulling-
bouk by the skin of my neck, lilu: a dog. “ Byhawcn Ind Ill
you've swam between you to murder that child] I knawhwl
is. now. that he is always out of my way. But. with the ham:
Satan. I shall make you mallow themrving-kniiie. Nelly! Ya
needn't laugh : for I've just crammed Kenneth. bend-durum
in the Blackhorsc marsh; and two is the same I: ate—and!
want to kill some ofyon: ! shall have no test till I do 1"

“ But I don't like the carving‘knifc, Mr. Hindley,” I alumni:
"it has been cutting red her-rings. l'd nthcr be about)!
plum"

"You'd rather be damned!" he said: “and so you dial.
No law in England mn hinder a man from keeping his but
decent, and rhine's abominable I open your mouth."

He held the knife in his hand, and pushed in paint ml!
teth: but, for my part. Iwas never much afraid of his vagu'n
I [put out, and affirmed it tnstcd detestably—I would not II!
it on any account.

" Oh I" said be. releasing me, " I see that hideous little val-‘-
is not Harmon: I beg your pardon, NelL If it be, he dam-
ﬂaying alive for not running to welcome me. and for scmminpl
in m n goblin. Unnatural cub. come hither! 1'“ mm:
to impose an a good-hearted, deluded father. Now, don'tyll
lhink the lad would be handsomcr cropped? It maku a M
m. and I low.- something ﬁerce—get menscissols—somethinl
Em and trim! Besides, it‘s infernal aﬁcctntion—davilish M
Hit it is. to chcrish our ears—we're asses enough without that
Huh. mild. huh 1 Well then. it is my darling] wisht. dry!!!)
eyes—there's n joy; kiss me. What! it won't? Kiss me.
Emmi Damn thee, kiss me! By God. as in would munch

xm! As mucus I‘m living, I'll break the bmt‘: neck”

Eva Harem was sqmlling and kicking in his father's am!

daﬂhis might. and rcdoublcd his yells when he carried him

’1 ﬂ BM him over the bnnislcr. I crir‘d out that N

the dtﬂd into ﬁts, and mu ta resale him. A: l

ﬂu Kindle! lain! forward an the rails to listen ml

ﬁn M Wing what hehad in his binds. “ W
-- dk-bd. hearing lame one approrwhingthc stair‘s M
“will”. in the purpose of signing to Hmthcliﬂ'

WUTHERING HEIGHTS 79

Incognieed. nonooomeftmher; Ind, nttheinstnnt

; what my eye quilted Harmon. he gave a sudden spring. delivered
Mm the cards grasp that held him, and fell.

> anrcelytimetoexpuienoeathrillofhormrhefore
Ie saw that the little wretch was safe. Heathcliﬁnrrived under-
.lh just at the crth moment: by: natural impulse. he
Wimmwsetting him on ht feet. looked up to
discover the authnrd'the nuident. A tuba-who has parted
will. My mum: for ﬁve shillings, and ﬁnds next day
behalat in the hrgain ﬁve thousand poundr, could Mtshow
thinker countenance than he did on beholding the ﬁgure of
Ir. brush“ above. It expressed, plaim than words could
‘0. tin ingest Anguish at having made himself the instrument
d'thnrﬁngh‘uown revenge Hedi: been dark, I daresay, he
mid have tried to remedy the mistake by smashing Hareton's
“at theﬂeps; htwe'itnessed his salutian; and I was
Myhdnv with myprecious chnrge pressed to myhart.
l'lindlq descended mom leisurely. sobered and Ihashed.

"It ‘3 your fault. Ellen," he said; “you should have kept
himmofa‘ght: ynushuuld havetnkmhiln from me! Is he
ind whee?"

"lnjuredl" X cried angrily: "if he's not killed. he’ll be an
idiot! Ohl I wonder his motherdoes not rise from her gmve to
Ehyou use him. You're worse than a. humane—treating
M an ﬂab and blood in that manner! “

Heattempted to much the child. who, on ﬁnding himself with
Ir. robbed of his terror directly. At the ﬁrst ﬁnger his father
kid on him. however. he shrieked again louder um before, and
W as if he wauld go into convulsinns.

"You shall not meddle with him !" I continued. " He hates
Nil—they all hate you—that's the truth I A happy family you.
Ive: and a pretty state you're come to l "

“I shill come to n prettier, yet. Nelly," laughed the mis-
ll'datl nun, recovering his herdness. " At present. convey
"sell Ind him away. And. hark yvu. Henthcliﬂ‘ 1 clear you
'00. quite from my reach and baring. I wouldn't murder you
blight; unl. perhaps, I set the hause on ﬁre: but that's as
myiancy gas."

While saying this he took a pint bottle of brandy from the
inset. and poured some into a tumbler.

"Nay, don't 1" I enueated. " Mr. Hindley, do mix: warning.

 

‘ HEIGHTS.

 

:e bay. il‘ )vu can M

 

' .\ than I shail," he rum
an soul!" I said, endeavor
ml.

   
   

I shall have great p11:
Eh its Maker." exclail
bunny damnatinn l "
inpatiemly bade us go: [an
A “and: o! horrid imprecalions. tor

 

. *wr kiil himself with drink." t
b ,..i am) of curses back when the c'
a. wry utmost; but his constiuuh
up he would wager his M. ii
. . . puk- Liimmman. and go to the
. » wuw happy chance out of me u

 

 

 

 
  
 

n. ma sit down to lull my little
lik‘ughl. walked through to that
hr only got as far as the other
~lf on a bench by the walla
\l sill-11L

.vu on my knee. and humming a Si

 

 

  

 
  
 

I

‘ . :..~ nigh. and the minus“ gral,

: . ‘uumrh ill: moo]: heard that "—

I

13. .. .~ hurl lislcncd to the hubbub {I

w , ;. .ud whispered—

m , \ '-l\

eye ' * ' J.

Hm . qmwhed the hearth. I, suppos

a “\r v lung, looked up. ’11:: exprcsioi
I'u

-~. \J .qu anxious. Her lips were half a
with l- “M . 0,3. .unl sin: drew a imam: but il.
upstaii * . . wllk'ﬂt'c. lrcsnnmd my song; nor
would i - Ll‘iﬂllﬂ'u

reached 5 . alb‘: laid. inlemipling me.
“°i5°be~ '  he Habit." was my answer.

is (hat ?" ‘h- "i m: ; perhaps he had fallen into
I b 4,... i...

 

 

   

WU'EHERING HEIGHTS- 81

Midland another long pause. during which I perceived in
We! two trickle from Catherine's cheek lo the ﬂags. Is she
“fuller shameful condlun? I asked myself. Thatwill he 1
Melly: but she may come to ihe point as she will—l shnn'l
Up be! No, she felt small trouble regarding any subject, save
h our concerns.

“Oh, den: i " she cried I! last. "I‘m very unhappy l”

. “A pity," observed l. " You're hard to plase : so rnnny
Mend so few cares. and can'r nuke yomselfoontent I "

“Nelly. will you keep Isecret for me?" she pursued. kneeling
downhylne. andlifdng herwinsome eyeslorny fuewiui that
an of look which turns 03‘ had temper. even when one has all
Illn'ght in the world to indulge it.

" Is it woth keeping?" I inquired, less sulkily.

, "Y5. and it worries mend I must lei it outl lwant u:
how what I should do. To—dny. Edgar Linton has asked me
loinsrryhirn. and I’ve given him an nnswer.‘ Now. before I
tell you whether it was a consent or denial. you tell me which it
all“ to have been.“

" Really, Miss Catherine, how an I know?" I replied.
"To be sure. considering the exhibition you performed in his
prance this afternoon, 1 might say i: would be wise to refuse
him: since he asked you after that. he must either hehopelessly
Inpid or a venmmome fool."

"if you talk so. I won't tell you any more." she returned
Dervishly. rising to her feel. " I accepted him. Nelly. Be
ﬂuids. and say whether I was wrong i "

"You hirnl then what good is it discussing the
Inner? You have pledged your word, and cannot ran-act? "

“ But. say whether I should have done so—do l" she ex-
chiined in an irritated tone; chaﬁng her hands together, and
(Winning.

“The: are many things to he considered before ihnt question
an be Answered properly." I said sentenliausly. "Firs: and
Most, do you love Mr. Edger?"

“Who can help it? Of course I do." she amazed.

Then 1 put her through the following onleoh'nm : for n girl of
twenty-two it was not injudicious.

" Why do you love him. Miss Cathy ?"

"Nonsense, l do—rhal's sulﬁdent."

"By no ms: you must. saywhy?"

   

82 wry-mums max-us.

"Well. became he '5 handsome, and plantar: to be vrixh.‘

" Bad! " was my commentary.

"Andhecauseheisyonngnndchea'ﬁll."

“ Bad. still."

"And beans: he loves me."

" ludiﬂ'erent, earning mere."

"And he will be rich, and I shall like to be the grates!
woman 0! she neighbourhood. and I shall he proud 11 king
such a husband."

"er of all. And now. say how yan love him?"

“ A: everybody loves—You're silly, Nelly." ‘

“ Not a all—Answer." .

" I love the ground under his feet, and the air ova his“
and everything he touches. end every word he says. I love tll
his looks. and all his ncﬁnns. and him entirely nuddtcguhﬂ-
There now I "

“And why?"

“Nay: you are making a jest of it: it is exceedingly m‘
nnluredl It‘s no jest lo mel" said the young lady, sembl-
and turning her ﬁne to the ﬁre

" I'm very far {mm jesling. Miss Catherine," l reind-
“ You love Mr. Elgar because he is hanﬁmne, and young. ind
cheerful, nnd rich. and loves you. The last. however, goes”
naming: yuu would love him without that, probably ; and vi":
it ymi wouldn'n unless he posescd the four fomiemurncrions

“ No. to be sure not : I should only pity him—hie hill"
perhaps, if he wurc ugly, and a. clmvn." '

“ But there are several other handsonw. rich young men I“
the world: handsomcr. possibly. and richer than he is.
should hinder you from laying them? "

" If there he nny, they are out of my way l I've seen none lik‘
Edgar."

" You maysee some 1 and he won't always be hnndsame. and
ynung. and may not always be rich."

" He is now i and l have only lo do with (he pnsent. I wish
you would speak nationally."

“ Well. that settles it : if you have only to do wiih the pnsenl.
marry Mr. Linton."

" I don't want your permisicn for that—l :lall marry him:
and yet you have not told me whether I‘m right."

" Perfectly right; if people be right to many only for 1.1K

WUTKERING HEIGHTS. 83

And now, let us hear what you are unhappy uhour.
)ther will be plased: the old lady und gentleman will
:t, I think: you will esoupe from u disorderly, oomfurt-
. Into a wealthy, respectable one: Ind you love Edgar,
Ir loves you. All seems smooth and easy: where is
cle P "

/ and MI" replied Cuber-inc. striking onehud on
ead. and the other on her breast: "in whichever place
ives. In my soul and in my heart, I'm convinced I‘m

  

‘s vay smgel I cannot make it out."
my secret. But if you will not mock It me, 1'11
1: I oun'tndn it distinctly: but I'll give you a feeling
feel."
ﬂed haul! by me again: her counhenuucegrewsldder
B‘. and her clasped hands trembled.
I, do you never dream queer drums?" she said.
. liter some minutel‘ reﬂection.
haw and then." I answered.
so do I. I‘ve drum! in my life dram: that have stayed
ever after. and changed my ideas : they’ve gone through
:gh me. like wine through water, sud almd the colour
ud. And this is one; I’m going to tell it—but take
to smile a: any part of it."
don’t. Miss Catherine l " I cried. "We're dismal
rithout conjuring up ghosts and vision: to perplex us.
ome. be merry and like yourself I Look ex little
I Ile': dreaming nothing dreary. How sweetly hesmlles
5p!"
and how sweetly his father curs: in his solitude!
amber him. I dare say, when he warns just such mother
tubby thing: nearly as young And innocent. However.
shall oblige you to listen: it's not long; and I've no
be merry to-night."
n't hear it. I won't hear it I" I repeated hastily.
superstitious about dreams then, and am still; and
3 had an unusual gloom in her upect. that made me
mething from which I might shape a prophecy. and
fearful cataslruphe. She was vexed. but she did not
Apparently taking up another subject, she recom-
n a short time.

84 mt; HEIGHTS.

"IiI‘ueinheaven. chy. Ishmldbeuuutelymisenhlr.

"Beunse ymale not lit to gamete," I nusweled. “A
sinners run“ he nimble in haven.“

"mixisnotfu-dm. Idxumtnneelmlwutheme."

“ltdlyoulwon'tharkm onourdsum.ML§Cnthaim
I’ll go to I inm-mpled again.

Shehnghed.andheldmedm:fm Imdeamotinnn:
lave my chit.

"Thisis nothing." cried she: "Iwnsonlygoing cost:ny
haven did mtseemtohe my home: and I broke myhm
with weepingm come backtoeanh: and tin angekwuen
angry that they ﬂung me out into the middle ofthehuxh'ol
the top ofVVuthering Heights: when I evoke sobbing {aria}.
Thavrmdolnupiainmysecrex. asweuastheotha. I've-o
morebusingsmmnylidgu Lintmimlinvetoheinhavu;
nndifthewieked man in time had not hung!“ HM”
law. I shouldn't have thought of it. It would deg-mic In D
marryHenthdiﬂ'now; so heshailnevu-kmhowllmehil:
and that. not beans: he‘s inndsome, Ndly. hut bean: he‘s
memyselhhmlm \Vhateveronrsoulsuemndeoﬁm
and mineuetbesame; and Linton'sisnsdiﬁ‘eruiustm
beam {to lightning, or [m from ﬁre."

Etc this speech ended. I became sensible of Huttelili
presence. Having noticed a slight movenuenl. I turned my hand.
and SN him rise [mm the bench. and slalom My. He
had listened till he heard Catherine say it would dzgnde her In
marry him. and then he stayed to hear no further. My m
punion. sitting on the ground, was prevented by the bank af d!
settle from remarking his presence or departure: but I started.
and hide ha hush l

" Why?" she asked. gazing nervously round.

" Joseph is here." I answered, catching opportuner the vol
of his can-wheels up the road: "and Hathciiﬂ‘ willcotneil
with him. I'm not sure whether he were not at the door Lbi
moment."

" 0h. he couldn't overhmr m: :n the door I " said she
“ Give me Hareton. while you get the supper. and when it i
rmdy ask me to sup with you. I want to cheat my unmfoﬂabl
conscience. and be convinced that Heathcliﬁ' has no nation :1
these things. He has not. has be? He does not know wh.

cing in love is?”

mnEkmc HEIGHTS. 85

' " I see no reason that he should not know, as well as you," I
mud; " endilyonareh‘u choice, he'll be the most unfartunate
ﬂuturethateeerwusbornl Assoonasyou become Mrs.
lintou. he Mesh-lend. and love, nnd all ! Have you considered
hym’llhearthe separation. and ham he'll hair to be quite
dusted in the warld? Realise. Miss Catherine"—
“Hequite deserted! wesepanted l " she exclaimed, with an
mtoﬁudignatien. "Who is to Sepalale IE, pray? They'll.
lathe fate ofMilol Not as long IS I live. Ellen: far no
mulcreature. Every Linton on the face of the earth might
ultimo nothing. before I cauld consent no famine Hathcliﬂ'.
(h. Ihnt's not what I intend—that‘s not what I meanl I
Wu't he Mrs. Linton were such npriee demanded! He'll
but much to me as he has been all his lifetime. Edgar must
thin (11' his antipathy. and talent: him. at lmt. He will.
whka mytmefeellngstowaxdshim. Nelly, ! see new.
Mdlinkmeaselfuhwretch; but did it never strike you that
iH-thcliﬁ' and I married. we should he beggars? whereas, it
hurry Linton, I an aid Heathdiﬂ' to rise. and place him out
My brother‘s pawer."

"With your huhaud's money. Miss Cathaine? " I asked.
"Yum ﬁnd him not so pliable as you calmlate upon: and,
‘laugh I‘m hardly u judge, I think that's the wvrst motive
Mn given yet for being the wife of young Linton."

"Itisuot," matted she: "it is the basil The 01th!!!
“Inﬂation of my whims: and far Edgai’s sake, too, to satisfy
1‘11:. This is forthe sake ofmwhocomprehendsinhispersau
lifeinngstoEdgarandmyself. I cannotexpresit; butsurely
Mandeveryhody have: notion that there is or should be an
wwofyoutsheyond you. Whatwerethenseol' mym-
lion. if I wereentirely contained here 2 My gm: miseries in this
Iorld lave heal Heathcliﬁ's miseries. and I watched and felt each
Iran the beginning : my great thought in living is himself. Ifall
the perished. Ind it remained, I should still continue to he : and
ill-ll else remained. and he wen annihilated. the univuse would

turn to I mighty stranger: I should not seem a part of it. My
love for Liutun is like the foliage in the woods : time will dunge
it. I'm well aware. as winter changes the trees. My love {or
Heuhcliﬂ'resemhles the eternal rocks benath : nsuulee of little
visible delight, but necessary. Nelly, I am Heathcliﬁ‘l He's
Ilwlys. always in my mind : not as a plasure. any more than I

86 wmmua HEIGHTS.

am tiny: 1 plasma to myself. bu! ms myuwn being.
talk ofenr sap-reﬁne ngain : it is impuctluble: end

Shepaused.andhklherfuein the foldlol'mygv
jerked it forcibly "my. I was an! of pnlietwe with he

"ll'lcan mkeanysemeol‘yeurm.mh.”i
only gas to convince me that you are ignarnntof the:
undennkelnnnrrying: orekethnyauarenwlch
cipled girL But trouble me with no mute and:
promise to keep them.“

"Van'n keep that 2" she uked eagerly.

" No, I'll not promise." I repeated.

She wu nbonl to insist, when the came: of Josep
an: conversation: Ind Catherine remand her will to
and nnned Ham. while I made the supper. Al
cooked. my fellow-servant and I began to quarrel w
carry some on Mr. Hindley.’ and we didn't settle it I
nmrly cold. Then we came la the Igreanent that It
llim nk, if he wanted any; {or we fared particularly
his Moe when he had been some time Alone.

“And how isn't that now: corned in fm‘ “1' 6:11
time) What is be about? girl idle mghtl " denund
man, looking round for Hatth

" I‘ll call him," I replied. " He's in mebam. I‘ve:

I went and called. but got no unmet. 0n telnrnlr
pen-ed to Catherine that he had heard 1 good put ol
snideusm; nndtoldhowlmwhlm quil the id
as she complained of her brother”: condnet regarding]
jumped up in :1 ﬁne fright. ﬂung Human on to the settl
w seal: {or her friend herself: not taking leisure to ear
she's: :0 turned. or hawher talk would have elf:
Shem absent such a while that Joseph pruposedv
wait no longer. He cunnineg wnjmlured they we:
nwny ln order to avoid bearing his promud Nair
val "ill eneugh for oily {chi manners," be Afﬁrmed.
M helm! handed that night I. special payer to
quartet of an hour’s snpplimﬁon before meal. and w
Mmmhaluthewd o! theyme.had not i
m bmiren in upon him wth I hurried oomrnan
‘2“ down the road. Ind wherever Hatbcliﬂ' had
H Ind Ink: him re-enler dimerlyl

vim to speak to him. and I mm. before I go

\VUTHERING HEIGHTS. 87

drenid. "And the gate is open: he is somewhere out of
W;hhewanld nolreply,thougb Ishouwdatthe top
eithefolrl as loud as I could."

)uzph objectaiuﬁrst; shewas toamuch in mew-
muskmnmﬁuion: Ind at last he placed his hat on

F End. and milked grumbling forth. Maritime. Calming
[losing and down the ﬂoor, exalaiming-

“lvm-der where he is—I wonder where he can be P What

did I say. Nelly? I‘ve forgotten. Was he vexed at my bad
, m th'u afternoon? Dear! tell me who: I‘ve aid to grieve
- HI? Idow'sh he'dcome. I dowishhewonld!"
i “wm : noisefor nothing)" I cried. though rather uneasy
, w "Whntntriﬂesmesyoul lt's surelyno graham
! dlhn: that Helm xhould take a. moonlight saunter on the
L mwmliemmkytospeak to ruin the boy-loft. I‘ll
i malaissz See “'1 don't ferrethlnlonll”

1W mo renew my search; in result was d'sappoint-

unadjuseph's qnst ended in the same.

"Yon lad gas war no war!" observed he on re-entering.
"He’s leﬁ th‘ yut: at t' full swing. and Mias’s pony has madden
Mum rigs o‘ m, and plottered through, might o’er into t'
Mn] Hahsvmdiver, I' maistu 'ull ploy t' devil to-ruom.
Idle‘ll doweeL He's patience itsscln wi' sick carelss, oﬂ'xld
mus—mm he is 1 End he’ll nor be so: dhu—yah’s
lullnnyel Yahrnumn’tdzivehimontofhisheudformwtl"

" szeyon found Heatheliﬂ‘, you ass? ” interrupted Catherine.
"Elva you been looking for him. as I ordered? "

“191d more likket look for th‘ home," he replied. " It 'Ird
IMarriorese'nse. Bad, I an look for norther horse nurmn
allueghx lollte this—as black as t” chimble'yl und Heelhdifi‘s
mt‘ elnp m eoorn at my whistle—happen he'll be less hard
0‘ baring wl' ,1"

It m A very dark evening {or summer: the clomk appeared
Wired to thunder. and I said we had better all sit down; the
Mn; min would be certain to bring him home without
ﬁlth: Rouble. Ema, Catherine would not be persuaded
bio mnqnlllity. She kept wandering to and fro, from the gate

blhedoor, in and: of agitation which permitted no repose:
and It length took up a permanent situation on one side of the
tall. near the road: where, heedless of my expostnlations and
the grvIIing thunder. and the grim drops that began to plash

88 wumnnmo moms.

nround her-{she remained. ailing at intervals. and then listen!“
and then crin outright. She heat Harmon. or my dtild. I”
good passionate tit of crying.

About midnight, while we still set up. the norm came ntﬂ'ﬂ
over the Heights in full fury. Therewns nviolent wind, old
Is thunder-,and either one or the other split 3 tree oﬂ‘ntti
corner of the building: a huge bough fell across thereof,“
knocked down a portion of the mt chimney-sunk. lending:
clutter of stones and soot into the kitchen ﬁre. We thrush“
bolt lad fallen in the middle of us ; and Joseph swung on told!
knees. maching the Lord to remunber the patriarch: Null
and Lot, and. as in former times, spare the righteous. though lit
smote the ungodly. I tell some sentiment that it must 1:!
judgment on us nlso. The Jonah. in my mind. was Mr. Em
straw; and I shook the handle of his den that I might email
if he were yet living. He replied nudiny enough. in n W
which made my companion vocifernte. more clamurouslytlﬂ
before. that a wide distinction might be drawn between still
like himself and sinners like his master. But the “pro-r pass
away in twenty minutes, leaving us nil unharmed: wept”!
Cathy. who got thoroughly drenched for her obstinate, in It
fusing to take shelter. and standing boundless end shawl-h!
to catch as much vmter us she could with her hair Ind clothe
Shecarneinand lnydnwn on the settle. nll soaked “shew:
turning her face to the back. and putting her hands More it.

"Well. miss!" I enlnimed, touching her shoulder: "yr
are not heat on getting your death. are you? Do you he
what o'clock it '5? Half-past twelve. Come, come to had
there's no use waiting longer on that foolish boy: he'll be got
to Gimmerton. Ind he'll stay there now. He guesses I
shouldn't wake for him till this late hour: at last. he gun
that only Mr. Hindley would be up: and he'd rather nvo
having the door opened by the mater."

"Nay, my, he's noan It Gimmerton." said Joseph. "I
niver wonder but he‘s at t' bothorn of n hog-hail:s This vlsitatir
worn't for nowt. and 1 wad hev ye to look out, miss—3h muhl
1' next. Thank Hivin for nlll All wads togitha for gooid
them as is choueu. and piked out fro' th' ruhhidgel Yah lrnl
whet r' Scripture ses.” And he began quoting maul text
referring us to chapter: Ind vets: where we might ﬁnd them.

I, having vninly begged the wilful girl to rise Ind more It

WDTHERING HEIGHTS. 4 89

In things. let! him preaching and her shivering. and hetook
“N to bed with little Hareton. who slept as last as it every
Wild heensleeping round him. I heard Joseph Md on».
VH2 afterwards ; then I distinguished his slow step on the
hdda. and then I dropped asleep. ‘

Coming down someth later than usual, I saw. by the sun-
ken; piercing the chinks of the shutters, Miss Catherine still
ﬁled hear the ﬁre-plate. The house door m ajar. too ; light
ultredfrom its unelosed windows ; Hindley had come out, and
load on the kitchen harm. haggard and drowsy.

"What mils yon. Cathy?" he we: nying when I entered:
“your look as dismal as n drowned whelp. Why are you so
Mp and pale. child?"

"I've been wet," she answered reluctantly. "and I'm cold,
“It's all."

"Oh. she is naughty l" I cried. perceiving the master to be
hie-ably sober. "She got steeped in the shower of yesterdny
ﬂexing, and thne she has sat the night through, and I couldn‘t
[nail on her to stir."

Mr. Earnshnw stared at us in surprise. ” The night through,"
be reputed "What kept her up? not fear of the thunder.
ﬁnely? Tint was over hours since."

Neither of us wished to mention Heathclm‘s absence. as long
Iveeauld echoed it : so I replied. I didn‘t know how she took it
intoher head to sit up; and she said nothing. The morning
"shah and eeol: I threw heel: the lattioe. and presently the
Min ﬁlled with vaeet scents from the garden; but Catherine
ﬁlledpeevishly to me. " Ellen. shut the window. I'm starvingl"
Andha-teethehatteredassheshrunk closer to the almost ex-
U'hnished embers.

"She's ill," said Hindley, taking her wrist : “ Isupme that's
Hexagon she would not go to bed. Damn it! I don't want to
hstumbled with more sieknrs here. What took you into the
hill"

" Running alter t' lads. as usuald 1" cracked Joseph, catching
an opportunity. from our Imitation, to thrust in his evil tongue.
"If 1 war yah, maister. I’d just slam t' hoards i' their faces all
0!! 'etn. game and simple! Never a day ut yah're off, but yon
at o' Linton comes sneaking hither; and Miss Nelly, shoo's a.
5!: ill I shoe sits watching for ye i' t' kitchen ; and as yah're in
“we door, he's out at t‘ether; and, then. Iergrand ladygoes

9° WUTHERING HEIGHIS.

n courting of her side! It's bonny behaviour, lurking t
ﬁelds, alter twelve o‘ l' night. wi' that frhl. ﬂnysame d
gipsy, Heatheliﬂ I They think I": blind: but I'm not
ut t‘ sonrt l—l seed young Linton bonth coming and go
I seedyaﬁ " (directing his discourse to roe). "th gooidl
slaltenly witchl nip up and bolt into th' home. t" mil
heard t' maister's horse ﬁt clatter up t‘ road."

" silence. eavesdmpper l “ cried Catherine: " none
insolence before mel Edgar Linton mm yestuday by
Hindley; and it we: I who told him to he oﬂ’: because
you would not like to have met him as you were”

" You lie. Cathy, no doubt," answered her brother, “
are n confounded simpleton 1 But never mind Linton at
tell me, were you not with Heathcliﬁ‘lnst night? Spain t
now. You need not be afraid of harming him: thong
him as much as ever. he did me a good turn 2. short tin
that will make my conscience tender of breaking his nr
prevent it. I shall send him about his business this very r
and after he's gone. I'd advise you all to loolr sharp : I s
have the more humour {or you." .

“ i never saw Hathcliﬂ' last night," answered C:
beginning to sob bitterly : " and if you do turn him out I
I'll gowith him. But. perhaps. you‘ll neverhnve an oppr
perhaps he's gone." Here she bum into unmtrollal
and the remainder of her words were inarticuhte.

Hindley lavished on her a. torrent of scornful abuse. 5
her get to her room immediately. or she shouldn‘t cry for:
I obliged her to obey ; and I shall never forget what as

noted when we reached her chamber: it terriﬁed me. 1
she was going mad. and I begged Joseph to run for [ht
It proved the commencement of delirium : Mr. Kenneth
as he saw her. pronounced her dangerously ill ; she 11:16
He bled her, and he told me to let her live on whey a:
gruel, and take care she did not throw herself downsmi
ohhe window ; and then he left: for he had enough to
perish. where two or three miles wasthe ordinarydismnce
mg! and cottage.

Though I cannot say I made a. gentle nurse, and Jo:
the master were no better; and though our patient
We and headstrong as a patient could be. she w
.g Mgh. 01d Mls. Linton paid us several visits. to

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 9!

Matthingsto rights.and scolded and ordered us all; and

uh: Catherine was oonulacent. she insisted on wuveying her'
‘DWGEIEC: ﬁnwhidi deliverancewewere very grate-

.il. Butthepoadamuhadrenson to repentdherkindm:

.hlndhr hmd both took the fever, and died within a few
in of ad: other.

hmhdyremrned tors, sand: and more insinuate,

Indhzuglmerthn ever. Heathdiﬁ‘had never been heard of
I'll! the evening of the thunderstorm; and one day I had the
Ilium”. when she had provoked me emeedingly, to lay the
Hanoi h's disappearance on her: where indeed it belonged.
ﬁshewell knew. From that period, for several months. she
used to held any communication with me, save in the relation
ni'tmcre sevant. Joseph fell under a. ban also : he would speak
lirmind, and lecture her all the same as ifshc were a little girl ;
Andria: steemed herself a woman. and our mistress, and thought
Wherrwent illness gave her a claim to he treated with con—
ﬂa-uinn. Then the doctor had said that she would not hear
musing much: she ought to have her own way: and it was
nothing less than murder in her eyes for any one to presume to
m up and contradict her. From Mr. Enrnshaw and his Cam<
Pinion: she kept aloof : and tutored by Kenneth. and sedans
hat: of a ﬁt that often amended her rages, her brother allowed
“Immer- she pleased to demand. and generally nvnided
Whig her ﬁery temper. He was rather tau indulgent in
haul-inghercawicu: notfrom affection, but from pride: he
"Iliad manly to see her bring honour to the family by an
“Tum with the Lintons, and as long as she let him alone she
I'm trample on us like skies. for night he and! Edgar
rain, as multitudes have been before and will be after him,
NW: and believed himself the happiest man nlive on
the day he led her to Gimettan Chapel. three years subsequent
to his father's dam.

Huh against my inclinatiun. 1 was persuaded to leave Wuther-
ilcﬂeights and ammpsny herhere. Little Hareton was nearly
ﬁve year: old, and I had just begun to teach him his letter;
We mad: a 9d parting ; but Catherine's tears were more power-
ful that ours. When I refused to go, and when she found her en-
mtiudid not move me. she went lamenting to her husband end
brother. The lormer offered me muniﬁccnt wages; the latter
ordered me to pack up : he wanted no women in the house, he

92 \VU‘I‘HERING HEIGHTS.

said, now that therein: no mistrss; and as to Here:
curate should take him in hand, hy-and~by. And so I h
onechoioeleft: todo as Iwu ordered. I told the ma
gotridnfulldeeent peopleonlytoruntnruin a lltdcfu
kissed Hareton, said good-bye: end since then he has]
stranger: and it's very queer to think it, but I've no do
has completely forgotten all about Ellen Dean. end tintl
evermore thunllthe warld (chef. nndshe tohimi

 

At this point of the housekeeper‘s story, she channel to
towards the timepiece over the chimney ; and was in arm:
on seeing the minute-th unsure half-past one. She
not hear of staying aseeond longer: in truth, I felt nth
posed to defer the sequel of her narrative, myself. And nu
she is vanished to her rat, and I have mediated. for 1
hour or two. I shall summon manage to go. also, in q
aching laziness of head and limbs.

..4—

CHAPTER X.

A CHARMING introduction to a hermit's life] Four weeks’ I;
tossing, nndsidmessl Ohl time bleak winds Ind hinng
skies, and impassable roads, and dilatory country surgeons!
oh, this dearth at the human physiognumy I und, worse tlz
the terrible intimation of Kenneth that I need not expect
out of doors till spring!

Mr. Heat.th has just honoured mewith mall. Ahmn
daysagohesentmenbrace ofgrwse—the last ofthe s
Scoundrel l H: is not altogether guilds: in this illnus of
and that I had a great mind to tell him. But. alas! how
I offend a men who was charitable enough to sit nt my bet
good hour, and talk on some other subject than pills and dn
blisters and leeches? This is quite an easy intetvnl. I am to:
to read ; yet I feel uif I could enjoy something intetuting.
not have up Mrs. Dean to ﬁnish her tale? I can recall
chief incidents as far a she had gone Yes: I nemernh
hem hnd run off. and never been heard of for three yea:
the heroine wns married. I'll ring: she‘ll be delighted t
me capable at talking cheerfully. Mrs. Dem came.

WDTHERING HEIGHTS. 9)

' It vents twenty minutes. sir. to taking the medicine." she
amenced.

"Away. away with it I" I replied; " I desire to have"—
"The doctorsays you must drop the powders." ‘

" With all my heart! Don’t interrupt me. Come and take
at out here. Keep your Eugen from that bitter phalanx of
Ils. Draw your knitting out of your pocket—that will (lo—now
mimic the history of Mr. Hathcliﬁ'. from where you left 08‘. to
e pruent day. Did he ﬁnish his edumtion on the Continent,
id come back a gentleman? or did he get a sitar-'5 place at col-
:e. or scape to America. and earn honours by drawing blood
on his foeter-counuy? or make a fortune more promptly on
e English highways? "

"He my have done a little in all these vocations. Mr. Lock-
nnd; but I couldn‘t give my word for any. 1 stated before that
dﬂn't him! how he gained h‘n money; neither am I aware of
Imennshe took to roise his mind from the savage ignorance
do which it was sunk: but. with your lave. I'll proceed in my
en ﬁshion, if you think it will muse and notweory you. Are
in feeling better this morning? "

.. Mm"

"That's good news. I got Miss Catherine end myself to
hrnshemss Grange ; and. to my agreeable disappointment. she
inns! inﬁnitely better than I dared to expect. &e seemed
humerfond of Mr. Linton ; and even to his sister she showed
IBIin uﬂ'ection. Theywete both very attentive to her comfort.
minly. It we: not the thorn bending to the honeysuckles, but
I honeysuckla embracing the thorn. There were no mutual
nus-ions: one stooda'ecl. and the others yielded 2 end who me
= ill-netxued nod bud‘ternpcred when they encounter neither
milieu nor indifference? I observed that Mr. Edger had a
squooted fear of ruﬁing her humour. He concealed it from
I; but if ever he hard we answer sharply, or saw any other
event grow cloudy It some imperiom order of hers. he would
whit trouble by a frown of displeasure that never darkened on
is on account. He my a time spoke sternly to me about my
Etna; and overred that the slab o! a knife could not inﬂict a
me pong than he suﬂ'ered at seeing his lady vexed. Not to
due: kind master, I learned to be less touchy; and, for the
lace of half I year. the gunpowder lay as harmless :tssttnd. be
In: no ﬁre tame nu: to explode it. Catherine had seasons of

94 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

gloom and silence nawnnd then : theyle
pathising silence by her husband. who ascribed than»:
tion in her constitution, produced by her perm illna
was never subject to depraion of spirit: beta: Tb
sunxhine we: welcomed by misusing mhine (tun
believelmaytsatthntthcymrully‘mpou-‘u
and growing happina»

Itended. Wellnmuurlbe formth
mild nndgmeronsmonlyrnorejmuyselﬁlhmml
ing: anditendedwhmdrcnmmneaunsed ad: to
the one‘s intcrut was not the ehid‘ musidmzim in 13
thoughts. On a mellow evening in Segunher, I II
from the garden with a hmvy basketof npplu'hldll
gathering. It had got dusk, and the moon looked on
wall of the court, causing undeﬁned shadows mlnrkin t'
of the numerous projecting portion: of the building.
burden on the huusc steps by the kilnhu doc. Ind li
rest. Inddrcwinafewmorehrathsol meson. twee
eyswereonthemooandnayMu-theentnnc
heard a voice behind me say—

"Nelly. is that you?"

It was a deep voice. and foreign in tone; yet there I
thing in themneroi‘ prunonncing my namewhichmad
familiar. I turned about to discover who spoke, inﬁll]
domswere shut, and I hid seen nobodyon awn-cling
Somahing stirred in the porch: and, mowing nearer.
guished n tall man dressed in dark cloths. with dark
hair. He Isl-it agninst the side. and held his huge: on
as iiintlmding to open for hilnself. " Whom it be?" I
" Mr. E'unshaw? 0h, ml The voieehnsnoresemhhn

“ I hue waited have an hour," he resumed, while It
staring; ” and the whole of that time all round babe
as dumb. I dared not enter. You do not know me
I‘m not I stranger l "

A my fellon his futures; the cheeks were allow,
covered with black whiskers; the bran: lowering. thel
set and singular. I remembered the eyes.

“What I" I cried. uncertain whether to regard l
worldly visitor. and I raised my lands in amazement.
you (some back? Is it renlly you? Is it? "

“ Yes. Hmthcliﬂ'," he replied. glancing from me i

   

wu‘mmmc HEIGHTS. 9;»

Villa-s. which reﬂected a score 0! glittering "nous, but showed
5MB from within. "Are they at home? where is she?
“1.1mm not glad! you needn’tbe so disturbed. Is she
he? Spelt! Ivan! whave onewordwith her—your mislrus.
hands” some puma from Gimmerton desirs ta seeker."

"Hovwill lhe take it?" I exelnimed. "What will she do?
Mmprkebevildmme—itwill puthzoutofberheatll And

Jumﬂmtheliﬁ l But altered l Nay, there's no oomprehend~
igit lhveyoubeenfornsoldier?"

"Go and any my mange." be interrupted impatiently.
"l‘mlnhell tillyou do!"

Helilledthelatchmndlmmed ; Wtwhmlgottotheparlour
Mellr. end Mr: Unaware. I could not persuade myself
toproeeed. Allength, ! resolution making a nurse to ask
1 they would have the anle lighted. and I opened the door.

They ﬁt togetha in a window whose lattice lay back Igninst
thewxll, and displnyed. beyond the gardmt trees and the wild
m park. the valleyof Gimmerton. with I long line of mist
riding early to it: top (for very soon after you pass the

chapel. as you may have noticed, the tough that runs from
the mrshu joins a heck which follow: the bend of the glen).
Wuthering Heights rose above this silvery vapour : but our old
New invls'ble; it mherdipe dawn on the otherside. Both
the row: and it: occupants. and the scene they gamed on, looked
mdrously paw I shrunk reluctantly from performing
In and; and I: actually going any leaving it unsaid.
Illa hiring put myquestion about the undies. when n sens: of
my lolly mpdled me to return, end mutter—"A person from
Gimme-ton with: to see you. ma'am."

"Whit does he want?" ulted Mrs. Linton.

" I did not quaﬁon him," I answered.

“Well. done the curtains, Nelly." she said; "and bring up
in. I‘ll b lack again directly."

Ste quitted the apartment; Mr. Edgar inquired. carelessly.
who it Im.

"Some one mistras does not expect,” I replied. “ That
HmhcliS—you recollect him, sin—who used to live at Mr.
WI'S"

“What I the gin—the ploughhcy?" he cried.
yank uy so to Clthnrine?"

“Htuhl you must not all him by those names, master." 1

" Why did

96 W‘UTHERING HEIGHTS.

said. “She'dhe sadly grieved to hearyou. Shewns hurl;
heat’tbrolenwhen hexan oh; I guess his remain-ill make:
jubilee to her."

Mr. Linton walked to awindow on the other sideot‘ the tool:
that mlooked the court. He unfast it end laut out.
I supposa they were below. for he exclaimed quickly—"Don’t
sand there, love] Bring the person in. if it be anyone per-
licnlu'." Ere long I hard the click of the latch, Ind Calm
ﬂew upstairs. breathless and wild; too excited to show gill-
ness: indeed. by her face, you would rather have surmised .n
awful calamity.

“ Oh, Edgar. Edgarl she pulled, ﬂinging her arms mud his
neck. " Oh Edgar. darling! Hathcliﬂ‘s come hack—he '5!"
And she tightened her embmne to a squeea.

"Well, well," cried her husband mly. “ don't strangle me
for thntl He never struck me as such I. meridians tram:
There is no need to be {anti

“ I know you didn't like him." she answered. represing a little
the intensity of her delight. "Yet. for my sake. you must be
friends now. Shall I tell him to come up?"

" Here?" he said, " into the parlaur?"

" Where else?" she asked.

He looked vexed. and suggested the kitchen as l more sultehle
place {or him. Mrs. Linton eyed him with a drull «pagina—
half angry. half laughing at his hstidiousness.

" No," she added after a while; " I mnnot sit in the kitchen.
Set two tables here, Ellen: onefor your master and Miss lsbelll.
being gentry; the other for Heathclitf and myself, being of the
lower orders. Will that plase you. (lat? Or mun I have I
ﬁre lighted elsewhere 7 If so. give directions. l'llrun dawn and
secure my guest. I’m Afraid the joy is too great to be real!"

She was about to dart off again ; but Edgar W her.

" Ynu hid him step up." he said, addressing me: "and.
Catherine, try to be glad. without heing absurdl the wholt
household need not witness the sight of your welcoming a run
away servant as a brother."

1 descended and found Heathclit'fwaitiug under the porch
evidently anticipating an invitation to enter. He followed my
guidance without waste of words, and I ushered him into tht
presence nl‘ the master and mistrus, whose dished cheek:
lictrnycd signs of mm talking. But the lady's glowed will

   

WTHERING HEIGHTS. 97

anther feeling when her friend appeared at the door : she sprang
:rnrd, took both his hands. and led him to Linton; and then
he seized Linton's reluctant ﬁngers and crushed them into his.
Sowinlly revealed by the ﬁre and undleligbt, I was amazed,
methane, to behold the transformation of Hmthcliﬂ'. He
um a tall. athletic, well-formed man ; hside whom, my
mastermedquite sleuderand youth-like. Hisupright carriage
lasted the ida ul'hil having been in the army. His counte-
t-nuvu much older in expression and decision of future than
Mr. Union‘s; it looked intelligent. and retained no marks of
former degndltion. A hachivilised ferocity lurked yet in the
Wm and eyes full of black ﬁre. but it was subdued; '
Ind hie manner vlu even digniﬁed : quite divuted of roughness.
though too stern {or grace. My master's surprise equalled or en
W mine: he remained for a minute at a loss how to address
“I! ploughboy. Is he had ﬁlled hirn. Heathcliﬂ' dropped his
ﬁlm hand. and stood looking at him coolly till he chose to speak.
"Sitdown. sir." he laid. at length. “ Mrs. Linmn. recalling
Old line. would have me give you a cordial reneption; and. of
Wu. 1 our gratified when anything occurs to please her.“
"And i also," answered Heathellﬁ, " especially it'll be anything
in Illich l have a part. i shall stay an hour or two willingly."
lie toolr a neat opposite Catherine, who kept her gm ﬁxed on
lira as inhe {and he would vanish were she to remove it. He
ﬂ uat raise his to ha often: a quick glance now and then
lined; but It ﬂashed back. each time more conﬁdently. the
“thanked delight he drank from hen. They were too much
Illahed in their mutual joy to sulfa embnmssrnent. Not so
"I- Brim: he grew. pale with pure annoyance: a feeling that
YUM it: climax when his lady «Se, and stepping across the
"maid Hutheliﬁ": hands again, and laughed like one beside

“lshll think it a drum to-rnarmwl" she cried. " I shrill
“‘1 he dale to believe that I have seen. and touched, and
M to you once more. And yet. cruel Heathcliﬂ'l you
“Wtduave this welcome. To be absent and Illent for three
Mndnemmthinkormel"

"A little more then you have thought of me." he murmured.
"1 hand of your runrriage, Cathy, not long since; and. while
'liﬁngiu the yard below, I meditated this plan :—just to have
“Ilium of your nee. a stare of surprise, perhlps, and pre-

D

98 WWII-IEka HEIGHTS.

tended pleasure: alterwards settle my more with Hindi]; I
then prevent the law by doing execution on mynelf. wi
wmhuputthueidmsoutdmymiud; bathe-mains!
me with moths aspect next time! Ney, you'll not Grin!
again. You‘re: really sorry for me. wae you} Well, thm
cause. I've fought through I. bitte- lil‘e sinu I he: head)
voice ; and you must forgive me, for I struggled only imp

“ Catherine, unles we are to hlve cold tea. pleasequ
the table." interrupted Linton. striving to preserve hkmiix
tone, and a due mmurc of politenas. " Mr. Hutheliﬁ'willl
n longwalk, wherever he may lodge tonight; end I'm this

She ml: her post before the urn; Ind Miss Isabelle:
summoned by the bell ; then, having handed fheilchlinﬁl‘
I ld't the room. The meal hardly endured ten minutes. Ct
rine's cup was never ﬁlled: she could neither eat not 0
Edgar had made a slap in his saucer, and scarcely ml!"
mouthfu!‘ Their guest did not mount his stay that a:
above an hour longer. I aked. as he departed, if he"
Gin-uneven 7

“ No, to Wuthcring Heights," he nnswexed: " Mr. Earl!
invited me. when I called this morning."

Mr. Emshaw invited Hm I and he called on Mr. Eunﬂ
I pondered this sentence painfully. after he Wu gone I
turning out a hit of a hypocrite. and coming into the comb
work mischief undeta cloak? I mused : I had : prsmtin!
the bottom of my hem that he had better have rennined ll

1 About the middle of the night, I W W from!“
nap by Mrs. Linton gliding inm my chamber. taking-‘1
my bedside, and pulling me by the hair to rouse me.

“ I cannot rest, Ellen." she said. by Ilyof apology. "A
want some living creative to keep me company in my hnppit
Edgar is sulky, because I'm glad of a. thing that does not int
him; he Rim to open his mouth, except to utter pettkh.
speeches; andhexﬂirmed Iwascruelmdseiﬁshtorwishiu
am when he was so sick and sleepy. He niwayl contrive:
sicklt the lust cross! I gavea {ewsenteneesofmueld
to Heathclitl', and he, either for u hm: or I ping of 4
began to cry: so I got up and left him."

"What use is it pnising Healhcliﬂ' to him?” I new
"A5 lads they had an aversion to each other, and Hut
would hate just as much to hear him praised : it's human II

WERING HEIGHTS. 99

La Mr. Linton done nhout him, unless you would like an open
m m than."

‘33 does it no: shmvgrent weakness?" poured she. " I’m
mm: I never feel him at the hrightnes of Isabella's
ydlnhnir end the whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance.
Ind lb fm all the family exhibit for her. Even you,
Nd}. ifwe have n dispute sometimes, you back Isabella em
on; end I yield liken foolish mother: [call her I. darling, nnd
muttongood temper. It pmherbmlherlosee us
calm-ad that plane: me But theyare veryrnnch alike:
My": spoiled children. and fancy the warld was made for their
Iowan-admin: and though lhumour both. I think I mm
Minna: might imptuve them, all the same,"

"You‘re mistaken, Mrs. Linton." said I. " They humour
WI: 1 know Whit there “mild he to do if they did not. You
uni-ell 115011! to indulge their passing whims as long as their
11mins: is to nntieipate nllyour desires. You may. however.
fall out, at last. over something of equal consequence to both
this: Ind then those you term wait an very capable of being
K ohninnte us you."

"And then we shall ﬁght to the dmth, shnn't we, Nelly?" she
fanned, llnghing. “ No I I tell you. I have such faith in
Union's love. that I believe I might kill him, and he wouldn‘t
I'd: to m"

Ildvieed her to nine him the more for his affection.

"I do:" she answered. " but he needn't resort to whining for
ME» his childish: Ind. instad of melting into tars because
ilidthx Hutheliﬂm now worthy of my one's regard. and
l IIIIld honour the ﬁrst gentlemln in the country to be his
he. he ought to hue said i: tor me, and been delighted from
My. He must gm hemmed to him, nnd he may as well
l“chin: : conﬁning haw Heathclin‘hasrmsan toohject whim,
I'm n: he hehnvai acellmtly z "

"Whnt do you think of his going to Wnlherlng Heights?" 1
Nailed. " He is reformed in every respect, apparently: quite
‘Chdm'an : oﬁring the right hind of fellowship to his enemies
Ill mud I "

"Heuplnined it." she replied. “ I wonder as much us you.
"It lid he wind to gather information concerning me from you.
“PM: you raided there still ; and Joseph told Hindlcy. who
Cline cut end tell to quaxioning him of what he had been doing.

Im WU‘I‘HERING HEIGHTS.

and howhe had been living: and ﬁnally, dm‘rod him mm
in. There were some persons sitting at cards: Hutheliﬂ'
them; my brother lost some money to him, end, ﬁnding in
plentifully supplied. he requested that he would come lgu'n '-
the evening: to which he consented. Hindleyistoo renlrklb
select his acquaintance prudently : he doun‘t trouble hind“!
reﬂect on the muses he might have {or mistrustingonewhanh
has basely injured. But Heathcﬁﬁ‘ nﬁms his principal m
for resuming a connection with his ancient persecutor is twill!
to install himself in qunrters at walking distance from them
and an attachment to the house where we lived together; tad
likewise a hope that I shall have more opportunqu of real!
him there than I could have if he settled in Grimmer-ton. HA
means to offer liberal payment for permission to lodge ll tll
Heights; and doubtless my brother's commons will prong
him to accept the terms: hewas always greedy; thoughwhl
he grasps with one hand he ﬁlings away with the other."

" It's A nice plat: for nyoung man to ﬁxhis dwellinginl'
said l. “ Hove you no fear of the consequences, Mrs. Linn?

" None for my friend," she replied: "his strong head vi!
keep him from danger: a little for Hindley: but he an't ll
made morally worse than he is; and I stand between hinulx
bodily hmn. The event of this evening has rewnciled men
God and humanityl I hnd risen in angry rebellion 9in!!!
Providence Oh, I‘ve endured very. very bitter misery, Ndly
If that creature knew how bitter, he'd be ashamed to cloudit
removal with idle petulnnce. ltwns kindness {or him which in
duoedmetobenrit alone: hndlexprased theagonyI frequ
felt. he would have been taught to long for its allevintion I
nrdently as I. However. it's over. and I'll tnlte no manger!
his folly; I can afford to suffer nnything hereoﬂu'l Should ill
meanest thing alive slap me on the cheek, I'd not only turn lb
other. but, I'd ask pardon for provoking it; and. as a proof. I'
go make my peace with Edger instantly. Good-nigh“ 1'!
an angel ! "

In this sell—complacent conviction she depmed : and tl
success of her fulﬁlled resolution was obvious on the mono!
Mr. Linton had not only objured his peevishness (though I:
spirits seemed still subduedby Catherine's exuberaneeofvindty
but he ventured no objection to her taking Isabella with her
Wuthering Heights in the afternoon: and she rewarded hi

WUTHEMNG HEIGHTS. Io!

Iiihsueh aszimuerofsweetnessnnd infection in return, as made
Ihehouenpnndisefmsevernldays; bothmasternndservants
naming from the pupaunl sunshine.

HUME—Mr. Hathcliﬁ I should say in future—used the
My of visiting at Thrushcmss Gauge cautiously, at ﬁrst: he
leanedstirnating how far its owner would hear his intrusion.
Catherine, also. deemed it judicious to mods-ate her exprasions
dplemne in recu’ving him; and he gradually established his
rimqu He retained a great deal ol'the reserve
ﬁrvhieh his boyhood was remarkable; and that served to
1Tl!“ all startling demonstrations of feeling. My master's

marina: experienced I lull. and further circumstances diverted
il‘nln mother channel {or a space.

His new source of trouble sprang from the not-anticipated
Dianna: of Isabella Linton evincing a sudden and irresistible
“Minn towards the tolerated guesL She was at that time a
dinning young lady of eighteen ; infantile in manners, though
Passed of keen wit. keen feelings. and nkeen temper. too. if
aimed. Ha brother. who loved her tenderly. was appalled at
all! fantastic preference. Levin; aside the degradation of an
1lliance with a nameless man, and the possible he! that his
my. in delanlt of heirs male. might pass into such a one‘s
m. he had sense to comprehend Heathcliﬁ's disposition: to
how that. though his exterior was xltered. his mind was
Mangeahle and unchanged. And he dreaded that mind:
“mulled him: he shrank forebodingly from the idea of com-
an Isabella to its keeping. He would have recailed still
"I!!! had he been aware that he attachment rose unsolicited.
“in: bestowed where it awakened no reciprocation of senti-
Emt: for the minute he discovered its exisloe, he hid the
“We on Huthcliﬁ": deliberate designing.

We hnd all remarked. during some time, that Miss Linton
lMerl and pined over something. She grew ores and weari~
m: snapping at and reusing Catherine continually. at the
Imminent risk of exhausting her limited patience We excused
131’. to a certain extent, on the plea of ill-health: she wns
dwindling and fading before our eya. But one day. when she
had been peculiarly wayward. rejecting her bmkfast. cam-
plaining that the mums did not do what she told them; that

lhe mistress would allow her to be nothing in the house. and
Edgar neglected her ; that she had caught a cold with the doors

h - - \VUTHERIXG HEIGHTS.

Evin}: left open. and we let the parlour ﬁre go out on purpose
in her. with a hundred yet more frivolous accusations. M
m [urreiuptorily insisted that she should get to bed; III
in; scolded her heartily. threatened to send for the duct:
.ntion of Kenneth caused her to enchim. instantly. that h
3”“ mu perfect, and it was only Catherine's harshness whit

nude her unhaPl’y-
.- How can you say I am harsh. you naughty fondling?" :1":
p; mistress. amazed at the unreasonable assertion. " You ll
‘ ur reason. When have I been harsh. tell me?‘

  

 

 

" ln nut wall: along the moor: you told me to unable IM-
1 ,tlmsnl. while you sauntered on with Mr. Heathcliﬂ‘l "

.\ml that's your notion of harshness?" said Cathaill
'.-ughiug. " It was no hint that your company was snperﬂuoﬁ
m. ttulu'x care whether you kept with us or not : I merely that?!
' .uln-litl‘s tall: would have nothing entertaining for your an!
-(‘II no," wept the young lady ; “ you wished nu: any
:\\-.tuit‘ you knew I liked to he them ! "

u Is she snnc?" asked Mrs. Linton. appealing to me. "11
.m‘m our conversation' word [or word. Isabella; and ya!
.“ nut any charm it could have had {or you.“

[don't mind the convursation," she answered: "! waulﬂ'
u'lth "—- ‘

~\\'.-ll ! " said Catherine. perceiving bcr hesitate to camp“

- minute.

With him : and I won't bcalways sent 05' l " she continmi
ﬁshnillg up "You are n (log in the Arranger. Cathy, and dash
N our to be loved but yourself l "

"You are an impertinent little monkey l " exclaimed “IS
1mm», in surprise. “ But I'll not believe this idiocy! ll‘t
“waging that you can covet the admiration of HeatheliﬂL
a.“ you consider him an agreeable person! 1 hope 1 b“
usulnhrrstood you. Isabella?"

“so, you have not," said the infatuated girl. " I love hiﬂ
’“ than ever you loved Edgar; and he might love me. if y“
"at let him l " .

.- [wouldn't be you for a kingdom, then i" Catherine deck!“
wtimlly: and she scorned to speak sincerely. “ Nelly. ht“
. p convinre her of her madness. Tell her it . at Ileathcliﬂ'is

 

  
  
 
  

WUTKERING HEIGHTS. 103‘

machined cram. without reﬁnement, without cultivation:

nuidwilderuessofﬁineundwhinstone. l'dussoonputthut
hmiutothepukonuwintersduy. ureeolumeudyou-
bhatowymr heart on him! It is denim-able ignumceoi his
thunder, child. and nothing else, which makes thnt dream
mmhad. Prey. don’t imginethat he conned: depths
oihmevoienoelnd un'ectionbeueuthnstern exta'iorl He's
not I rough diunwnd—u pearl-conﬁning oyster of I rustic:
be‘nﬁeme. pitilas, wolﬁsh mm. I never saytohim ‘ Let this
wantememydnne. because itwould be ungenerousorcrue! to
mumm’ I sny'Letthemuione.bemuse/shouidhatethem
bhewmnged : ' Ind he'd crush you like aspumw‘s egg. Isabella.
He found you n troublaome charge. I know he couldn't love
Hinton: and yet he'd be quitempable oflnarrying your fortune
Illierpmnions! avnrice is growing with him a besetting sin.
M's my picture: and I'm his friend—so much so, that had
hlhought seriously to and: you, I should, perhaps. have held
mytougue. and let you fall into his trap."

"is Linton regarded her sister-in-hw with indignation.

“Fur shame! for shame!” the repeated angrily, “you are
Wise than twenty foes, you poisonous friend I “

"Ah! you won’t believe nte, then?" suit! Catherine. “ You
mink I speak fmm wicked selﬁshness? "

"I'm certain you do," retortcd Isabella ; "find I shudder at
7‘31!“

“Good !" cried the other. "Try for yourself, ilthat be your
M: Ihave done, and yield the argument to your saucy in«

"And I must suh'er for her egotisnl!" she sobhed, asMrs.
Um lei! the room. "All. in is ugaiust rne: she has blighted
l'Hillgie consolation. hit she uttered falsehoods, didn't she?
“I. Hathciiﬂ' is not a ﬁeﬂd : he has In honourable soul. and
“none, orhcvr could he lemetnber her?"

“ ﬁnish him from your thoughts. miss." I nirL “ He‘s a bird
mm! omen: no mate for you. Mrs. Linton spoke stmngly,
M yet I can't contndict her. She is better acquainted with
“but! “1111 I, or my one Mid: : Ind she never would repre-
ht him :5 worse than he is. Honest people don't hide their
hit. How has he been living? how hns he got rich P why is
1“flying It Wuthering Heights, the house of u man whom he
“on? Theyuy Mr. Euruhuw intone and worse since he

m4 WUTHERING HEIGHTS-

uune. They sit up all night together nominally, Ind Hulk]
hasbeenborrowing moneyon his land. and dos mun-t
phynnd drink: I heard onlynweelt ago—it“: Jinth
told nee—l met him at Gimmerton : ' Nelly,‘ he aid. 've's In
a. crowner's 'quest enow. at ah: folks. One on 'em’s f“
getten his ﬁnger cut 03' mi handing t‘other fro‘ stickln m
loilte a cawlf. That's maister. yah knnw, 'nt's son up o'u'll
tuh t‘ grand 'sizes. He's noun {ﬁred 0' t‘ bench o' W
norther Paul, nur Peter. nur John, nur Matthew, nnr noun I
‘em, not be! He fair likes—he lnngs loset his bummed h!
ngean 'eml And yon bonny lad Heathdiﬁ'. yah mind. he'u
rare uni He tan girn a laugh as well‘s onyhodyat I nigh
divil's jest. Does he niver say nowt at his ﬁne living emu-i
when he goes to t' Grange? This is t' wny on't :—up It 3-
dawn: dice. brandy, cloised shutters, und can‘le-light till In
day at noon: then, I‘ fooil gangs banning un raving to 1"
cham'er, mnkking dnoent fowlrs dig thur ﬁnger: i’ thur luafl'
varry shame; un‘ the knnve, why he tan taint his bliss. unm
un sleep, un off In his neighbour's In gossip wi‘ t' wife. I' m
he tells Dame Catherine how her futhur's goold runs intn iii!
pocket. and her fathur's son gnllops down t‘ broad road. viii:
he ﬂees nfore to oppen t' pikesi" Now. Miss Lintan. Jami“!
an old rascal. but no liar; and. if his account of Heathdif’
conduct be true, you would never think of desiring sudl '
husband, would you '1’"

“ You are lengucd with the rest, Ellen l " she replied. “ [1130'
listen to your slanders. What malevolence you must have W
wish to convince me that there is no happinss in the world!”

Whether she would have got over this fancy if left to had-
or persevered in nursing it perpetually, I cannot say: she “a
little time to reﬂect. The day after. there we: I justice-Instill
at the next town; my master was obliged to attend ; and W-
Heathclitf. aware of his absence. called rather earlierthzn
Catherine and lsnbella were sitting in the libnry. on W
terms. but silent. The latter alarmed at her recent indium-Wt
And the disclosure she had made other secret feelings in at!“
sient ﬁt of passion; the former. on mnture consideration. rel“!
offended with her companion ; and, if she laughed egnin ntha
pertness, inclined to make it no laughing mutter to Aer. 5“
did laugh as she saw Heathcliﬁ' pass the window. lwas 5M
ing the hearth. and I noticed a mischievous smile on her “F

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l0;

Isabelle. nhsorhed in her meditations. or a book. remained till
III: door opened ; and it was too late to attempt an escape. which
hwmld gladly have done had it been puctiable.

"Came in, ninth rightl" exclaimed the mistress glily. pull-
ng I chair to the ﬁre. " Here are two people sadly in need of
iihlrdtothuw the lee between them; and you are the very one
I: should both of us choose. Heathcliﬂ'. I'm proud to show
ml. at last. somebody that dates on you more than myself. I
xpret you to feel ﬂattered. Nay. it's not Nelly: don't look at
tr! My poor little sister-ln-lnw in breaking her heart by mere
nnleniplntlon of your physical Ind moral beauty. It ll: in
norm power to he Edgur's hrotherl No, no, Isabella, you
Mn't run 01f." she condoned. mating. with feigned playful-
u, the confounded girl, who had risen indignnntly. " We
a: Ming like cats about you. Heathcliff; Ind l was
Iirly beaten in protestntions of devotion and admiration: and,
nearer. I was informed that if I would but have the manners
)Iund nside. my rivnl, Is she will have herself to he. would
not: shaft into your soul that would ﬁx you {or ever. Ind send
1y huge into eternal oblivion l "

"Cathet-ineln said Isuhella. calling up her dignity. Ind dis;
lining to struggle from the tight grasp thst held her. “I'd
link you to adhere to the truth end not slander me, even in
Ilel Mr. Hutheliﬁ‘, be kind enough to bid this friend of yours
ﬂute me: she forgets that you and I are not intimate IC-
Himsnees' and what nmnses her is painful to me beyond
Iillusion.“

Althe- guest answered nothing, but took his sat, Ind looked
mongth indiﬂ'erent what sentiments she cherished concerning
ill. she turned and whispered an cor-nest appeal for liberty to
ltormentor. .

“Dyna means ! ” cried Mrs. Linton in answer. "I won‘t be
“and 1 dog in the manger ngnin. You Moll stny: now then l
fathom. why don't you evince satisfaction It my pleasant
as) lsobelln sweats [hut the love Edgar hes {or me is
Idling to that she entertains for you. I'm sure she made some
Bah of the kind; did she not. Ellen? And she has fasted
trainee the day before yesterday's wnlk. from sorrow Ind nge
uldespatched her out of your society under the idn of its
in: moreme ."

"I think you belie her," said Hathcliﬁ', twisting his clinir to
u a

106 WDTHERING HF.le

{teem "She wisha tube out ol'rny society "mull!
n21"

And he shared hurl at the objeu of dictum, acne-U
douaunngerepulsivennimnl: uwnﬁpedehumthemh
instance, which curiosity leads one to enmine in spite dill
evasion it raises. The poorthingemldn't berth-nil
grew white Ind red in rapid succession. and. while uni-ti
her lubes. hen: the strength of he smell ﬁngers (abound!
ﬁrm dutch of Catherine; and perca‘ving that as flat I: ill
niacinneﬁnge oﬂ‘her arm mother closeddawn, and dram!
not remove the whole together. she began to make use d I
mils: and their sharpmss prsenllyarrwnented the W
with ascents of red. 1

"There's atigress l " exclaimed Mrs. Linmn. letting huh
and shaking her hand with pain. “ Begone, forGod'I uh.”
hideynurvixentnoe! Howfoolish tn revenlthoee minute“
Cnn‘t you fancy the conclusions he'll draw? Look, Huthelil
they Ire instruments that will do uecution—youmnst her-m
your w”

" I‘d wrench them 08' her ﬁngers. if they ever WM
he answered brutally. when the door had closed Ills he
“ But what did you mean bytensingrheawure in than”.
Cathy? You vac no: spmking the truth. were you?"

“I mnreyou I m,"shereturnecL "Shehnshmn dyiqi
yoursakeseveral reels: and raving about you this will
and pouring forth a deluge of abuse. because I reprelented yll
failings in n plain light. for the purpose of mitigating he Id‘
ntion. But don't notice it further: Iwishedto punish hers-It
nus. that‘s all. I like her too well. my deer Hathdiﬁ'. ml
you absolutely seize and devour her up."

“And I like her too ill to attempt it," said he. “will
vey zhnulish fashion. You‘d heatof odd things if I lived 1!!
with that mnwkish, wuen lane: the non ordinary worth“
painting on he white the colours of the rainbow. end min; Kl
Hue eyes black, every day or two: they demuth reenb
Dawn's."

“Delectath l" observed Catherine. “ They are dove's B1
-—engel's | "

"She‘s her brother's heir, [5 she not?" he ﬁled. after a l!
silence.

‘ "I should be sorry 10 think so." returned his comp-lid

WHERle HEIGHTS. 107

vdonen nephews shall muse her title. please Heaven!
:yourmlndtrom thesnbjectu present: you melon
: covet yont neighbour's goods; member 112': neigb
cod: are mine."

I] were nine. they would be none the less tint." said
in‘; "but though Isabella Linton may be silly. she is
mad: and. in short. we'll dismal the matter. as you

lhdl’ tongues they did dismis it: and Catherine. pro.
m her mm The other. I felt 0min. recalled it
theeanne of the awning. I new him amlletn blue!
ether—Ind lapse lnlo ominous musing whenever Mn.
ndaecasiontobeeltent {markup-“mt.

ruined to watch hi: movements. My heart lnvnrlebly
to the master’s, in preference to Cetherlne's side: wilh
imgmm'lmwukhd. and MLndhonmmble:
-sh=muldnmbecﬂledtheaffadle.yetshewdlo
:Iself such wide We. that I had little faith in he!
5. and still 15: sympnthy {at he: feeﬂngs. I wanted
I; to happen whldlmighthanthceﬁhctofﬁeelngboth
mg Heights and the Gmge of Mr. Helthcllﬁ‘. quietly;
useswehndbeenpriortohisadvmt. Hlsvlliuwelez
dnightmetome; Ind. Inspectednnmymnenka.
do at the Heights man 0M past exphlnlng. l
:God had {mam the stny weep there to itsown
wanderingsud an evil bust proﬁled between ﬁend
. waiting his ﬁne to splingnnd destroy.

...

CHAPTER XX.

IRS, while meditating“ these thing! in solltule. I've
nnmddentmmndwtonmyhonnettogoneehaw
n the farm. I've persuaded my conscience that Inns
owamhimhawpeopletalked regudlnghiswlyuud
1: recolleeted his conﬁrmed bad habits» Ind. hands!
ﬁting him. lave ﬂinch from neutering the M
loubtingiflunldbeartobenkmntmyvord.

imelpusedtheoldgnte,pingantotmyway,onn
toGimmertnn. ltwasnbounhepedodth-tmynm
mend: a bright frosty men-noon: the ground hue.

108 WUTHERING HEIGHTS-

nnd the road hard and dry. I came to 1. stone where thehiﬂ
way hunches 01' on to the moor at your left hand: awngh-u'
pillar. with the letters W. H. cut on its north side. on than
C... and on the south-west. T. 6. It sews I33 guideme
the Grange. the Heights. end village. The sun shone yellows
its grey head, reminding me of summer; and I cannot lth:
but I“ at once. a gush ot' child's sens-dons ﬂowed into my hat
Hindley and I held it a favourite spot twenty years hd'ote.
gucd long at the weather-worn block, and, stooplng down, pt
eeived a hole near the bottom still full of snail-shells and pdials
which we were {and of storing thee with more perishable thinl:
and, as fresh as mlity, it appeared that Ibeheld ntyesrlypll
mate seated on the withered turf : his dark. squlre head he
forward, end his little hsnd scooping out the earth with s [b
of slute. " Poor Hindiey l " I exclaimed involuntarﬂy.
started: my bodily eye was cheated into n momentary heﬁ
lhst the child lifted its face Ind stared strnight into mine!
vanished in a twinkling: but immediately I felt an irrdslih
yearning to he at the Heights. Superstition urged me to amp
with this impulse: supposing he should he dad! I thought
or should die soon l—snpposing it were a sign of death! Tl
nearer I got to the house the more agitated I grew; null
utching sight of it I trembled every limb. The apparitianhi
outstripped me: it stood looking through the gate. That!
my that idea on observing an elf-locked. brown-eyed boy sen"!
his ruddy countenance against the bots. Furtha rdeai
snggated this must be Hareton, my Haremn, not altered gral
since I k0. himl ten months since.

“ God bless thee. darling I " I cried. forgetting instantnnm
my foolish (ears. " Hnreton, it’s Nelly! Nelly. thy nurse."

He retreated out at arm's length, and picked up a large all

"Im come to seethy father, Hareton." l sdded, gush
from the action that Nelly. if she lived in his memory at s
was not recognised as one with me.

He raised his missile to hurl it ; I oomrnenud a soothi
speech. hut could not stay his hand: the stone ﬁrm I
bonnet : and then ensued. from the stammerlng lips of the lit
fellow. a string of nurses. which. whether he comprehended thi
ornot. were delivered with practised emphasis, and distorted
baby features into a shocking expression of indignity. You ll:
been-tail: this grieved more than angered me. Fit tocry, I t:

WUTHERING HEIGHTS: {09

:e from my pocket, end oﬂered it to propitiate him. He

l. and then snatched it from my hold; as if he fancied

tended to tempt and disappoint him. I showed another,

it out of his mch.

) has taught you those ﬁne words. my hairn?" I
" The curate ? "

m the curate. and theel Gie me that." he replied.

us where you got your lessons, and you shall have it."

" Who's your mater?"

I daddy." was his answer.

what do you lam from daddy? " I continued.

nped at the fruit; I raised it higher. “Whit does he

i P " I asked.

ght." said he. “but to keep out of his gait. Daddy

ide me. because I'sweur at him." . ~

and the devil teschesyou to swear at daddy?" Iobserved.

Anny." he dmwled;

I. then ‘4‘"

lhcliﬂ‘."

i if he liked Mr. Hesthcliﬂ;

" he answered again.

igm have his reasons for liking him, I could only gather

W“ Iknown’t: hepaysdadhackwhxthegiestome

ses daddy (or cursing me. He says I luun do Is I will."

the cunte does not tech you to mdandwritethen?‘

:L

I was told the curate should have his —- teeth dashed

— throat. it he stepped over the threshold—Heatheliﬁ'

nised that l "

he mange in his hand, and bade him tell his father that

i called Nelly Dean was waiting to spit with him. by

an gate. He went up the walk. and entered the house ;

ad of Hindley, Heathcliﬁ appured on the door scans;

.‘nedditectlyandnn dawntheroad ashard as ever!

ee, making no halt till I gained the guide-post. and

s scared as if I had raised a goblin. This is not much

d with Mia Isabella's aﬁair: except that it urged me

e further on mounting vigilant guard. and doing my

3 check the spread of such bad inﬂuence at the Grange;

nigh I should wake a damestic storm, by thwm'm

Iton's plusure. ‘

"0 WVTKERING HEIGHTS.

The next time Heathcliﬁ'enme. my young lady WIN
feedingsnmepigeonsintheeonrt. SlielindIntermittent!d
to her siste-in-izw for thread-y“ busheme
her {retrial complaining. and we foundinng w
elith not thchnbitot bestowing a single mm
on Miss Linton, I knew. Now, as soon II he beheld M.“
ﬁrst precaution was to tnkenswupingmeyofthehmm
Immding bythe kitchenwindow.bntld1evontdl'¢ﬂ
He then stepped was: the pavementto her. and nidlomﬂh'l‘li
she seemed embarrassed, and duirous ofgetting "my: hm
it. he laid his hand on her am. She averted her ha : helm!-
ently put some question which she hadnotnind tom 1U
was another rapid glance at the home. and supposing W
unseen, the scoundrel had the inpudence to embrace hot.

“Judas! traitor l " l ejaculnted. "You Ire a hymn-hm
are you? A deliberate deoeiver." 

” Who is, Nelly?“ said Catherine‘s voice at my elbow: "II
been over intent on watching the pair outside to mark ll
entrance.

“ Your-worthless friend i " I answeIedennly: " the nae-HM
rascal yonder. Ah. he has caught a. glimpseofns—he is uni“
in! lwonderwillhehzvetheheart totinda pluuihleunﬂ
for muking love to Miss. when he told you he hated he?"

Mrs. Linton snwlsabelln l.th freemdrunintolbf
garden: and A minute after. Heithcliﬂ‘ opened the doc. ‘
couldn't withhold giving some loose to my indignation: 3“
Catherine Ingrin insisted on silence. and threatened to oak
meant ofthekiwben, if I dared to be so presumptuousu“
put in my insolem tongue. I

"To hear you, people might think you were the ml
shecried. " You want setting down in your-right phal Hat-b
cliﬂ', what are you about, raising this stir? I said you nut V
Isabella Alone i—I ha yon will. unless you are tiredof hill!"
ceived here, and wish Linton to draw the bolts again pal"

“ God forbid that he should try I " mmmi the M villi.
I detested him just then. "God keep him meek and new
Every day I grow maddcr alter sending him to haven l"

" Hush l" said Catherine, shutting the inn:- door. "Don
Mme. Why have yaudisregndedmy request? Did“
come across you on purpose? " 

"Whntisitto you?“he growled. "I have a right to h

wmrmmo HEIGHTS. I I I

limifsheehooes: and you have no right to object. I am not
yrlnshundumt needn't bejealom ofme ! "
"l'n not jealous fyuuf repliedtlremistriss, "I'm jalau
hyoe. Garyuurfnce: youshan't seowlatme! Ifyoulike
blah, youshullm'ryher. But do youl-ikeher? Tellthetruth.
Hutheliﬂ'l There, you won‘t nnswer. I'm certain you don‘t!“

"Andwvuld Mr. Linton approve of his sister marrying that
m)" I inquired.

“Mr. Linton should approve." returned my My decisively.

"He mil)! spare himself the trouble," said Heatholiﬂ': "I
HRH do as well without his approbation And as to you,
Calla-inc. I have a mind to speak a Iewvvords now, while we are
Ii. lvvnutyonte beaver: that I My“ havetruted me
i11E!'ilally—luierirally I Do you hm? And if you ﬂatter your-
ﬁﬂhtldori’t perceive it, youareal'ool; andifyouthink [can

' hemmed hysvveel words, youareau idiot ; and ifyuu faneyl'll
nﬁumrevenged. I'll convince you of the contrary. inaverylittle
While! Meantime. thank you for telling me your sister-in-lavv’s
mart: Iswurl‘llmakethemoﬁofit. And stand you aside l "

"What new phase of h'scharucter is this?" exclaimed Mrs.
union, in merit. " I’ve treated you infenully—aud you'll
“it your revenge! How will you take it, ungrateful brute?
HUI have I treated you infanally?"

"I seek no revengeon you,” replied Hmthcllﬁ' less vehemmtly.
"Tim's not the plan. The tyrant grinds down his slam and
they don't turn against him ; they cnislr those beneath them.
Yw Ire welcome to torture me to death for your amusement.
My ellovv me to amuse mysell : little in the same style. and
Efrain from insult as much as you are able. Having levelled my
Rhee, don't erect a bowel and compiuoeritly admire your mm
charity in giving me that for a home. If I imagined you really
'Hledmecomurrylsabel. I'deut my throat !"

“Oh. the evil is that I am Mljealws, isiﬁ" cried Catharine.
"Well. I won’t repeatrny oﬁer aiawife: itisasbed asoﬁ’eri-ng
hue lost soul. Your His lies. like his, in inﬂicting misery.
You prove it. Edgar is restored from the ill-temper he gave way
to at your coming; I begin to be secure and tranquil; and

you. rsilese to know us at peace, appear mlved on exciting is
qrmrel. Qunrrel with Edgar, if you please, Henhcliif. and
have his sister: you‘ll hit on exactly the most eﬁicient method

of reversing yourself on me.”

l I: WWI-[BRING Iime

The convention cased. Mrs. Linton set down hyllliﬁ
ﬂushed and gloomy. The spirit which served her m m
intrnctable '. she could neither lay nor control it. He stood U
the bani: with folded mm. broodingonhisevilthoughts; and
in thisposition I leftthemtoseeltthemnster,whowuvw
ing what kept Catherine below so long.

“ said be, when I entered, "have you seen ya
misuse ? "

“Ya; she's in the kitchen, sir." I answered. "She's ndi
put out by Mr. Hmrhciiﬁ's bebnviour: und, indeed. I do thi‘
it's time to arrange his visits on another footing. There's ill!
in being toosoii.nndnowit's mlnetothis"—— And lame
thesceneinthemum and, unwasldnred. thewth
quent dispute I fancied it could not be very prejudicini to In
Linton; unlessshemndeit so afterwards, hynssuming theﬂ
fensive for her guest. Edgar Linton had diﬁculty in baring:
to the close. His 5m words mailed that he did not clar h
wife of blame.

" This is insuﬂ‘erable l " he exclaimed. " It is disgraodultll
she should own him (or 1 friend. and force his oompuny ohm!
Call me two men out of the bull. Ellen. Catherine shall iii!!!
no longer to argue with the low ruﬁnn—I have humonxerl ii
enough."

He dsoended. and bidding the servants wait in the palm
went. {allowed by me. to the kitchen. Its occupants had 1‘
commenced their angry discussion: Mus. Linton, nt lent. "
scolding with renewed vigour ; Heathch had moved to a
window, and hung his had, somewhat bowed by her viola
rating apparently. He saw the mastu' ﬁrst, and made 0. In!
motion that she should be silent; which she obeyed,
an discovering the reason of his intimation.

“ How is this?" said Linton, adan her ; " what nvlk
of propriety must you have to remain here. u’ter the MM
which has been held to you by that blackguard ? l supp!!!
because it is his ordinay talk, you think nothing of it; you!
habituated to his boseness. and. perhaps, imagine I an get 115‘
to it too I "

“Have you been listening at the door. Edgar?" nsltedil
mistras. in a. tone particularly reticulated to provoke be! h"
bond. implying both carelessness and contempt of his
Huthcliif. who had raised his eyes at the former speech. BI

WUTHERING HEIGH'IS. 1 13

main; laugh at the latter; on purpose, it seemed. to draw
llr. Linton's attention to him. He succeeded; but Edgar did
mmnwentamin him with any high ﬁightsot‘ pas-

“I.

“l have been so far tome-ring with you. sir." he said quietly ;
"not tint I was ignmmt of your miserable. degraded char-
am. but I felt you were only partly responsible for that z and
to keep up your acquaintance. I acquiesced—
lmliihly. Your presence is a moral poison that would non-
Iminate the most virtuous: {or that cause. and to prevent
no: consequences, I shall deny you here-her admission into
dim. and give notice now that I require yourinstant de-
Fm Three minuts' delay will render it involuntuxy and
minions.”

Heatholiﬁ‘ measured the height and breadth of the speaker
'ilhln eye full of derision.

"Cathy, tth hmbafyouts threatens like a hull!" he said.
"It is in danger of splitting its skull ugaimt my knuckles. By
Godl Mr. Linton. I‘m mortally sorry that you are not worth
hocking down I "

My master glaneed towards the passage. and signed me to
“themed: hehadnointentionof hanrdingapetsonalen-
coma. I obeyed the hint ; hut Mrs. Linton. suspecting some-
Wﬂlz. followed; Ind when I attempted to tail them, she pulled
"Illcthmmedthedom’m. andlockedit.

“Fair mans l " she aid, in answer to her husband’s look of
“ﬁlm. " It'you have not courage to attack him. make
'ﬂlpnlogy, or allow yourself to be beaten. It will correct you
“Gluing more velour than you posses. No, I'll swallow the
kfihefore you shall get it] I'm delightfully rewarded [or my
ham to eachl Aftet' constant indulgence of one’s weak
We, and mother's had one, I am for thanks two samples
91m ingntltude. stupid to absurdity I Edgur, I was defend-
“(you and yours: end I wish Hwhcliﬁ' may flog you sick. for
llil'ingtothinkunevil thought nfmet"

x"lid not need the medium of u ﬂogging to produce that eﬁect
“i them-star. He tzied to wrest the key from Catherine's grasp.
Nhnlety sheﬂung itinto the hottat pmot' the ﬁle; whet}
“NI Mr. Elgar was taken with a nervous trembling. and his
Wane: grew deadly pale. For his life he could not ave!
“use: at emotion: mingled anguish and humiliation over-

1].} “millle HEIGH‘IS.

.um him Windy. Hz: inn: an the luck of a dn'I'.
m h‘n ﬂee.

"0h. hints! in olddaysthisimuld‘dnymknightho
exclaimed Mrs. Linton. "\\'e are vanquished! we an:
qu'uhedl Hathcliﬂ'would swan liltaﬁnga'atymlasa
mldmarehh‘sarmyagainstacolonyofmiee Cheaup'
shan'thelm‘tl ertypeisnota hmb.it'sasunkinglet1

"I wish you joyof the milk-blooded coward. Cathy!"
he'friend. “Implimenlyonouyouttaste. Andtlnt:
slavu'ing. shivering thing you primed to ml 1 wall:
strike him with my ﬁst, but I‘d kiek him with my {not
ape-inc: considerable satisfaction. 15 be keeping, or
going to hint {or fear?"

The fellow approached and gave the chair on which L
rated a push. He'd betta‘ have kept his diam ; my n
quickly sprang erect, and struck him full on the throat:
that would have levelled a slighter man. It tool: his bus
It minute; and while he choked. Mr. Linton walked out t
back door into lhc yard. and from thenoe to the {ma
trance

“Titre! you've done with coming hue." cried Cath
"Get tray. now ; he'll return with a brace of pistols, and
m assistants. If he did omrhar us. of course he‘d
[alive you. You've played. me an ill tum. Heathcliﬂ‘l B
—tuake hasth I'd mtha' see Elgar at bay than you."

" Do ymt supPOSe I'm going with that blow burning l
gdh?" he thundered. " Byhcll, uol I'll crush his I“! it
emu: hazel-nut before I cross the threshold 1 If I don‘t
HI m. I shall murder him some time; so, as you will
shitletmegetaxhiml“

“H: ‘I not coming." I interposed. framing a bit of:
I‘M‘I the coachman and the two gardeners: you'll:
‘Ililtnbe thrust into the road by theml Eachl

; and master will, very likely. be watching t‘rul
#Iiudows. to see that they fulﬁl his orders."

1’ and coachmnn m there; but Link)!
‘— 'mcy ind almdy entered the court. Hat
.—l WIS, ruched to avoid a struggle again:
-W: backed the poker. smashed the lock

ﬂu. Ill‘l made his escape as they trumped in.
.- I‘w‘ III! very much excited. bade me mum

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I l 5

ll: npntnils. She did not know my share in contributing to the
Wendimnnxicnstokeephainlgmm-

"l‘n Early d'sulcted, Nelly l " she exclaimed. throwing

hullon the sofa. "A thousand smilhs' henna-I an beeﬁng
inyhudl Tell Isabella to shun me; thin npronr is owing
tolls; nndlhonldsheoranyone else nggnnte nay-ingest
Pant. Ishellgez'ild. And.NellLInytoEdgnr,ifyon nee
biennium-night. that I'm in danger ni'helng seriously ill.-
lwishitmypmveuue. Hehustaniedenddimestedme
Ihoddnglyl Inn: to frighten him. asides, hemlght come
Illl begin I string of nbuse or complalnings; I'm main I
MGM“ and God knows wherewe should end] Will
I": do so. mygood Nelly? You are nwnre that I am no my
bhmable in this nutter. What possessed him to turn listener?
Huthclllf’s tall: was unmgeou. liter you left us; but I could
“have diveﬂed hiniﬁrom Isabella. end thexest than! nothing.
Nonnllkdnshedvrong; bythe fool's caving to hurevil of
ELIJmhanntssc-me peoplelikexdanonl Had Edgunever'
Mend our mnvexsnion, he would never have been the worse-
fﬂi'. Really, when he opened on me in that unreasonnble tone
“displeasure alter I had scolded Heuheliﬁ'till 1 m house {or
it‘s. [did not carerhnrdly. what theydid to ash othe; speci-
Illyas I felt that. however the scene closed. we should all he
driven “node:- for nobody knows how long I Well, if I cannot
hIt}!l’lentlmliﬂ'l'nt'myfriarntl—il'liclg'arwillbenlatnnm'l jealous,
l’ﬂvywbmkmdrhumbybmkingmym. That will be
leptmyofﬁnishingnll,whenIunpunhedtommityl
3!! it's a deed to be men-ed forafoelornhope; I'dnnttalzz
Union by sm'pr‘sewith ii. To this point he has been discreet
invading to provoke me: you must replesenl the peril of
(lilting that policy. and xemind him at my passionate temper.
was. when kindled. on ﬁenzy. I wish you could dismiss
llnt npethy out of the: countenance. and look rather more
lotions about me."

The sualidity with which I received these inﬂmctibm was. no
duh, nthet' unspeming: for they were delivaed in perfect
lineetity; but I believed it pemn who could plan the turning
of her ﬁts of pnsu'on to account. beforehand, night, by exerting
krill. lounge to control herself tolenhly, even while under
‘beir inﬂuence; and I did not with to " frighten " her hw'"
nshesnﬂ,nndnntltiplyhi:nnnoynnmfor they

I [6 WITH-[BRING HEIGHTS.

serving her selﬁshness Therefore I said nothing when hi
the masts coming towards the parlour; but I tool: mum
of turning back to listen whether they would resume their quid
together. He began to speak ﬁrst. '

" Remain where you are, Catherine." he said; without In:
anger in his voice, but with much sawwful dapondxney. "
shall not stay. I urn neither come to wrangle nor be reconciled
but I wish just to learn whether. after this evening: events. ya
intend to continue your intimacy with "—

" 0h. [or mercy‘s sake,” interrupted the misc-es, sniping h
foot, " for mmy’s sake. let In hear no more of it now] Yot
coldhloodmnnmheworkedintonfever: your veinsuefnlll
ice-water : but mine are boiling, and the sight of such chillu
makes them dance."

“ To get rid of me, answer myquestion." persevered Mr. Lintnt
" You maul answer it; and that violence does not ulnrnr me.
have found that you can be as stoicalns any one, when youpleu
Will you give up Heatth herafter, or will you givetrpln
it is impossible for you to he ’9' friend and bi: at the III
time ; and X absolutely require to know which you choose."

“ I require to be let alone i " exclaimed Catherine furionnlf
"I demand it! Don't you see I censurodystand? 1‘}ng
you—you leave me l "

She mg the hell till it broke with n twang ; l entered leistull:
1t wasenough totry the temper of a saint. such senselss. wick
raga! There she lay dashing her head against the arm of ti
soft, and grinding her teeth. so that you might fancy she wall
crash them to splinters] Mr. Linton stood looking at hurl
sudden compunction and fear. He told me to fetch same rule
She had no breath for speaking. I brought a glass full; II
as she would not drink. I sprinkled it on her face. In a it
seconds she stretched herself out stiff, and turned up her eye
while her cheeks. at once blanched and livid. assumed the Ispe
of death. Linton looked terriﬁed.

"There is nothing in the world the matter." I whispered.
did not want him to yield. though I could not help being nftl
in my heart.

"she has blood on her lips!" he said. shuddering.

" Never mind ! " I answered tartly. And I told him how i
had resolved, previous to his coming, on exhibiting a ﬁt offrenr

l inmutiously gave the account aloud, and she hand me; i

WTHERKNG HEIGHTS. I I7

142d tip—her hair ﬂying over her shoulders, her eyes
. the muscles of her neck and arms standing out preter<
y. I nude up my mind {or broken bones. at least: but
I glared about her {or an instant. 'nnd then rushed from
m. The master directed me to follow; I did. to her
r door: she hindered me from going further by securing
st me.
e never offered to descend to breakfast next morning. I
ask whether she would have some carried up. " No! "
iied perernptorily. The same question was repmted at
3nd tea: and again an the marrow after, and received
e answer. Mr. Linton. on his part. spent his lime in the
and did not inquire concerning his wife's occupations.
and he had had an hour's interview. during which he
. elicit from her some sentiment of proper horror {or
.iﬁ‘s advances : but he could make nothing of her evasive
and was obliged to close the examination unsatishotnrily;
however. a solemn warning. that if shewne so insane
courage that worthless suitor. it would dissolve all bonds
onship between herself and him.

...

CHAPTER XII.

Miss Linton moped about the park and glrden. nlwlys

nd nlrnost always in tears; nnd her brother shut himself
ng hook that he never opened—weaning. I gunned.
:nntimnl vague expectation that Catherine. repeating her
. would come ofher own accord to ask pudon. end seek
:iliatlon—nnd sh fasted pertlnaciausly. under the idﬂ.
y. that at every meal. Edgar was may to choke for her
. and pride alone held him from running to oust himself
set: I went about my household dutis. convinced thnt
age had but one sensible soul in its walls. and that lodged
ody. I wasted no condoan on Miss, nor any expos-
s on my mistms; nor did I pay much attention to the
'my master, who yearned to beer his lady's name. since
at not her her voice. I determined they should come
1 they pleased for me : and though it was s tiresomer
aness. ! begun to rejoice at length in a fnint dawn of its
5: ns I thought at ﬁrst.

x 18 “1111115me HEIGHTS.

Mrs. Linton, on the third day. unhalred he: door. Mh‘
ﬁnished them in herpitcheranddeunw,duizednw
supply, end a basin of gruel. for she believed Ike wps dy
'I'hntlsetdnvrnns a Ipeechmant forms-then; Ibdi
no such thing. so Ikeptit tomyself and brought berm
undde toast. Shane and dank «gain and sank bed
her pillow again clenching her hands and groaning. “0
will die." sheuclnimed. " since no one am anything that
Iwishlhndnot taken that." ﬁenagoodwhﬂedmlh
her murmur. " No, I'll not die—he'd be glad-die does not
mentall—hewouldnever miss me!"

" Did you want anything, ma'am?" I inquired. still pres
my external nomposuxe. in spite of her ghastly 2mm
stange exaggerated manner.

“ What is link apathetic being doing?" she dmnded, pus
the thick entangled lode. from harvested“ " Has he i
inxo - lethargy. or is be dead?”

“ Neither," replied I: “if you mean Mr. Linton.
tolerably well. I think. though his studies occupy him I:
more than they ought: he is continually among his book:
be has no other society."

I should not have spoken so. if I had known her cm
dition. but i could not get rid of the notion that she am
part ofher disorder.

“Among b": booksl"shecxied. confounded. "Andldy
lonthelrinkof thegmvel MyGodl doesth
dazed?" continued she. staring at her redeem in a In
hangingegninst the opposite wall. “ Is that Contain: Lin
Be Mine: me in a pet—in play. paling. Cannot yo!
farm him that it is [rightful Ernest? Nelly. in: hem too
assoon asIlaeamth: feels. I‘llchoose between than
debs to slme ax once—that would be no punishmentuuh
ludahmnwrtorewver.nndleavelbeomtry, Are
ape-hing the truth about him now? Tilt: an: kheuu
nomialynzdiﬂerent for my life?”

"Why, m‘am.‘ I answered. " the master ha no idea of
Hngdmnged; mdoleonzse hedoanot fearMyuvi
yourself die of hunger."

"You think not? Cannot you tell him I'm?“ sham
‘l' Pesuade him! spa]: 0! your own mind: say you ere oe

will I"

WUTHERING HEIGHIS. l [9

“No, you forget, Mrs. Linton." I suggested. “ that you have
emmel‘oodwith II relish thisevening. and to-mmym
Iﬂl pceeive its good ﬂeets."

" l“ were only sure it would kill him.” she interrupted. " ['4
WWW]! These the: awful nights. I‘veneva dosed
bylide—end ah, I‘vcheen tormented l l'vehun mmNelIy!
Bull begin to buoy you don't like me How Sir-rage l I thought.
thmgheverybody hated and do:de each other, they:qu not
avoid loving me. And they have all turned to enemia in I buy
bulls: Mohave. I'm positive: the people ken. How drary to
meadmth. Wed bytheir cold fem! Inbella. terriﬁed
quaelledAtnidtoentu lheroorn. itwould hewdrudfulto
and: Catherine go. And Edger standing solemnly by to see it
over: then oﬂ'er'ing prayers of thanks toGod for restoring peace
whithme. “dyeing hacktohisbaahl Whatin thenuneof
allthltfeehhsshetodovith Mk1. whenl am dying?"

Sumdnothearthenmlonvhieh I had putinlaher head
a! Mr. Linton‘s philosophical resignation. Taxing ebmt, she
fussed her feverish bewilderment to madnese. Ind tore the
Pillow with her teeth : then rating heiself up all burning.

Jailed that I would apex: the window. We were in the middle
6‘ winter. the wind blew strong from the north-east, and I
Wed. Bath theWnsﬂitling over her {amend the
changes other moods, began to alarm me terribly: and brought
“my recolleaion her former illness. and the doctor's injunction
"lithe should not be erased. A minute previanslyshewu
'blau; m. supportedononeurn.and not noticingmyrdual
IWhey her, she seemed to ﬁnd childish divetsion in pulling the
hthufmm theremsshe hadjust made.lndnnging them
Mlherheetama’dingmtheirdiﬁ'erentspecies': hermimdhul
“yd to othe- Maxims.

"Th-1's I turkey'l." she murmured to herself; " and this '5 I
'ifl dnck'x; Ind th'n is e pigeon'l. Ah, they put pigeou'
{when in the pillowt—no wonder I couldn‘t die I Let me
bitumtothrovitontheﬂoorwhenlliedmn. Andhere'u
Imoor-eock's; and this—I should know it amonga thousan—
it‘uhpuing's. Bonny bird: wheeling over cm heads in the
mlddleofthemocr. ltwnntedtogetmitsneaJa’thedmds
had touched the wells. and it felt rain coming. This father
It: picked up from the heath. the birdwu not shut: we saw

in nut in the winter, full of little skeletons. Heathcliﬂ' set a

113 WUTKERING HEIGHTS.

trnp over it, and the old nnﬁ dare not come. I made
promise he’d never shoot a lapwing utter tint. and he di
Yes, here are more! Did he shoot my inpwlngs, Nelly?
theyred. nnyoftheml Letmelook.“

"Give over with that baby-work!" I interrupted, drag
the pillow nway, end turning the holes towards the mama
she was removing its contents by handfuls. "Lie down
shut your eyes: you're wandering. There's amesnl Tim
is ﬂying about like snow."

I went here and there collecting it.

"I see in you. Nelly.“ she continued dramily, "on
woman: you have grey hair and bent shoulders. This I:
the fairy cave under Peniston Crag. nnd you are gnthez‘inl
bolts to hurt our heifers ; pretending, while I am near, that
are only lot-Jr: of wool. That's what you‘ll come to ﬁfty
hence: I know you are notso now. I'm not wondering: y
mistaken, or else I should believe you really were that witl
hag, and I should think I m: under Penlston Crag; ant
conscious it‘s night. and there are two candlm on the
making the block press shine like jet."

"The block press? where is that?" I asked. "You are
ing in your sleep 1 "

" It's against the wall, as it always is," she replied. " I'
appear odd—l see a face in itl" ‘

" There‘s no press in the room, and never was." said I. rsu
my seat, and looping up the curtain that I might watch ha

" Don'tyou see that face?" she inquired. gazing came:
the mirror.

And say what I could. I wns incapable of making her our
head it to be her own ; so I rose and covered it with n sha‘

“It‘s behind there stilll" she pulsued anxiously. “A
stirred. Who is it? Ihope it will not come out when yours-e;
Ohl Nelly, the room is haunted! I'm afraid of being nlo

I took her hand in mine. and bid her be composed:
msion of shudders convulsed her frame. and she would
staining her gaze towards the glass.

"There's nobody here! " I insisted. “It wns yourself.
Hilton: you knew it a while since."

“MySelfl” she gasped. "and the clock is striking tw
Ith true. then l that's dreadful l "

Ha ﬁngers clutched the clothes. and gnthered them on

WUTl-IERING HEIGHTS. 12!

qu. lnttelnptedtostenl tothedocrwithnn intentionof
ulhn‘krhushnnd: but lwas summoned heel: by n. pkrdng
link—the shawl had dropped from the frame.

"Why. what irthernatter?" cried I. “ Whois coward now?
Wthe up! That is the glare—the mirror. Mrs. Linton; and
Mneyonrseli’in it, nndtherearn I too, byyonrside."

Trembling nnd bewildered, she held me fut. but the horror
Mushypnaredfromhercountemce: itspalenulgaveplaee
lo a slam of shine.

"Oh, durl I thought I was at borne," she sighed. "I
“taught I was lying in my chamber at Wuthering Heights.
Barrie I'In weak. my brain got confused, and ! screamed un-
mcimsly. Don't say anything; but my with me. I dread
daring: my dreams nppel rue."

"Awnndsleepwoulddoyongood.m'am." I nnswered; "and
“tape this sulfering will prevent your trying starving agni "

“Oh, if I were but in my own bed in the old house!" she
van on bitterly. wringing her hands. "And that wind mund-
ingin the ﬁrs by the lattice. Do letrneicel it—it coma straight
down the moor—do let me have one breath I "

To pncﬂy her. I held the easement njar a. few seconds. A
wldhlut rushed through : I dosed it. and returned to my post.
Shaky still now. he face bathed in tears. Exhnusu'on of hody
lﬂd entirely subdued her spirit: our ﬂay Catherine was no
hater than n wailing child.

"How long is it since I shut myself in here?" she asked,
Manly revivlnz.

"ltwa: Mondny evening." Ireplied. “and th's is Thursday
W. or rather Friday morning, at omen "

“th of the same week?" she exclaimed. "Only that
Wtime?"

“long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-
hrpu," observed 1.

“Well. it seem: a wry number of ham," she muttered

y: “ it must be more. I remember being in the parlour
'h' they had quarrelled, nnd Edglr being cruelly provoking.
lldlrrerunning into this room desperate As soon I: eva I
“I lined the door. utter blackness overwhelmed me. and I fell
"I the ﬂoor. I couldn't explain to Edgar how certain I felt of
living I ﬁt. or going raging mad. if he persisted in teasing me!
“II! no command of tongue, or 1min, and he did not guess my

    

  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

\‘.‘CTHERL\'G HEIGHTS.

«'1 Inc sense to try to may: {mm hill
mred sufﬁciently to so: and bani
be duh, and, .\e.ly. X'il tell you trim I thought. Ind
"L5 kept reaming and recurring tiil I feared for my usual.
: as I by there, with my had against that table H.
3 ryts dimly discerning the grey square of the window.
luncnclosed in the oak-panelled hednthnme;nndll1
.1ch with some great grief which. just taking. I an“
I. I pondered. and world mych to disminrwht
.5 be. and. most strangely. the whole last seven yer! d
grew n blank! I did not recall that theyhd beennttll
3 nts a child; my father was just buried. and my misery In:
the separation that Hindley had ordered heme“ nae ad
a: t was laid alone. for the ﬁrst tin-w: and,rnnsin¢
it hlSmﬂl doze after n night of weeping, I lifted my hand to
the panels aside : it struck the table-top l I swept ittlmt
1m. and then memory burst in: my late anguish n:
'0‘! in n pnrnxysm of despair. I mnnot say why I felt»
\- vrrctchetl : it must have been temporary derangement 7 h
. saintly cause. But. supposing at twelve mt: old Ihld
3‘ wrvnchod from the Heights. and every early association. and
V all. as Heathcliﬁ‘ was at that time. and been cont-marl
c into .\lrs. Lintonv the lady of Thmsht-ross Grunge.
c wife of a stmngcr: :Ln cxiie. and outlast, [henceforth
uh.“ lmd been my world. You may Inncyoglitnpseoltlﬂ
i .‘\< Mm l gravcllud ! Sham.- your head as you will. Kelly.
cheipcd to unsettle me! You should have spoken to
indeed you should. and compelled him to have me quid!
\ burning! I wish I were out of doors! Iwish Iwa'l
“Jill. half savage and hardy. and free; and laughing ll
, V. .5. not maddening under them I “'hy am 1 so chug!!!"
.3. 3.6 my blood rush into a hzll of tumult at n few words:
.n gr: I should be myself were I once among the human
m“. am; Open the window again \n'de: fasten it open?
q.“ ‘hy don’t you mm: P"
. W I won't give you you- death of cold," I amend-
.\~~ tou'! give In: a chime of life. you mean." she ii
“at, “ However. I'm not helpless. yet : l’ll open it myssll.‘
bmidi“; from tbs bed before I could hintin- her. she crow
gm. wanting very unoeminly. threw it hack. and hem out
‘am“.- My air that out about her shoulders as tuna:

 

       
 
  

\

WIRING HEIGHTS. 123

. knife. I enueotod, and ﬁnally attempted to force her to retire.
Rut I soon found her delirious strength much surpassed mine (she
Intuition. Ibemme mvinecdhyhernbseqmntactimsand
nvlngs). “mmmmoanmnd everything beneath by in
thy animus: not I light glnmed {mm any house, {or or
var—on but been eningulshod long ago ; and those at Wuther-
a; Hdghu can never visible—still she asserted she ought their
hiring.

" i" nho cried eagerly, " that's my mom with the candle
n it. Ind tln tree swaying before it : nnd the 0th:- undle 'u in
'oneph’s garret. Joseph sits up late. doesn‘t he? He’l waiting
in I come hm that he my lock the gote. Wen. he'll wait a
rhﬂe yet. It’sl rough journey. md :- and hurt tomvel it;
III we must pus hy Gimmerton Kirk, to go that journey!
We‘ve hnvd its ghosts often together, Ind dared ach other to
rand among the gum and uh than to come. But, Hoathcliﬁ',
illdareyou now, will you vulture? If you do, I’ll keep you.
l'llnotliethaehymysdt‘: theyrnayhurynretwelvefeet
(beyond throw the church downwerme.but1won‘t resttill
1 nevu-willl"

Ste pulsed. Ind resumed with a strange smile. “ He's mn-
ikring—he'd nther I'd come to him! Find any, then! not
high that kirkynrd. You on slow i Beoontcnt. you nlwnys
"loved the l“

Punching it vain to urgue Igninst her insanity. I in: planning
MI could renoh something to wrap about her, without quitting
lyhnld of head! (for I could not trust her done by the gaping
lattice). when. to my consternation. I heard the rattle of the
h~handle. Ind Mr. Linton entered. He had only then come
in. the library ; end, in passing through the lobby. had noticed
“lilting Ind been attuned hy curiosity, or fenr, to examine
'hltit signiﬁed. at that late hour.

"on, sir I “ I tried, chooldng the emlnmmion risen to h's
In It the light which m him, and the bleak umosphete of
"Enhamber. " My poor mistress is 211, and the quite masters
.: 1mm monogehernt “131,11” tune 1nd persude her
“into bed. Forget your user. for she': herd toguidelny
my hat ha m"

" Clthcrine ill '1‘" hevsaid, hasteninng “ Shut the window.
Mal Cuber-he! why"—

Henunmt. The hazardous of Mn. Linwn’: uppunme

124 WUTBERING HEIGHTS.

smehimspeeehlss. andhecouldonlyglnnoe from halo.
in horriﬁed astonishment.

“ She's been fretting here." I continued. "undude
anything. and never mmplsiuing: she would admit none cl I
till this evening. and so we couldn‘t inform you ofhermtet
we were not aware of it camel's; but it is nothing.”

I felt I uttered my uphnndons nwkwurdly : the n‘
frnwned. "It is nothing, is it, Ellen Dean? he mad man!
" You shall account more clearly for keeping me lgnmut-
this!" And he took his wife in his arms. and looked It h
with anguish.

At ﬁrst she gave him no glance of reeognitiou: he wui
visible to her abstracted gate. The delirium was not ﬁled. h!
ever; having waned her eyes from eontemplnting the a
dnrkness. by degrees she centred her attention on him. I‘
discovered who it was that held her.

“Ahl you are come. are you. Edger Linton?" she I
with angry animation. " You are one of these things then
ever found when least wanted, and what you Ire muted, new
I suppose we shall have plenty of lamentations now—I In:
shall—hut they un‘t keep me flotn my narrow home out ynnd
my resting-place, where I'm bound before spring is overl Th
it is: not among the Lintons. mind, under the chnpelnronf. l
in the open air. with a head-stone : and you my plus: your!
whether you go to them or come to mel"

"Catherine. what have you done?" commenced the Inn!
“Am I nothing to you any more? Do you love that me
Heath-J'

"Hush!" cried Mrs. Linton. "Hush. this momentl l
mention that name and I end the matter instantly, by I IF
from the windowl What you touch at present you my he
but my soul will he on that hill-top before you lay hulk
me again. I don't want you. Edger: I‘m past wanting y
Return to ymtr books. I'm glad you possess a consolntion.
all you had in me is gone."

" Her mind wandu's. sir," I interposed. “ She has been I:
it. nonsense the whole evening; but let her have quiet. 1
paper attendance. nud she'll rally. Hereafter. we mm
wt: how we vex her."

“ I ddre no further advice from you," answaed Mr. Lint

flab" your mistress‘s nature. and you encouraged In

WWII-[BRING HEIGHTS. "5

is her. Andnot to givemeone hintafhcmshehnsheen
: thru- dnys I It ins hennle Months of sickness could
am such I chnnge l "

:egnn to defend myself. thinking it toohnd to be blamed for
he‘s wicked waywnrdnese. "I knew Mrs. Linton‘s nature
e headstrong and domineering." criedI; "put I didn't
I that you wished to foster her ﬁeme temper! I didn't
u thu. to humour her, I should wink at Mr. Harhcliﬂ'. I
armed the duty of a hithl'ul servant in telling you, and I ’
:got a faithful mum's wagesl Well. it will teach me to
neful next time. Next time you mnygnther intelligence for
sell I"

The next time you bring a tale to me. you shall quit my
ice. Ellen Dean." he replied. '

You'd ruther hear nothing about it. I suppose, then. Mr.
Inn?" said I. "Henthcliﬂ' her your mission to come 1
run; to miss, and to drop in at every opportunity your
nice offers. on purpose to poison the mistms against you?"
hinted u Catherine wu. her wits were alert at applying
femurs-don.

‘Ahl Nelly has played unitor," she exclaimed pasxionately.
idly it my hidden enemy. You witch l So you do seek elf-
htohurtusl Letme go.nnd I‘llmlrehermel l'llmnlte
fibril n retaliation l “

Kuniu's furykindled under her brow: ; she struggled des-
Ndy to disengage herself from Linton's mus. I felt no in‘
min to tarry the event: and, resolving to seek medical aid
I] own responsibility. I quitted the chamber.

[Inning the zurden to reach the road. ntsplaoewherea
Uh bank is driven into thewull. I saw somethingwht’te moved
xehrly. evidently by another agent than the wind. Not-
hnnding my hurry. I stayed to examine it. lest ever after
build have the nonﬁction impinged on my imagination thnr
mnuenture of theotherwarld. My surprise and paplexity
7: great on discovering. by touch more than vision. Miss
Mill's springer, Funny. expended by a hundkerchiei'. and
ﬂy It it: last gup. I quickly released the animal. and liited
ate the golden. I had seen it follow its minim upstairs
alhewentto bed; and wondered much howiteouldhnve
out than, and what mischievous person had treated it so.
I]. untying the knot round the hook. it seemed to me rim 1

- ‘3 \VUTHERING HEIGHIS.

xxx-:tnily caught the beat of horses' {out galloping at it
' Jm“: but [ﬁrm um such a numba of things to occupy
. 11am that I hardly gave the circumstance u thong?
:, ugh it was a strange sound. in thxt plane. at two o'elt
:- that n wing.

cth was fortunately just issuing from his hm
“t .l ; it in the village as I came up the strut; and)
i t‘atlu-rinc Linton's malady induad him to my
. inmwrliatrly. He was a plain rough man: and
a seruplc to speak his doubts of her surviving th's In:
he wen‘ more submissive to his direction: tb

 

   
 

  
    
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 

Dunn," said he. "i can't help fringing Khan's:
. w for this. \\‘hat has there bccn to do at the Gnu:
“ h. “M mums up here. A stout. hearty laslike Contain
.tv; :4: fall ill for a triﬂe: and that sort of people shouldu
9:33. 11': hard work bringing them through (am. and In
How did it begin ?"
. master will inform you." I unsuited: "but you I
ml with the iinmshnws' violent dispositions. And III
I may say this; it commuted in
-\-L She was struck during a tempest of passion with a kit
l‘hat‘s her account. at least ; for she ﬂew off in the his
.l lucked licrsclf up. Afterwards. she refused to eat. at
v. at.- altt-mately mvcs and remains in a half drum; km
". N“. mm her, but having her mind ﬁlled with all sa-
:3,“ um: and illusions."
‘ \lgA Lintnn will be sorry?" observed Kenneth inning-rid
i“! he'll break his heart should anything kappa!"
Don't alarm him man: than my."
\ l told him to beware," raid my companion .- “and!
" up [he ctmscqucnccs of noglccting my warning! HI!
3“: minute with Mr. Heathcliif, lately?"
‘ .‘\‘m‘.;iﬂ' fnqunnlly visits at the Grange." «nursed
“wed “am: on the strength of the mistrcss having km!
a boy. than bemltsc the master like! his comp”

 
   

'. ‘ w. discharged from the trouble of calling: wit
1‘ Mignon: upimtions after Mist Untan which]

’1. I hardly think he'll be taken in again."
a” ills Linton turn a cold shoulder on him 7" u-
w" mt question.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I 27

" I'm not in he m."mumcd l, reluctant to continue
the subject.

"No. she's a sly one," he remarked. shaking his head. “she
has her own counsel! But she’s areal little fool. I have
‘I from good authority. that. last night (and I pretty night it
I: I) she and Heatth wee walking in the plantation nt
thehsekofymlr hme.nhove twohoun; and he pressed her

intogoin agnin,l1ut just mount his homandonyvithhim!
lly informant said she could only put him of by pledging her
nude! honour lobe prepared on thu‘rﬁrst meetingal’t: tint:
lhm it was to be, he didn‘t bar: but you urge Mr. “Mon to
- lank sharp!"
. This news ﬁlled me with fresh furs : l outstripped Kenneth.
' all an most of the my hack. The little dog was yelping in
lite garden yet. I spared a minute to open the gete for it. but
intend of going to the house door, it oontsed up and down
lining the grass. and would have escaped taﬁthe road. had I
not Ieieed and conveyed it in with me. On Isoending to
llhdla's mom. my suspicions were conﬁrmed: it was aunty.
Had I been a fewhours sooner. Mrs. Linton's illness mightluve
ﬂuted hermsh step. But what could bedone now? There
'Is I here possibility ot'ovu'tslting them if pursued insuntly.
rleonldnot pursue them.howuu-:nnd Idsrenotwuse the
Emily. and ﬁll the place with confusion; still less unfold the
to my master. absorbed as he was in his present coll-
'-'17.Iod having noheart tospme for I second grief! I saw
3 nothing for it but to hold my tongue. end sutfer matters to take
MW: and Kenneth bang urrivedeaitwith a badly
W countean to announce him. Catherine ley in a
tumbled sleep : her husband had suomeded in soothing the
i «a! frenzy: he now hunt,r over her pillow, watching every
1 ilk. nod every change of her painfully uprasive features.

Til doctor. onenmlning the use for himself, spoke hope-
Hlyto him at its having s favourable termination, if we could
“I We around her perfect Ind constant trnnquillity. To
In. hedgniﬁed the thmtening danger was not so much death.
Ipmmnent mention of intellect

I did not close my e76 that night. nor did Mr. Unton:
Heed. we never mt tolled; and the sematswuenll uplong
Mae themnl hour. moving through the house with stealthy
hid, Ind exchanging whispers as they etuonntered each other

1:8 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

in their vocaﬁons. Every one was naive, but Miss Ishdh:
and they began to remark how sound she slept : her brother. to».
asked if she had risen. and seemed impatient for her plaster.
and hurt that she showed so little anxiety {or her sister‘inm.
l trembled lest he should send me to all her; but I was spin!
the pain of being the ﬁrst pmdeimaut of her ﬂight. Oneofth
maids. a thoughtless girl. who had been on In elrlyernndb
Gimmerton. came panting upstairs, open mouthed. end dulled
into the chamber, crying-—

"Oh, dear, dear I What mun we have next? Mutt.
master, our young lady"—

" Hold your noise !" cried I hastily, enraged at berm
manner.

"Speak lower. Mary—What is the matter?" said Mr. um
“ What ails your young lady?"

" She's gone. she's gonel Yon' Heathcliﬁ's run of wi' ha?
gasped the girl.

“ That is not true!" exclaimed Linton, rising in agitation-
“It cannot be: how has the ides entered your heed? Elk!
Dean, go end seek her. It is incredible: it annot be."

As he spoke he took the servant to the door, and then repute!
his demand to know her reasons for such In nsserlion.

“ Why, I met on the road a lad that fetches milk here”!
summered, " and he aslred whether we weren't in trouble It “I
Grange. I thought he meant for missis‘s sickness. so I wound.
yes. Then says he. ' There's somebody gone efter ’em, 1 gas?
I started. He saw l knew nought about it, and he told how:
gentleman and lady had stopped to have a horse's shoe W
at a blacksmith's shop. two miles out of Gimmerton. not IE!
long after midnight l and how the blacksmith's lass hnd got up
to spy who they were: she knew them both directly. And til
notioed the man—Huthcliﬁ’ it WIS. she felt certain: noh'dy
could mistake him, besides—put a sovereign in her {ather'shln‘l
for payment. The lady had a cloak shout her face: but hsvil‘
desired a sup of water, while she drank. it fell back, wish I!
her very plain. Hathcliﬂ’ held both brile as they rode oil.
and they set their faoes from the vilhge. and went 3 int n the
rough roads would let them. The lass said nothing to hu‘ talk.
but she told it all over Gimmerton this morning."

I run and peeped. {or form's sake, into lsibelln's room: nod-
ﬁrming, when I returned. the servant's statement. Mr. Hutch

WERING HEIGHTS. ! 29

simmeth salhythe bed; on my reentrnnoe. hernised
l eys. run the meaning of my blank aspect. and dropped
urn without giving u: order. or uttering a word.

"Are we to try my mum for overtaking and bringing
r belt?" I inquired. " How should we do?"
"Shewemofherown accord.”nnswered the master; "she
id nright to go if she pleased. Trouble the no more about
:1“. Hue-ha she is only my sister in name: not beans: I
sown her, but because :he has disowned me."
Andthatwnsﬂlhetm’donthe subject: hedidnotmake
single inquiry ﬁn-ther, or mention her in my wny, except
inning me to send what property she had in the house tn her
uh home. wherever it was. when I knew it.

——u—

CHAPTER XIII.

Pot two months the fugitive: remained absent: in those two
Until. Mn. Linton encountered Ind conquered the worst shock
“Vim In: denominated obtain fever. No mother could have
Wind In only child more devotedly than Edgar tended her.
Dlylnd night he was watching. and patiently enduring Ill the
W that Irritable nerves and a shnken reason could
m; end, though Kenth remarked that what he uved from
"tune would oniyrecompenre his care by forming the source
"mun future uxiety—in fut. that his health and strength
“hing-wheat! to preserve n mere ruin of humaniqu
ht! no limits in gratitude and joy when Cntheﬁne's life ms
Wmofdunger: Ind houranerhaurhewonldsitheside
hunting the gradual return to bodily health. and “attain;
Hum ungniwe hope: with the illusion that her mind would
3* hunk to its right balance also, and she would soon be
ﬁnitely her former self.

The ﬁrst time she left her chamber was 1: the commencement
“the following March. Mr. Linton had put on her pillaw. in
manning. n hendlnl of golden crecuses ; her eye. long stranger
“my [lam or plasma, caught them in raking. and shone
“that n she [uttered them eagerly together.

“That no the enlist ﬂowers It the Heights." she exclaimed.
"'l'byrentindmeeftoftthnwwlnda, and warm sunlhine. And

a

 

\‘ITHERISG HEIGHTS.

   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 

   

anmnmhMud
VmgGﬂ
«rs-r3251: Emu-.1 11:2. WIWI
rxowmzspnuntheihdgmz
mks-gaining. ndlh

Camquiua
udalh'sloufmamlvi!
:Lhelibhnn-eaiz

 
 
  
 
  
  
   
    
 

“5:221; :--g=:ding ‘he Imus

:tsndmdonhdﬂ
' rally 583:. and. {hill
" .x s'ug’: phat: pmdneedlﬂ
‘~ 5: my madly!
neuiig'nuﬁreinlhellly
msaumydnkhhsuﬂil
:e EINth ash-muddled:

pe.b§ﬂ£birﬁelnaa:.
macknzhulsnbe'hsen: In her batsman-l"
mks! haw-Mmuaounc‘aghm‘q
mum ku—lh-dnil: buan
"m5. n-Ihu.udn-nu

WING HEIGHTS. ! 31

kind rememhlnceud reconciliation, if bume
ndedhimzasuﬁnglhntsheeomdmthelpiubn.mdbeing
e,xhehadnwnopowa'lonpenlit. Linmndidnmreply
his,Ibe!ieIe'. and,ina fortnightmongotnhngIeuer
:hlcmsidaedodd.comingfromthepeu ofchth
mhoneymoon. I‘nminforlheepityet. Anyrelieof
dadisptedeflheymnhwdliving.

n mm.i¢hegius.-

am last night to Wnlhcring Heights. and hand. for the
lime,‘hntCalhexinehIsheen,nnd is yet. veryiﬂ. Imust
wﬁwmha’JmppaeJndmybmtherisdthuloonngryor
d'mraedtonnswetwhntlsulhim. Sdllermwn-ixeto
My,nndtheonlyehoieeleﬁmeilym. '

nl'on'n Edgar that I'd givethewoﬂd loseehis Engagin—
3 my been rum-nod to Thrushcros Grunge in twenty-four
maker 1 leﬂil. and is thetenuhismamemel ofwann
Eng: for him, and Catherine! I can't/01bit it, Maugh—
anwordsucunderﬂnedhheyneednolexpenmemnd they
ydnw whn! conclusions they please; “kin; are. however,
by nothinguthedoor of my weak willordeﬂci1 Iﬂ'edinn.
l'helunlindﬂoflheletwistoryomselfnlone. lem to
:youmo qmﬁou: the ﬁrst is.—How did you contrive to
me the common sympathies of hm name when you
ided hue? I sumo: recognise any sentiment which those
Mmrewhhme. '
rum quests/an. have gm: inmest in; it i: (his—Is
aHuthdiﬂ‘a man? Ifw,is hennd? Andi! nol,is he a
In? I m'ndlmymformh'ngthisinquiry; but, I
Ilhyoumexﬂain.ifyuumn,whmlhavenmniedz dank.
annual! to scene: and youmusl call,Ellen.verysoan.
u'twriu. bum, and hringmesamelhingfmmEdgar.
ﬂowqoushﬂlhurhwlhnvebemnceivadinmynewhmne,
lmledtoimlgine the Heights willbe. hismunusc
“MidwdlonsuchsubjecuumelaekdeneMcom-
5: they never occupy my thoughvs, except at the women!
ulnbthnn. Ishmldhugbanddanoefmjoydflfaund
hmwuzhewm of mymisexis,andthemtwasan
mum:
MannhehindtheGnngemswcmmedontclhemmn;
M. Ill-indin besixo'clcck; andmy mmpunionhalled

I 32 WWII-[ERIN G HEIGHTS.

half-an-hmlr, to inspect the park. and the grudﬂls, and, probably.
the placeitself,aswcll as hecmrld: soilwasdurltwhen wedb
mounted in the paved yurdoflhc tam-house, andyonr old fella-'-
servant, Joseph. issued out to receive us by the light of a dip
candle. He did it with a courtesy that. redounded to his credit.
His ﬁrst act was to elevate his torch to a. level with my hoe.
squint malignantly, project his under lip. and turn away. Then
he took the two horses, and led them into the stables; res-ppm-
ing for the purpose of locking the outer gate. as it“ we lived inn:
ancient castle.

Heat.th stayed to speak to him, and I entered mam
—o dingy, untidy hole; 1 dare say you would not know it, it '5
sachsnged since itwasinyourchargr. Bytheﬁrosloodl
ruﬁnnly child. strong in limb and dirty in garb, with a lookof
Catherine in his eyes and about his mouth.

“ This is Edgar’s legal nephew," I reﬂected—" mine in t
manner; I must shake hands. and—1&1 must kiss him. It
is right to amblish 3 good understanding It the

I approached, and. attempting to take his chubby ﬁst. aid——

" How do you do, my dear P"

He replied in a jargon I did not comprehend.

" Shall you and l be friends, Haremn ?” was my nmmyat
conversation.

An oath, and a that to set Thrower on use it“ I did not
" flame off." rewarded my perseverane:

" Hey. Throttler. lad ! " whispered the little match. rousing!
half-bred hull-dog from its lair in a corner. "Now. wilt than
be gauging?” he asked authoritatively.

Love for my life urged a compliance: I stepped over the
threshold to wait till the other: shmdd enter. Mr. Hulhdiﬂ'
was nowhere visible; and Joseph. whom I known! to the
suhla, and reqmted to accompany roe in, ma staring and
muttering to himself, screwed up his nose and replied—

“ Miml miml min: I Did ﬁver Christian body he‘r ought
like it? Minching un' munching! How Can I tell m y:
say P "

"lsay. I w‘uhyou tocamewithme into thehouel"l cried.
thinking him duf. yet highly disgusted at his rudeneu.

“ None if me I I gotten sumnmt else to do." he “and.
and continued his work; moving his lantern jaws meanwhile.
and surveying my drus and countenanoe (the farmer 3 great

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. l 3}

denltoo ﬁne, but the latter. I'm sure, as sad as he could desire)
with sovereign contempt.

I walked round the yard. and through a wicket, to another
door, at which I took the liberty of knocking, in hops some
more civil servant might show himde After a short suspense,
it was opened by a tall. gaunt luau. without neckerchief, und
other'ue unemely slavenly : his fatures wu-e lost in wastes of
shaggybnir that hung on his shanlders ; and Hr eyes. too, were
like a gbnaly Catha'ine's with all their hauty annihilated.

“ What's your business hm?" he demanded grimly. " Who
me you 7 "

“ My name m Isabella Linton," I replied. " You've seen me
Mare, sir. I'm Inter married to Mr. Heathclm‘, and he has
brought me hue—I suppose by your permission."

“Is he come back, then?" asked the hermit, glaring like a.
hungry wolf.

"Ya—we mine just now," I said; "but he left me by the
kitdlen dour; and when I would have gone in, your little boy
played sentinel aver the place, andfrighlened m: 05 by the help
of n bull—dog."

“It's well the hellish villain has kept his word I " growled my
lulu: hosg arching the darkness beyond me in expectation of
discovering Heathcliﬂ‘: and then he indulged in u soliloquy of
mentions, and threat: of what he would have done bed the
“Mid " deceived him.

Irqaented having tried this second entrance. and was almost
inclined to slip away before he ﬁnished cursing, but are I could
astute that intention, he ordered me in, and shut and re-futened
the door. There was a great ﬁre. and that was all the light in
the huge apartment, whose ﬂoor had grown a. uniform grey; and
the once brilliant pewter dishes, which used to attract my gaze
when I was a girl. partook of a similar ohaurity. created by txr-
n'uh and dust. I inquired whether I might call the maid. and
he conducted to a bed-room? Mr. Earnshuw vouchsuled nu
ma. He walked up and down. with his hands in his pockets.
may quite forgetting my presence ; and his abstraction
was evidently so deep, and his whole aspect so misauthmpiml.
lint I shrank from disturbing him again.

You’ll not besurprised. Ellen. at my feeling particularly cheer-
lﬂ. seated in mine than solitude on that inhospitable hearth.
Ind remembering that four miles distant lay my delightful hnme.

I 34 W‘D'THERING HEIGHTS.

mntainingtheanlypeople I lovedon earth: Ind thaelnightls
well he the Atlantic to part us. instad of those four mils: I
could not overpass them! I mastic-med with myulf—Iha:
must I turn for cmnfort? and—mind you don't id! “slaw
Cnhuine—ehove every sanvw beside. thin rose pie-mint:
Wit nt ﬁnding nobody who could arwauldhemylllynglht
Hathcliﬂ‘l I had sought sheltorat Wuthm'ing Helm. m
gladly, bemuse I was secured by tint magenta! fromllvin‘
alone with him; but he knew the people we were main;
amongst. and he did not fear their intermeddling.

I sat and thought a doleful time: the clock struck eight, end
nine,andstﬂ1mymmpanlon pneedtonndﬁu.hishendmntm
his breast, and perfectly silent, unless a green or a liner ebul-
lation famed itself out at intervals I listened to daeet a
woman's voice in the house. and ﬁlled the interim with wild
regrets and dismal anticipations, which, at last, spokenudihlyin
imible sighing and weeping. I was not uware how openly
I grieved, till Enmshaw halted opposite. in Ha maimed nlk.
and gave me I stare of newlyawakened surpr‘ue. Teking
advantage of his rewvered attention. I excisimed—

" I'm tired with my jom-ney, end I want to go to bed!
Wha-e is the maid—servant? Direct me to her, as she won't
come to me I "

" We have none," he answered: "you mnstwait on youndﬂ"

“Wheremust Isloep, then?" Isabbed; Imbeymdrgurl-
in; self-respect. weighed down by fatigue and wretchean

"Joseph will show you Heathciiif's chamber." said he: “ open
[ha-t dour—he's in them."

I we: going to obey, but he mddenly arrested me, and added
in the strugest tone-—

“Besogoodastomn yourlock. anddrawmholt—don'l
omit it I"

"Weill" I said. "But why. Mr. Earnshaw?" Ididnotrelish
the notion of deliberately fastening myself in with Henlhdiﬁ

“ Lockhere ! ” he replied, pulling from his waistemt t curily
minded pistol. having I dwbledgd spring knife studied
to the baneL " That‘s a great laupler to a desperate m. i:
it not P I cannot resist going up with this every night. Ind
trying his door. Home I ﬁnd it open he's done forl I do il
invariably, even though the minute before I have been mulling
nhumlred reasons that should make me refmin : it is some den"

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I 3;

that urges me to thwart my own schemes by killing him. You
ﬁghtsgninst that devil {or love as long as you may; when the
time comes. not all the angels in heaven shall save him i "

I urged the weapon inquisitively. A hidems notion struck
me: hm! Main! I should be pomessing such an instrument!
I took it from his hand. and touched the blade. He looked
astou'uhed I: ll! explain my face assumed during a brief
second : it was not honor, it Ins covemusnﬁ. He snatched the
pistol m, jealously ; shut the knife, and returned it to its
concealment.

“I don't [are if you tell him," said he “Put him on his
guard, and watch for him. You know the terms we are on, I
see: his danger does not shock you"

"What has Heathclili' done to you?" I ashd. "In what
has he wronged you. to warrant this appalling hatred ?
Wouldn't it be wiser to bid-him quit the house?"

" No i" thundered Earnshaw. “ should he oﬁer to leave me,
he's in dead man: persuade him to attempt it, and you are a
murderess 1 Am I to lose all. without a chance of retrieval? Is
Hutton to in a beggar? 0h. damnation! I willhave it back:
and I’ll have M: gold too; and then his blood; and hell shall
have his soul 1 It will be ten timi: blacker with that guest than
ever it was before ! "

You've acquainted me. Ellen. with your old master's habits.
Heis clnrly on the verge of mdness: he was so last night at
last. I shuddered to he near him. and thought on the servant's
ill-bred mom Is comparatively agreeable He now re-
mmmenced his moody walk. and I raised the latch. and scaped
into the kitchen. Joseph was bending over the ﬁre, peering into
Huge pun thatng above it ; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal
stood on the settle close by. The contents of the pan began to
boil. Ind he mud to plunge h‘s hand into the bowl; I conjec-
tured the this preparation was pmbablyformirsupper, numbing
hungry, I rsolved it should be unable; so. crying out sharply.
“IR makerhe porridge l " I removed the vase] outof his reach.
and proceeded to take of my hat and riding-habit. “ Mr. Eam-
lhv,” I cmtinud, "directs me to wait on myself : I will. I'm
not gm‘ng In In the lady ummg you, for fear I should starve."

“ Gooid Lord I " he muttered, sitting down. and stroking his
ribbed stockings i'nxn the knee to the ankle. “ I! there’s to be
fresh ortheringe—just when I getten used to two maisteis, if I mun

136 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

hev is akin“ set o'er my heead. it's like time to he ﬂitting. ‘
niver did think to see t' day that I mud lave th’ Mild plan-W
I doubt it's nigh at hand i "

This lamentation drew no notice from me: I wait briskly”
work, sighing to remember a period when itwauld have been“
merry fun; but compelled speedily to drive 011' the manhunt
It melted me to rem“ past happinas and the greaterpexilthul
was of conjuring up its apparition, the quicker the thxhle nu
round. and the faster the handful: of meal fell into them.
Joseph beheld my style of cookery with growing

" Theart " he ejaculated. “ Eamon. than willn’t mp thy
porridge tn-neeght : they'll be naught but lumps as big IS my
neive. ’I‘hcar, agunl I'd ﬂing in bowl un all. if I we: ye!
There. pale t' guin off. nn' then ye’ll he done wi‘t. ling.
bang. It's a mercy t' bothom isn‘t deaved out I "

It wax rather I rough mess, I own. when poured into thebosins;
four had been provided. and a gallon pitchu' of new milkwas
brought from the dairy. which Hareton seized and commented
drinking and spilling from the expensive lip. Iexpostnlnted. end-
dsired that he should have his in a mug; aﬁrming that I could .
not taste the liquid Hated so dirtily. The old cynic chose to
he mtly oﬂ‘ended at this ninety; muting me, repeatedly, tlut
” the barn was every bit as good" as l, “ and every hit as
wullsome." and wondering how I could fashion to besooonted.
Meanwhile. the infant rulﬁan continued sucking; and glowend
up at me defyingly, as he slaveted into the jug.

" I shall have my supper in anothe- room,” 1 said. “ Have
you no place you call a parlour?"

“Parlour I " he echoed sneeringly, “ parler Nay.'we've non
Atrium. It' yah dunnut hike we: company. there's misur's;
un’ it ynh dunnut loilte maister. there's us."

"'I'hcnlshallgoupsmirs."ln.nswered; "showmenchamher."

I put my basin on a tray. and went myself to fetch somenwre
milk. With glut grumblings, the fellow rose, and preceded me
in my ascent: we mounted to the genus; he opened n door,
now and then. to look into the apartments we passed.

" Here‘s a rahln." he said, at last. ﬂinging back a cranky hoard
an hinges. " It's wee! eneugh to ate a few porridge in. There‘s
.pncko' corn i' t' corner. than meeterly chne ; i! ‘ret‘ered o’
muckying ya grand silk dos. sprud yer hankerchiro' t'topon'L "

The "rahm" was I kind of lumber-hole smelling strong 0"

  
  

 

WWII-[BRING HEIGHTS. l 37

tit and grain ; varioussaeks of which articles were piled around.

uving a wide. hare specs in the middle.

” Why, meal" I exchimed. facing him angrily, "this '5 not
place to sleep in. 1 wish to see my bed-room."

" Bed-mind" be repeated. in a toneol' mockery. "Yuh‘s see
it t' Mm thear is—yon's mine."

He pointed into the second gar-rel. only dih‘ering from the ﬁrst
in being more naked about the walls. and huving a large low.
mminles bed. with an indigmlmued quilt at one end.

"What do 1 want with yours?" I retorted. “I suppose Mr.
Hathcliﬂ' does not lodge at the top of the house. dos he?"

"Obi it's Muister HatﬁechTr ye're wanting?" cried he. as if
making n new discovery. " Couldn't ye hn' said son. at out?
unthen, I mud hn' leiled ye. baht All this work. that that's just
one ye cannut see—he alias keep: it locked, rm nob'dy iver
meih on't but hisreln."

"You‘ve 1 nice house. Joseph." I could not refmjn from
observing. " and pleasant inmtu ; and. I think the coneentrued
m of all the madness in the world took up its abode in my
hill the day I linked my {ate with theirs! Howell". that is
“lathe resent purpose—therenrcotber room. For Heaven's
the be quick, and let me settle somewhere l "

' He made no reply to this ndjuntion ; only plodding doggedly
9mm the wooden steps. and halting before an apartment which.
fun that hit and the superior quality or its furniture, I con-
}ecluredtobethebestnne. Therewas nearpet: a good one.
hi the pattern was obliterated by dust: a ﬁreplace hung with
nip-per. dropping to pieces ; a handsome oak bedstad with
Maple crimson curtains of rather upensive material and modern
nuke; but they had evidently experienced rough usage: the
"huts hung in heinous. wrenched from their rings. and the iron
M supporting them was bent in an are on oneside. causing the
drapery to trail upon the ﬂoor. The chairs were alsodnmnzed.
"Inon themreverely; Ind deep indentations deformed the panels
0" the wells. 1 was endeavouring to gather resolution forenter—
ing Ind uking possession. when my fool of e guide announced.
" Th‘: here is t' mnister's.“ My supper bythis timewaseold. my
appetite gone. end my pntienoe exhausted. I insisted on being
Mded instantly with a plane of refuge, and means of repose.

“th the divil?" began the religious elder. "The Lord

blunt! The Lnrdiorgieusl Wharthelullwnldyegang?

E 2

I 38 WUTHERING HEIGl'ﬂS.

ye marred. waﬁsomenml Ye'nuendlbntﬂmkhm
cham'er. There's not madam hoilelnligdm ini‘ lh' lube

lwnssuvezed, lﬁungmymynnd‘nsconlenuonhegmm
and then sealed myself at the shin-head. hid my“ in
hands. Ind cried.

" Ech! echl" exclaimed Jaseph. “Weeldom.MinCll-b
weel done. Mis Cathy i Hawsiver, t’ mist: sully“ tun'leo
ihem hroeken pol: ; un' then we's hear summer! ; we'l in. la
ix’s to be. Gooid-iar—nnuzhl mldllngl ye desme pining!
this to Churstrnas. ﬂinging t' predous gilt: (1‘ch undaboi
yer ﬁaysome rags l Bin, I'm misle‘en if ye shovyersperrhhl
Will Hathccliﬂ‘ bide sich bonny ways. think ye? Inability!
he may with ye i’ that plisky. 1 nobbut wish he my."

And so he went on scolding :0 his den hath. inking!
candle with him: and I remained in the dark. The period
reﬂection succeeding this silly action. compelled me to ed!
the necessity of smothering my pride and choking my WI:
and besiirring myself (0 remove its duets. An manned I
presently appeared in the shape of Thrown. when: I m
cognised as a son of our old Skulker: it hadspen! its whelphc
at lhe Grange, and was given by my fniher to Mr.
fancy it knew me: it pushed its nose against mine by way ofsnln
and then hastened to devour the porridge: while I gasped in
step to step. collecting the shattered earthenware. and drying '
spatlﬂs of milk from the banisier with my pocket-Wick
Our labours were scarcely over when I heard Earnsth uni
the psage: my asismn! tucked in his tail. end pm in
wall : I stole into the nearest doorway. The dog's endennul
nvoid him was unsuccessful; as I gusset! byesumer dam
and a prolonged. pileous yelping. I hid betnerlurkl he p:
on, emered his chamber, and shut lhe door. Directly-Iteron
came up with Ramon. lo put him to bed. I had found she
in Harman‘s room. and the old man on seeing me. said—-

" They’s mhrn {or bi:th ye un yer pride. now. I and thin!
the hahse. his empty; ye may but ii all 10 yeneln. in Hill:
.1125 malts a. third. i' sich ill company!"

Gladly did. l take advantage of this intimiian‘. and the min
I ﬂung myself into a chair. by the ﬁre. I nadded. and III
ﬂy slumber was deep and sweet. though over hr too soon. l
anoke me; he had just come in. and denuded
ﬁbvlogmanner. what I was doing mere? I‘toldhim iheu

mama HEIGHTS. 139

:nying upso late—that he had the key of our room in
:et. The adjective our gave mortal 05:39:. He swan:
not. nut ever should be. mine; and he'd—«But I'll not
:is language. not desaibe his habitual .conduct; he is
:5 Ind unrestingjn seeking to xnin my nhhonenoel 1
ms wonder at him with an intently that linden: my
2b 1 new: you. a tiger or a venommu serpent could not
minusqulllothuwhichhemkms. He told me
urine“: illness. and accused my hrothu of causing it;
.13 thu I should be Edgax's pxwy in snaking, till

:t hold of him. 
me hlm-l am wretched—I luv: been A fool! Bevan
‘ng one lyre-1h of this to my one at the Grange. 1 sh!“
ran away day—don't disappoint me i ISABELLA.

.....

CHAPTER XlV. V

lulhnd penned this epistle,l went hath: master.
med him that his sister had united n tlut Heights.
it me n letter expressing her mow for Mrs Union's
x,andharatdent desile wmhim: withnwishthnt
Id transmit to bet. a: wly as possible. some token of
by me.

given-mi" said Linwn. “I have nothing to forgive
an. You may call at Wuthering Heights this nl'temoon.
he. and say that I am not angry. but I'm 5077] to have
; especially as I can never think she'll be happy. It is
the queltion my going to see her. howeter: we m
y diw'ded; and should the rally wish to oblige me, let
and: the villnin she has mmied to have the country."
lyott won‘t write ha- I litd: note, sir?" I asked in:—
y.

." he mead. “It is needless. My communication
anthem”: family shall he as sparing n: his with wins
not exist I "

Edglr’t coldness «preset! me exceedingly; and all the
m Ihc Grange I puzzled my bnins how to put more heart
I! he Illd. when l repealed it: and how to soften his
:fcvmslewlinu to console Isabella. I dare say she

I 40 WUTHERING HEIGH‘IS.

had been on the wntch [or me since morning : 1 saw

through the lattice. as I came up the gmien clusn
nodded to her ; but she drew back. Isif lit-aid of being
[entered without knocking. There never was not
dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house presenter
oonfm. that if I had back in the young lady's plnc
at last. have swept the hearth. and wiped the tat
duster. But she already pmook oi the pervadin
neglect which encompassed her. Her pretty face wx
listles; her hair nncurled: some locks hanging hr
and some carelest twisted round her head. thn‘
not touched her dress since yster evening. Hindl
there Mr. Heatbcliﬂ‘ sat at a table. turning over st
in his pocket-book: but herose when I appeared. nslu
did, quite friendly, and oﬂ‘ered me a chair. He we: thn
there that seemed deoent : and I thought he mu ltX
So much had circumstances altered their positions. th
certainly have struck a stranger as a barn and bred ;
and his wife as a thorough little slsttern! She ear
eagerly to greet me; and held out onehand to tske tl
letter. I shoal: my head. She wouldn't understnn
but followed me to n sideboard. where I went to lay

and importuned me in a whisper to give her directly

brought. Heathcliﬁ‘ guessed the meaning of ha 1
and said-—

" If you hnve got anything for Isabella (as no douh
Nelly), give it to her. You needn't makensecret ofi
no secrets between us."

"Oh. I have nothing." I replied. thinking it best t
truth at once. " My master hit! me tell his sister th:
not expect either I letter or a visit from him It pr
sends his love. rna‘am, and his wishes for your hep
his pnrdon for the grief you have occasioned: but he
met this time, his household and the houSehold here :
htaoornntnnication. as nothing could come of keepir

Mn. Hathcllf's lip qnivered slightly, and she l
Mae“ in the window. Her husband took his st:
Mahatma. nu: me. and began to put questions
chu‘lne. I told him as-much as I thought pr:
tn. Ind he extorted from me. by emanatin-
d th hots connected with its origin. I blamed l

WUTHERING HEIGH'IS. I41

drscved. for bringing it all on herself: and ended by hoping
tht he would follow Mr. LinIon's enmple and avoid future
imn'trrmoewithhisfzmily. {orgoodoreviL

“Mrs. Unton is now just recovering." I said; "she'll never
heliheshewas, bother life is spared: and ifyou reallyhavea
ﬁeld {or her. you'll shun crossing her way again: nay. you'll
move out of this country entirely : and that you may not regret
it. 111 inform yon Catherine Linton is as diﬂ'erent now from
your old Iriend Catherine Ernshnw. as that young lady is
diluent from me Her appearance is changed greatly. her
thema- rnunh moreso; and the person who is compelled. of
usesity, to be her compunion. will only sustain his nﬁ'ectiou
banner by the remanhranoe of what she once was. by common
humanity, and a sense of duty 1 "

“ The! is quite possible," remarked Huithcliﬂ’, forcing himself
la lean calm: “quite passan that your master should have
nothing but common humanity and a sense of dnry to fall back
upon. But do you imagine that I shall leave Catherine toh's
In; and lawsuit] 7 and can you compare my feelings respecting
cherine to his? Before you leave this house. I must exact a
promise from you. that you'll get me an interview with her:
consent or reiuse, I willsee her! What do you say?"

"I say, Mr. Heathcliii" I replied. " you must not: you never
Shall. through my means. Another encounter between you and
lhemnster would kill her altogether."

“With your aid. that may be avoided." he continued; and
“mid there he danger of such an event—should he be the
Bus: of adding a single trauhle more to her existence—why, I
think I shall hejustilied in going to extremes! I wish you had
linearity enough totell mewhether Catherine would sun'er greatly
{mm his 105; the {ear that she would restrains me And there
youreethe distinctions between our feelings: hnd he been in
my place. end I in his, though I hated him with a hatred that
lined my life to gall, I never would have raised a hand against
him. You my look incredulm. it you please] I never would
lave hnnished him from her society 15 long Is she desired his.
The moment ha regard ceased. I would have torn his heart out.
Inddrnnkhis blood! But. till then-if you don't believe me.
on don't know mhtill then, I would have died by inch:
dare I touched a single hair of his head I"

" And yet." I interrupted. “ you have no scrupies in completely

I42 WING HEIGH'IS.

mlning all hopes of he perfect ristoratinn, by thrusting you!!!
into her remembrance now. when she has nearly forgotten ya
and involving her in a new tumult of dismal Ind discus"

“ You suppose she has nearly forgotten me?" he said. "GI
Nelly! youlrnowshehas not! You lmowaswellu Ida, Il-
{or every thought she spends on union: shcspenda e mom
on me! Al I most miserable pedod of mylile, I had-m
oflhe kind : it haunted me on my return to the nei
last summer: but onlyherawn assurance oonldmkeneldni
the horrible idea again. And then Union would be uodrlng
nor Hindley, nor all the dreams that ever I dream. M out
would comprehend my future—49a“ and W.- enlstenoe, the
losing her, would be hell. Yet 1 us a fool to tuneyfwt
moment that she valued Edgar Linton's nmdnnent more that
mine. If he loved with all the powers of his puny being. in
couldn't love as much in eighty yws as i could inn any. Ant
Catherinehasuhean as deep as I have: the sen. could he s
readlly contained in that horse-trough. as her whole M
be monopolised by him i Tushl He is scarcely n delta
dearer to her than her dog. or her horse. It is not he Mm it
beloved like me: how can she love in him 'm him
not l“

"Catherine and Edgar are as fond of etch other as my M
people can he," cried Isabella. with sudden vivacity. " No on
has a right to talk in that manner, 1nd I won't hear/my W
depreclated in silence I "

" Your brother is wondrous fond of you too, isn‘t he?" ob
served Huthcliﬁ' mnfully. " He turns you unit! on m
world with surprising alacrity."

" He is not aware of what I suﬁ'er." she replied. “ I dim'ﬂd
him that."

" You have been telling him something, then: you luv
written. have you?"

" To say that I was married. I did write—you saw the note.
" And nothing since 7"

 

" My young lady is looking sadly rhe worse lbr her damp r
condition," I ream-Red. "Somebody: love comes short in he
cm. obvlously: whose, I may guss; but, perhaps. ! shouldn‘
my."

" I should guessit was her own." said Heathclid'. “mm

wmnmc. moms. 14;

5 into a me slut! Sheis tired of trying to please me
only early. You'd hurdly credit it. but'the very-arrow
edding. she m weeping to go home: However, mm
house so much the better for not being over nice. and
care-she does not disgrace me by rambling nhrued."
1. it,” named l, " i hope you'll consida that Mrs.
iliswcnstomedtohelooked aﬂerlnd waitedon: and
has been brought up like an only daughter. whom every
rendytnserve. Youmust letharhave a maidtoltzep
dy about her. and you must treat her kindly. Whatever
notion of Mr. Edgar. you cannot doubt that she has a.
' for strong unchments, orshe wouldn't have abendooed
mas. and comforts, Ind friends of her former home. to
medly. in such a wilderness as this, with you."
abandoned them under it delusion." he answered:
ng in me a. hero of romance. and expecting unlimited
noes {tom my chivalrous devotion. I can hardly regud
e light of I ration-l creature, so otstinately has she per.
forming a fabulous notion of my character and acting
his: impressions she cherished. But. at last. I think
Ins to know me: I don't perceive the silly mils and
I that provoked me at ﬁrst; andthe mulls: incapa-
dtsoernlng that I was in earnest when I gave her my
of her infatuation and herself. It We: a marvellous eﬁcn.
knotty to discover that I did‘ not love her. I believed,
me. no lasons could teach her that l Andyet it is poorly
for this morning'ahe announced, a: a piece ofappnlling
me, that I had actually suoeeeded in making her hate
positive labour of Hercules. I mun: you.) If it. be
‘, I havecauseto returnthnnlu. Can I out your user-
bella? Amyou son you tmeme? Ifllnyoualone
it day. won't you come sighing and wheequ to the
l dare say she would rather I had sound all mm
on : it wounds her vanity to hove the truth upmcd.
m't care who knows the: the passion was wholly on one
(I I never told her :1 lie about it. She mnnot scene me
ng anehh of deceitful softness. The ﬁrst thing the m
7:: coming out of the Grange. was to hang up her little
:1 when she planted for it, the ﬂat words I uttered were
m 1 bed the hanging at every being belonging to he.
no : possibly she took that exception for herself. But no

 

wumxxmc HEIGHTS. 14;

Dean in private. That's not the way: upstairs. I tell
by, this is the road upstairs, child l "
nod. and thrust be from the room; and returned
e nopin 1 l have no pityl The morethe womswrithe,
I yum to crush out theirentrailsl It is a moral teeth-
I grind with gtenter energy. in pmpartion to the in-
pun."
on understand what the word pity man?" 1 said.
‘ to resume my bonnet “ Did you ever feel I touch of
we, ..
hat down l " be interrupted, perceiving my intention to
"You are not going yet. Come here new, Nelly: I
er persuade or compel you to aid me in fulﬁlling my
ition to see Catherine. and that without delay. i swear
iitate nu harm: I don't desire toeause any disturbance,
ipemte or insult Mr. Linton; l onlywish to hear {mm
M she is, and why she has been ill; and to u): ifany-
.I could dowuuld he ofuse to her. Lutnight. I was
tnge garden six hours. and I'll return there tin-night:
night I'll haunt the place. and every day. till I ﬁnd an
ty of entering. if Edgar Linton meets me. I shall not
a knock him down. and give him enough to insure his
e while I stay. If his servants oppose me. I shall
hem off with thse pistols. But wouldn’t it be better
,t my coming in contact with them. or their master?
wuld do it so easily. I'd warn you when 1 came. and
might let me in unobserved. as soon as she was done,
h till I departed, your conscience quite calm: you
hindering mischieL"
ﬂed against playing that treachemus part in my em-
ouse: and, bsides, 1 urged the cruelty and seiﬁshneu
:tmying Mrs. Unton's unquiliity for his sntisfutian.
rnrnonest oxurrenee startle: her painfully," 1 said.
i nerves. and she couldn't bear the surprise. I‘m positive
sist. sir! or else. 1 Shell be obliged to inform my master
5igns: and he‘ll take measures to secure his house and
s {rum any such unwun-antnhle intrusions I "
it case. I'll take measures to secure you, meal " ex-
icatheliﬂ' ; “ you shall not lave Wuthering Heith till
v morning. it is a foolish story to assert that Catherine

I46 WUTI-IBRING IIqu

could not bear xosce me: and um surprisingher. ldan'tddl
it: yonmnslpl'tpamM—tukhﬂiflmym Younydl
never mentions my nun-e. Ind that. I m never mentioned tab.
To whom should she mention me if I am a forbidden uni in
thehonse? Shethinlts ywareﬂlspiuforherhmd. GI.
I've no doubt she‘s in hell among yonl I m by haiku.
as much as anything. what she feels. You say she is unans-
less, and :Lnxiousdooking: is that a proof of tranquillity? Ya
talk of her mind being unsettled. Howthedevii mild it be
otherwise in her frightful isolation? And that insipid, phi]
creature attending her from duty und hut-ram}! Front [it]
nnd Mar-fly] He might as well plant an tank in a ﬂaw-pot. Ild
expect it to thrive, as imagine he mnrutoreher to vigonrinh
soil of his shallow atria! Let us settle it ll um: : will you”
here. and am I to ﬁght my way to Catherine m Linen-ﬂ
his footmau ? Or will you be my fried. a you hue h-
hithcrto. and do what I requst? Decide! because there ism
reason for my lingering another minute, if you persist inywr
stubborn ill-nature I "

Wen. Mr. Lockwood. I argued and complained, end My
refused him ﬁlly tims; but in the long run he formed me toll
agreement. lenglged to carry a lane from him tomy mint“:
nnd should she consent. I promised to let him have innings:
of Linton's next absence from home. when he might come. an!
get in IS he was able: I wouldn‘t be there. and my {dior-
servnnts should be equally out of the my “’1: it right it
wrong? I fear it was wrong. though expedient. I though“
prevented another explosion by my compliance; end I that“.
too, it might create 3 favourable crisis in Catherine's menu! ill-
ness: and then I remembered Mt. Edgnx‘s stern rebuked II!
carrying (lies; And I tried to smooth nwny all disquietndemth!
mbject, by Afﬁrming. with frequent itmiion, um um hen-yd
nl trust, if it merited so harsh In appellation, should he lhl
hat. Notwithstanding. my journey homewnrd we: adder w
my journey thither: and runny misgivings I had. ere I amid
[let-nil on myself to put the misslve into Mrs. Linton's hand.

an here is Kenneth ; I‘ll go down. and tell him how and!
Mm you are. My history is dm. as we say. and will save»
ville may another morning.

nee.nnddrmyl I reﬂected ls thegoodwomnnduemded
,m the doctor : and not exactly of the kind which I should

WIRING HEIGH’IS. 147‘

m chosen to mouse me. But never mind I I'll m thala-
otne medicines {tom Mrs. Dean's bitter herbs: end ﬁrstly. let
new the twin-tint that lurks in Catherine Heulwliﬁ‘s
My: I’M bein neuriousnklng If I mndaed

«tyne-t! lolhﬂ‘mgm.and thedaugmrtmnd out n.
madamefthemotherl

——~—-

CI-IAPTER XV.

\Ito'nmt veal: out—and I In so many days natal-halal, and
MI I hm now hard all my neighbour’s history. at dif-
Fcllt lltﬂlli. as 2h. housekeeper would spare time I'm more
Rum-t comp-lions. I'll continue it ln ham words. only
i Eula mound. She II. on the whole. a very fair narrator,
Ind I don‘t think I mldvimpmve her style.

In the evening, the sold. the evening of my vlsit to the Heights,
“new. I: well u if I saw hlm. that Mr. Heathcliﬂ'was about
lheplltae: MI shunned golngont, because I stillcaﬂied his
lute in my pocket. Ind didn‘t want to he threatened or tensed
hymen. Ihldmndeupmymind nottogiveittillmymumr
mm~.«lmummmhwiumdmmld
Ila: Catherine. The consequence VII. that it did not ruck
huhdottth‘ hplnoldtree days. Thefourthwu Sunday. and
Ihmlht It intohermmlﬂerthefmilywmgonemchmh.
Thain-amtleﬁ tolwepthehm-ewith me, end we
Mum-math: ofloclting the doorsdlring the-hm
11m; hum Intonation themthcrwu lownnn and
pm that I set them wide open. and, to ﬁtlﬁl my engagan
II how wha'ould be coming. I told my comp-him: thnt the
mmwymh lumemngu,ud he mustnm
mmtbuvﬂkgelndguafcw. tohcplid rot-on themon'aw.
HI departed. and I went upmnin.

Mn. Linton sat in I loose. white dress. with I light thaw!
own-her shoulders. in the tens! of the open window, as usual.
Ht (hick, 10mg hnil'. had heal pu‘tly moved a the beginning
11th luau. and now she wore it simply combed in its natural
lunar ha- mplu end nedt. Her appeannoawas ahead.
I I Ind told Heathcliﬂ'; but when slw was «In. there mental
Dually bunt, in tho chmgo. The flth other eyes hnd been
Ned by I dreamy and melancholy softnm; they no longer

x48 WUTHERING axioms.

gave the impression of looking at the object! Hound her: they
nppured always to gun beyond. Ind fur beyond—you wank
havesnidoutnflhisworld. Thenthepuleueuoi her M
haggard aspect having vnnished nuke recovered ﬂesh—end the
peculiar exprusiou arising from her manta! state. though polo
fully suggative of their causes. added to the touching lute-u
which she awakened: and—invariably to me. I know, Ind to
any person who saw her. I should think—refuted more anth
proofs of oouvalesoenoe. and stamped her as one doomed to
decay.

A book lay spread on the sill before her. and the seemer
perceptible wind ﬂuttered its lava an interval; 1 bdieve
Lintnn had laid it there: for she never endavoured Indth
herself with rattling. or occupation of any kind, and he won“
spend many an hour in trying to entice her attention to m
subject which had formerly been her amusement ﬁe VII
conscious of his aim, Ind in her hatter moods mauled h'ﬁ
eﬁ'orts placidly. only showing their uselasnas by now nod the:
suppressing a wmried sigh, and checking him at last with the
saddest of smilm and kisses. At other times. she would turn
petulantly away. and hide her tune in her hands. or even push
him oﬁnngrily'. Ind then he tookmre tolet heralone, forhe
was certain of doing no good. '

Gimmertnn chapel hdls wee still ringing; and the hill.
mellowﬂowofthebecltinthevnlleycamesoothinglyontlw
at. It wu 1 sweet subtitute for the yet nhsent murmurot the
summer foliage, which drowned that music about theGmnge
when the m were in leaf. At Wutherlng Heights it elm”
sounded on quiet day: following a great thaw or a. season of
steady rain. And a! Wuthering Heights Cetherinewuthlnh-
ing as she listened: that '5, if she thought or listed at Ill:
but she had the vogue. distant look I mentioned hdbte.
which expressed no recognition of materiel thing: either by
ear or eye.

"There's a letter for you, Mrs. Linton."l aid. gently in‘
sorting it in one hand that rested on her knee. "You mm
read it lmmaliately. bemusc it want: on Inswer. Shall I link
the seal?" " Yes," she answered. without altering the Mill
of her eys. I opened it—it was very short. “New.” 1 con-
tinued, “read it." She drew away her hand, and let it full. I
replaced it in her lap. and stood wniting till it should pleue her

WITH-[BRING HEIGHIS. [49

ee down; but that movement was so long delayed that at
:surned—

tst I read it. Inn'un? It is from Mr. Huthcliﬂ'."

e was n nut and n troubled gleam of recollection, nnd a
e to anuge her ides. She lifted the letter. and seemed
se it: and when she me to the signature she sighed:
. l laund she had not gathered its import. for, upon my
; to hear her reply. she memly pointed to the me. and
xt me with mournl'nl Ind qustlaning agerna

all. hewishstaneeyou," said I. gmingherneed arm
:ter. " He's in the garden by this time. and impatient ta
vhat answer 1 shall bring."

spoke. I observed a. large dog lying on the sunny gnss
2 raise its ears as if about to bark. and then smoothing
«ck. announce. by :. wng o! the nil. that some one Ip-
ed whom it did not mnsider a stranger. Mrs. Linton
yrwnrd. and listened breathlssly. The minute ether :1.
nversed the hall: the open house was too tempting for
:liﬂ‘ to resist walking in: Inns: lihly he supposed that I
:lined to Shirk my promise, and so resolved to trust to his
nineity. With straining eagernas Catherine sued to-
the entrance of her chamber. He did not hit the right
lltectly, she motirmcd me to admit him. but he faund it
I wild teach the door. and in ash-ide or two want her
1d had her grnsped in his arms.
\either spoke nor loosed his hold for same ﬁve minutes.
which period he bestowed more kiss: than ever he gave
life helm. I dare say: but then my mistress had kined
st, and l plninly saw that newuld hardly beer. for down-
gony. u: look into her fuel The same conviction bed
1 him as me. from the instant he beheld her, that there
rpmpect of ultimate recovery there—she was Med. sure

 

e. Cathyl Oh, my lifel how can I bear it?" mike ﬁrst
:e he uttered. in a tone that did not seek to disguise bis
'. And now he stared at herso umestly thnt I thought
y intensity of his gnu would bring lean into his eyes:
-y burned with anguish: they did not melt.

but now?" said Catherine. Inning hack. IM returning
k with nmddenlydmtded brow: herhumourwnsn mere
)r constnntly varying capries. "Yen and Edger have

130 warmma HEIGHTS-

bzoken my hart. Heuhcliﬁl And you hothpone tn hail the
deed to me, as if you were the people In be pithdl 1 shellac!
pity you. not I. You huve killed mo—eudzlhdvuan it. I think.
How Itrong you ml Howmyyuudommtnllu
If!“ I am gone?"

Hathdiﬁ' had knelt on one knee 10mm”: 3*
tempted to rise, but she seized his hair. Indhepthiudm

"I wish I could hold you." she continued hiuerlyl "ﬂue
werehothdadl Ishmrldn'twewhumm Ia:
nothing far ymu' “ﬁxings. Why-shouldn't m MS? I dol
Willyou forget me? Willyoube happywhen [ninth
earth? Wlll you say twenty yearshenee, “run the grind
Catherine Eunshaw. I loved her long ego. and w nuts!
to lose her; but it is post. I'velnved myothmﬁm: I}
chlldrenuedenxer tomethznshewns;undntdalh,llllll
not xejoieethat I wgaing to her: I shall hennytmlnﬂ
lave them l' Will yau ﬂy so. Huthcliﬁ' ?"

“Don't torture me till I'm u M I: 1:.
wrenching his head free. and grinding his teeth.

The two. ta 3 cool spectator. nude I strange Ind inﬁll li>
sure. Well might Catherine deem thnt haven wauIdheIU
of exile to her. unless will) he mortal body she nanny his
moral character also. Her present commune: had- Uild vin-
dictiveness in its white cheek. and a blooth lip and sa'milllt'ﬂ
eye ; and she retained in her closed ﬁngers a. ponionot‘ the 108!
shchul been grasping. Astn her commion.
self withonehand.he had taken hermnldﬂl Welland
so inadequate was his stock of gentleness to llama
her condition, that on his letting go I new (our w h
pressions left blue in the colnurless skin.

"Are you possessed with a devil," he pulled Am, "ll
talk in that manner to me when you are dying? Dayan-w
that all those words will be branded in my memory. Ind clﬁll
deeper eternally after you have left me? You know you lie I!
say I havekilled you: and. Cstherineqnultnawtm lemldl
soon target you as my existennel Is it not Inﬁdel“ {a you
infernal selﬁshness. that while you me at peace I shill with”
the laments of hell?"

“I shall not he I! peace." moaned Catherine. mulbd tm
sense of physiml waknm by the violent. unequal thrcbhln‘t
he— humwhkh heat visibly and nudihlyundu this“!

WTHERING HEIGHTS. IS I

‘ She said nothing further till the paroxysm was over ;
than she continued. more kindly—

“ I'm not wishing ycngreiuer torment than I have. lith
Ionlywishunevertobepartcd: andshnuldawotdofmine
www.mklkdthesamemundermund.
and for my own sake, forgive me! Come here and kneel down
again! You never harmed me in your life. Nay. ifyqu muse
anger. that will be worse loremember than myhush words!
Won’t you combating-in? Dol"

Huthcliﬂ‘ went to the back of her chair. and Man: over, but
not schrns tolethuseehisflct.whichw:slivid withernm
lion. Shehentround to look st him: he would not permit it:
tnrning thruptly. he walked to the ﬁreplace. where he stood.
silent. with his bank Kawade us. Mrs. Linton‘s glance followed
him suspim'mly: every movement woke a new sentiment in her.
Alter I pure and a prolonged sue, she resumed; adan
me in accented indignant disappointment—

"Oh. you lee. Nelly. he would not relent a. moment to keep
me an: of the grave. That is how I'm Jamil Well, never
mind. Thuisuot my Hathcliﬂ'. I shall lavamlm yet; and
take him with me: It": in mysaul. And." added she musingly,
"thethingthntlrksmemonisthisshatteredprlson.nfterulL
I'm tired of being enclosed here. I‘m warying to escape into
that glorious I'm-id. and to he Always there: not seeing it dimly
thwgh tears. and yearning {or it through the walls a! an aching
hurt; but rally with it. and in it. Nelly. you think you are
better ind mote {animate than I; in full halt): 3nd strength:
yumsw'ryfarme‘overysoonthatwillbealtered. Islnllbe
mrryfaryu. Inhnllbe hamper-ably beyond andnhoveyou
all. Imukrhcwon’thenenrmel" Shewrntnntohenelf.
"I thought he wished it. Heathdiﬁ', darl you sbnuld not be
sullen m. Become to me, Hathclill"

lnherugernmeherme and supponedbemelion thearm of
the chair. At thnt enrnest upped he turned to her. looking
Ihlnlutely deem His eyes. wide and wet. at last ﬂashed
ﬁrmly on her : his breast heaved convulsively. An instant
they held under...“ then how they met I hardly aw. but

Cllhaine mud: 1 spring. and he unght her, and they were
hrhd in In emhrue from which I thought my mistress would
wherein-led alive: infant. tamy eyes. sheseemed directly
MIG. He ﬂung himself into the nearst sent. and on my

131 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

approaching hurriedly to aseenaiu if she had fainted, he gnasl
at me. and (burned like :1 road dog. and gathered her to h
with greedy jealousy. I did not feel aslf I were in the camp
of a creainre of my own speciuz it appeared that he would!
understand. (haugh I spoke to him; so I stood 0E. and h
my tongue. in grat perplexily.

A movement of Cathuine's relieved me A little may: 5
put up her hand to clasp his neck. 1nd bring her cheek to]
as he held her; while he. in return. cording herwith fun
caressa. said wildly—

“ You teach me now how cruel you‘ve been—cruel and ill:
Wily did you despise me? Wily did you betray your 0‘
hurt. Cathy? l have not one word of comfort. You d5:
this. You have killed yourself. Yes. you my kiss me. I
cry; and ring out my kisses and tears: they’ll blight you
they’ll damn you. You loved rue—then who! right had you
leave me? What right-answer Ina-4m the poor fancy y
felt for Linton? Became misery Ind degrodnion. Ind HB’
and nothing that God or Satan could inﬂict would huve [In
nay“. of your own will, did it. I have not broken yanrlls
ﬁlm have broken it; and in breaking it. you hove brvll
mine. So much the worse for me. [hot I on strong. D!
want to live? What kind of living will it be when you—<
God 1 would you like to live with your sun! in the grave)"

“ Let me alum Let me alone," sobbed Catherine " I”
done wrong, I'm dying for it. his enough I You left me to
but I won't upbraid you! I forgive you. Forgive me i "

"It is hard to forgive. and to look it those «ya. um! 9
those wasted hands." he answered. " Kiss rue spin: a
don't let me see your eyesl I forgive what you have done
me. I lave my murderer—but you"! How can I?"

They were silent—their lacs hid oping! each other, I
washed by each aunt‘s team. At least. I suppose (he weepi
was on both sides; as it seemed Heozhcliﬁ‘ mid weep on
great occasion like this.

X grew very uncomfortable. manwhile ; for the literan 1‘
Inst away. the mu whom I had sent off returned from bios!!!
and l could distinguish. by the shine of the water-n sunny!
valley. I concourse thickening outside Gimmerlon chel pol!

“Service is over." I announced. “ My router will be h'
in half-In-hour."

WTHEklNG HEIGHTS. 153

Heatth gunned r. curse. and strained Catherine closer:
she never moved.

Ere hing I perceived a group ol‘ the servants passing up the
reed towards the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton was not far behind :
he opened the gate himself Ind sauntered slowly up. probably
enjoying the lovely afternoon that breathed as soft as summer.

" Now he is here." I exclaimed. " For Heaven’s sake. hurry
down! You'll not met my one on the front suits. Do be
quick ; Ind my among the trees till he is fairly in."

" I must go. Cathy." aid Heathcliﬂ, seeking to extricate
himself from his componion'l arms. " But if I live, I'll see you
again before you ere sleep. I won’t stray ﬁve yards from your
window."

“ You must not go i " she answered. holding him as ﬁrmly as
her strength allowed. "You stall not. I tell you."

"For one hour.“ he pladed, earnestly.

" Not for one inute." she replied.

" I slut—Linton will be up immediately," persisted the
alarmed intruder.

He would have risen. and unﬁxed her ﬁngers hy the net—she
clung fut. gasping: there was and resolution in her fame.

" No!" she shrieked. "Oh. don't. don't go. It is the last
time! Edgar will not hurt us. Heathcliﬂ. I shall die l I
shall die I "

" Damn the fool i There he is," cried Hwthcliﬂ‘, sinking back
into his mt. “Hush, my darlingl Hush. hush. Catherine!
l'llstny. If he shotlne so. I'd expire with a blessing on my lips."

And there they were fast min. I heard my master mounting
the stairs—the cold sweat ran from my forehead '. I was horriﬁed.

“ Are ya: goingta listen to her mvings?" I said pnssionntely.
"She do: not know what she says. Will yau ruin her, became
thehas not vino help herself? Get up! You could be free
inmnﬂy. Thntis the mast diabolical deed that ever you did.
Wenre all done {on-master. mistress, and servant."

lwrun‘ my bonds, Ind cried out: and Mr. Linton hastened
his map It the nnlse in the midst of my agitation. l was

“rarely glad to observe that Catherine‘s arms had fallen

"bred. and her held hung dawn.

"She's Muted or dead." I thought : " so much the better.
Pu but: am [he shauld be dead. than lingering a burden
Ind - misery—mullet to all than! her."

X 54 WVTHERING

Edgar sprang to his unhidden guest. blanched with danish
mentnndnge. Whathemeanttcdo. landfall; Ito-en
the other stopped ell demonstntions, at tune. by glad-gal-
Haas-looking Int-m in his arms.

"Look therel"hesaid;“unlessyoubeaﬁud.hdphﬂs
—thenyoushallspeaktomel"

He walked into the purlmu', and sat dorm Mr. Linton
summoned me. and with great diﬁenlty. and alter martin; t:
many means, wemanngedtortstore her to taxation: husk
was all hewﬂdered; she sighed. andmoaned. Indknnuohody.
Elgar. in his anxidyfarher. largotherhatedtriead. Ididmt.
1 went. at the earliest opportunity. and hsouclu hint tom:
uﬁrming that Catherinewas better, and he shnuld hearﬁunnt
in the morning how she passed the night.

“ I shall not refuse tn go out of doors." he unarmed: "but!
shall stay in the garden: and. Nelly, rnind you keep wield
ttrmorrow. I shall heunderthnselarehues Mindl «Int:
another visit, whether Linton be in or not.“

He sent a rapid glance thraugh the half-open door of tht
chamber. Mid, ascertaining that what 1 stated in: applaﬂ’
true. deliveredthehmtseolhislueklsspreseue.

—.—n-—

CHAPTER XVI.

ABOUT twelve o'clock that night, was born the Cuban: you!!!
at Wuthering Heights : a puny. seven months' child; ndtv:
hours after the mother died. hiving new med same”!!!
consciotunus to miss Hmthcliﬂ'. or know Edgar. The W!
distraction at his bereavement is a subject too pitiful to heduel'
on ; its alter eﬁ'ects showed how deep the sorrow sunk. A gal
addition, in my eyes, was his being left without an ha‘r. l he
moaned that. as I sued on the feeble orphan: Ind l mull
abused old Linton for (what was only nature! Malia) m
securing his estate to his own daughter, instatd of his son'a N
unwelcomed infant it was. poor thing! It might have VIEW
of life. and nobody cared a morsel. during thnse ﬁrst hm: I
existence. We redeemed the neglect aherwards; but itshqilt
ning was as friendless as its end is likely to he.

Neat morning-wright and cheerful out owners—mic”
in through the blinds of the silent room. and “fused cl: and

WHERING HEIGHTS. 155

Ind B mm with I. mellow. tder glow. Est! Limon
hndhilhudhidonthepiﬂuw. Ind hiscyuihnt. His yang
IndfnlrleImuwaeIlnmu duthlike as those at thetorm
buidehlm,nndnhno|tu§ned: hntkisvuthehmh dexhanuad
anguishndhndperfectpuee Her hmsmooth, herllds
closed. herllps'uring thecpmsion of I smile: no angel in
haven could he more beautiful than she nypenxed. And I par-
took ofthe inﬁnlte alln in whichshe lay: my mind mauve: in
[holierfnnte thIn while I gazed on that untroubled lmnge of
Dlvlnem. Xlnltinctlvelyenhoed thewordsshe hndmtered
Ifewhmshdore: "lncompunblyheyond and Ibove n: Illl
Whether still on earth at now in heaven. herspiritisathame
with (had l "
ldon‘thnowlfithenpecnlinrityln madam! unseldnm
otherwise than happy while watching in the ellan 0f duth.
should no frenzied a dspniring manner share the duty with me.
lseenrepouthuneltherunh nor hellunhretk. IndIfeelm
mm of the endlm and shadoleS handler—the Etetnity
they have muted—where life is boundlﬁ in it: dilution. Ind
laveln it: sympathy. Ind joy in its inlness. I noticed on that
mien how mud: Ielﬁshnus then is even in I love like Mr.
Llnton'l, what he so legretted Catherine's blessed telnse! To
be ante. one might have dmbted. Iﬁeﬂhewaywnnl Ind impItimt
erase: she hId led, whether she merited a haven of pane It
last. One might doubt in seasons of cold reﬂection: but not
the. in the wane: ofhscarpse. Ituseﬂed itsmtnnqm'llity,
whid: lead I pledge nf equal quiet to its former inhabltnnls.
Do you believe such people an hnppy in the otherworld. sir?
I'd glee I greet (led to know.
I w musing Mrs. Dan's question, which struck me
n W haunting she pmeeeded—
lend-g theme of Catherine Limon. I fearwehmno
illitme ll:h“l1llﬂvﬁ herwith hetMIlnet.
hem-nebular! asleep. and Iventumdsonnnnersunrlseto
quit the mom Ind steal out to the pale refreshing ﬁt. The
BMW me gone to shakeoﬁthedmwslnasot'mypm.
MW; in rullt'y, my chief motive WIS seeing Mr. Hath-
d'ﬂ. Uhthnd Med mung the luvhsIll night, he would
he hen-d nothing of the stir n the Grange: unless. path-PS.
h light latch the gullop ofthe messenga going to Gimmenon.
"he had some m. he would probably be aware. from the

156 WU‘I'HERING HEIGHTS.

lights ﬂitting to and fro. and the opening and shutting of t‘
outer doors, that all wns not right within. Ivlshed. yet [an
to ﬁnd him. I felt the terrible news must be told. and I long-
toget itover: but how todoil. I did not know. Hewnstbe
—-n.t least a few yards further in the pork: leont against on o
ash tree. his hat of. end his hair soaked with the dew that ha
gathered on the hudded branches. Ind fell pattering round bin

, He had been standing I long time in that position, for I saw
pair of onsels passing and repassing scarcely three feet from bin
busy in building their nat. and regurding his proximity no not
than that of of timber. They new 05 nt my npprnnd
and he raised is eyes and spoke—

"She‘s dendl" he said; “I've not united {or you to let!
that. Put your handkerchief any—don't snivel before mt
Damn you all! she wont: none ofywr tears I "

I was weeping as much for him as her: we do somethnupit
creatures that have none of the feeling either {or themsth
others. When I ﬁrst looked into his ﬁne. I perceived that It
had got intelligence of the austrophe: and n foolish notio
struck me that his heart m queued and he prayed, heausehi
lips moved and his gaze was bent on the ground.

" Yes. she‘s dead I " I answered. checking my sol: unddryin
my cheeks. "Gone to heaven, I hope: where we may. ever
one. join her. if we aka due warning md leave our evil ways!
follow good I "

“ Did rte take due warning, then? " nsked Hathcliﬁ'. am?
in; a sneer. " Did she die like u saint I Come. give the
true history of the event. How did "—

He endeavoured to pronounce the mine. but could Ill
manage it; snd compressing his month he held n silent oomhl
with his inward IKOIIY. defying. mmnwhile, my sympathy wit
an unﬂindiing ferocious store. ” How did she die?" he resume
at lat—rain. notwithstanding his hardihood, to havennppo
behind him; for. after the struggle. he trembled. in spin: 1
himself. to his very ﬁnger-ends.

"Poor wretch!" I thought; “you have n hart and new
the some as your brother men 1 Why should you he noxious!
conceal them P Your pride unnot blind God I You tempt ﬁn
to wring them, till He forces a cry of humiliation." '

"Quietly as a lamb !" I answered uloud. "She-drew
sigh, and stretched herself. like I child reviving. 1nd sinkin

WTHERING HEIGHTS. 157

again to sleep: and ﬁve minute-s after I felt one little pulse n
he- beart. end nothing more i "

"And—did she eve mentirm me?" he Islted. hesitating, as
ifhedxeeded thennswerta hisquestiun would introdumdetaik
that he could not hear to henr.

“Ha-seams never returned; shcreungnised nobodyfromthc
time you left her." I said. " She lies with n sweet smile on her
lace; and her latest idms wnndued back In plasnnt early dnys.
Her life closed in n gentle dram-may she wake ns kindly in
the other worid l "

“ Mny she wake in torment!" he cried, with {rightful vehe-
niuioe, stamping his foot. and groaning in a sudden pnroxysm
of ungovernnhlc passion "Why. she‘s a liar to the endl
Where is she? Not acre—not in baVen—not perished—
whae? Oh! you slid you cared nothing for my snﬂ'erings!
And I prny one prayer»! repeat it till my tongue stiﬁ‘ens—
Catherine Enrnshnw, may you not rest as long as 1 an: living!
You aid 1 killed you—haunt me. then! The murdered do
haunt their murderers, I believe. i ltnaw that ghosts haw
undead an earth. Bo with me always—take nny form—drive
Ine mad I onlyda not leave me in this abyss. whee I ennnot ﬁnd
you! Oh. Godl it is unuttenblet I mum live without my
life! 1 mm! live without my sanll"

He dnshui his head ngninst the knotted trunk; end. lifting
lip his eyes. howled. not like a man. but like a snvage beast
he'ng gridded to denth with knives and spars. 1 observed
seven! splashes of blood shoot the bark of the tree. and his hand
and forehead were both shined : probably the scene I witnessed
was a repetition of others noted during the night. It hardly
Wed my cumpnssionoit appalled me: still, I felt reluctant to
quit him so. But the moment he recollected himself small: to
notice me watching. he thundered I command for me to go. and
Ioheyed. He was heyond my skill to quiet or console l

Mrs. Lintan's funeral was appointed to take place on the
Friday following her deoease; and till then her ooiﬁn remnined
wavered. nnd strewn with ﬂowers and scented leave. in the
(treat drnwing-room. Linton spent his days and nights there.
Illeepleu guardlnn; Ind—n circumstance concealed from ell
ht Ine—Huthdiﬁ' spent his nights, at least, outside, equally n
Kruger to repose. I held no communiaation with him; still.

[mensde his design toenter, if heoould: nndonthr:

I .5 WUTHERXRG mans.

 

.x mu: after dark. whamymu. tasks-ship
., ‘ \wupcuedmmﬁxeamuﬂedhmlu-
“hm! mmohhawindcws: movedbyhimhgi-
dummul‘ hauling on the hhi Mikael
a... uhcu. liedidnotomilmanilhindfdlhew
min and brieﬂy: too undansiym Mayra ml
-1 . .hglwast miss: Ideal. I shouldn'thnvedisnnudﬂl
ml lwulbemmxcep‘ﬁmlhediarmgmdthdnp
ul ilu: corpsc's fxce. and it ohsa'vingmdmﬂmuad
l hair. fastened with a Silva: thread: which. mm
“Alm‘d Iohaveheentakznﬁmalauhthqm
snack. Heathcliﬁhad upenddie mm:
in winning. replacing than by a Hack hckd' h‘son.

:u- .icd the mo. and mdosed them togetha'.

.\li. Earmhnw was, of course. invited coated :1: tennis
h wuuthcgmve; hasenlno.lntl:neva~une;.
Ilml, buidcshcrhusbnnd. thalamus-59mm
mum. and servants Isbdla In no! and.

Tim pka at Cuba-ins: inn-mail. m It: m d' I!
“Haul, . was neither in Lhechapel. undelth m
u; h.- Linluns, not yet by the £0th :1th on Mons or
Ila.“ dugon agreenslop: hammde
u...- wall 35 so low that bath and Elba-Ky plants ll
.Iml nuzl n llvxu them; and pen medium bur‘ui
h .Iwnl In» in the sancth now: and Iheyhve ad!
u-mabove, and aplain mmulﬁxfeﬂ.

.1. Ilw 5mm».

 
 
 
  

 

 

   

 

 

 

  
  
  

   

—«—

CHAPTER XVII.

~\- ‘- kl) mule (he laslof ourﬁn: days ham
iln; wuazherbmkc: lhewindshiﬁedﬁmmh
I. ‘ uni luvught rain ﬁrst. and then sleek and snow. (
-~-u m».- could hardly imagine that than had been Ihl
nun-u . thcprimxmaudcrocuseswaehidden um:
N 4. via: luksvmesilent. the young leavde a
.ml wwnm And dmry. and chill. and dism
M . lwpml Mynnster kept his room; I In
‘n‘ :muly Inﬂow. converting“ into I nursery: n
. ‘ l. “4‘; mlh me moaning doll Ola child laid on I
n w uni in). and watching. meanwhile. the :-

  
 

 

  

Wm HEIGKIS. :59

driving ﬂakes build up the maintained window. when the door
owned. llld some person entered, on! of breath and hughingl
Mynnguwu grater than my lstonishmenl {on minute. I
snppueditoneoﬂhemxids. “dialed—-

“Hm done! How dare you shut ymn- giddina hue?
What 'mler. Lintonsnyifhe hardyou?"

“Emeline the!" answered : familizr voice; “but I know
Edgar isin bed. Illd I cannot slapulyself.”

With tht the spenlner came forward to the ﬁre, panting and
holding ha hand to her tide.

" l but fun the whole way from Wuthering Heighlsl“ she
mntinnedmfrut phase: "eneptwhere l‘veﬂown. I couldn't
count the numberde I’ve had. Oh. I'm aching nlloverl
Dm'thenhnndl Thereshnll bennexplnnationnssoonasl
can give it; only jun have the gnodm lo step out and. order
Lheurrhgeto theme on to Gimmerton. Ind tell nservantro
soekupniewdothesinmywardmhe.”

Tl: inmxlervu Mrs. Heathclifi She certainly seemed in
mlmghing paiinunent: ha hair summed on her shoulders,
dripping-id: mandwuer: shewas drmed in the girlish
dz—shecolnnoulym.heﬂttinghaagemorethanher
poison: In low frock with short sleeves. end nothing on either
had or neck. The [rack was of light silk, and clung to her
tithes. end herieetware protected merely by thin slippers;
hid notth deep at under on air. which only the cold pre-
‘med from bleeding profusely. a white {nee scratched and
huised. Ind I {rune hardly sble tn support itself. through
h’gne; nnd you any they my ﬁrst {right was not much allnyed
M I had had leilue to examine her.

“ My dear young lady." I exclaimed. “ I'll stir nowhere. end
heir nothing. till you have removed every micle of your clothes.
snap-non rhyming“ and certainlyyoushallnot golnGim-
mm tonight, so it is needles to order the urringe."

"Certainly. I shall." she said ; "wﬂking or riding: yet l‘ve
Mnhjealon to dig: myself demtly. And—ah. see how it ﬂows
hnuyneeknw! The ﬁredounnkeitmt"

She w on my {ulﬁlling her directions. before she would
humming; and not an mathemhmnmd been in-
M togetmdyandannidsetlo punk upscrnenectssary
limdld l 0min ha- eonsent for binding thewound and help-

k'l‘mchmgevllerglrments.

160 WU‘I‘HERING HEXGH'IS.

" Now. Ellen." she said. when my task was ﬁnished ends!
wassatedinan easychair ontheheanh.withneupo{u
before her. " you sit down opposite me. and put poor Catherine
hnby away: I don't like to see itl Yon mustn't think I tar
little for Catherine, because I hehavul so foolishly on musing
he cried. too, bitterly—ya. more than my one else has run
to cry. We parted unreconciled. you mix. and I shn'
forgive myself. But, (or all that, l was not going to aymptii
with him—the brute beast! Oh, give me the poke-l Thisii “I
last thing of his 1 have about me:" she slipped the gold ring
from her third ﬁnger. and threwitonthe ﬂoor. " I11 mash it!’
she continued. striking it with childish spite. " and thm I'll hurl
itl" andshetnok and dropped the misused urticle mung“!
coals. "There l heshallbuyanotherdfhegetsmehek'nin.
He'd be capable of coming to seek me, to tease Edgar. I dell
not stay, list that notion should possa hiswicked bend! And
besides, Edgar has not hem kind, has he? And I von’tmmt
suing for his insistence ; nor will I bring him into more trnuhh
Necessity compelled me to seek shelter here: though. if I Ind
not learned he was out of the way, I'd havehaltednt thekiwhn.
washed my face. warmed myself. got you to bring what ! mid.
and departed again to anywhere out of thereach of nay-m
—ol‘ thatinmrnategoblinl Ah, hewasinsnchel’uryl I“:
had taught me! It's a pity ﬁnish“! is not his match in
strength : I wouldn’t have run till I‘d seen him ullhut demolislli.
hnd Hindiey been able to do it i "

"Well. don't talk so inst. missl " i interrupted: "yon'llﬂ
order the handkerchief I have tied round your ﬁne. and Illh
the cut bleed again. Drink your tea. and take hath, 3nd gi‘l
over laughing: laughter is stdly out of place unda- thil moi
and in your condition I "

“ An undeniable truth." she replied. “ Listen to that child
It maintains I constant wail—send it out of my baring far I:
hour ; 1 shnn't stay any longer."

I nng the hell. and committed it to a servant's are; m
then I inquired what had urged her to escape (mm Wutherim
Heights in such an unlikely plight. and where she meant to gt
as she refused remaining wiLh us.

“I ought. and I wish to remain." Answered she. " to ch:
Edgar and take care of the baby. for two things. and beam
the Grange is my right home. But I tell you he wouldn’t let me

val-IEXING HEIGHTS. :61

lo you think he could bear to see mo grow (at mid merry—could
ear to think that we were tranquil. and not resolve on poisoning
or comfort? Now, [have the satisfaction of being sure that
re detest: me. to the point of its annoying him seriously to
me me within earshot or eyesight: I notice. when I enter his
"menace. the muse]: of his countenance are involuntarily dis-
orted into In exprusion of hatred ; partly arising from his
rnowledge of the good causes I have to feel thnt sentiment (or
him. Ind partly from original nversion. It is strong enough to
make me feel pretty cert-in that he would not chase me over
England. supposing I contrived a clear escape; and therefore
Imust get quite sway. I’ve recovered from my ﬁrst desire to
he killed by him: I'd rather he'd kill himself! He has ex-
tinguished my love eﬂ'ectually. and so I'm at my case. lean
mﬂectyet bowl loved him; end tan dimly imngine that I
could still be loving him. if—no, no! Even if he had dated on
me. the devilish nature would have revealed its existence some:
how. Catherine had an awfully perverted taste to esteem him
so darly. knowing him so welL Monster l would that he could
heblntted out of creation. and out of my memory I"

“ Hush, hush! He's a human being." I said. “Be more
thriuble: there are worse men than he is yet I "

"He‘l not a humnn being." she returted: "Ind he has no
dlilnon my charity. I gave him my hurt. and he took and
Pinched it to dmth, and ﬂung it back to me. People (eel with
"a"! henna. len: and since he has destroyed mine. I have not
mm feel for him: end I would not, though hegronned from
‘histn his dying day. And wept tears of blood for Catherine!
No. indeed, indeed. I wouldn‘t!" And here Isabella began to
“Y: but, immediately dashing the water from her lashes. she
"command. "You asked. what has driven me to ﬂight It
last? I we: compelled to attempt it. because I had succeeded
1" musing his rnge a pitch above his malignity. Pulling out the
m with red-hot planets requires more coolness than knocking
an the head. He was worked up to forget the ﬁendish prudence
hfhonsted of. and proceeded to murdmur violence. I expe-
nsited plmune in being nhle to ensperate him ; the sense of
Mine woke my instinct of self-preservation, so 1 fairly broke
ﬁat: end it ever I come into his lands again he is welwmeto a
"ma! revenge.

"me. you know. Mr. Enrnlbnw should have been at

F

16: won-12mm; HEIGHTS.

the funenl. He kept himself sober for the purpose—tolenh
sober: not going to bed mad at six o'clock and geuing up drnt
at twelve. Consequently he rose. in suicidal low spirit» us!
forthechurchasfor a dance; nudiusteud,heatdownbytl
ﬁn: and swallowed gin or brandy by tumblerful;

” HeatheliE—I shudder to name him I has been a strangui
the house from lat Sunday till today. Whether the huge
have fed him, or his kin benmth. I cannot tell; but he has n!
eaten a meal with us for nearly nweek He has justoomehou
at dawn, and gone upstairs to his chamber; looking himseii i
—-as if anybody dreamt of ooveting his componyl There helu
continued, praying like a Methodist : only the deity he lmﬂm
is senseless dim and ashes; and God, when nddresed. II
curiously confounded with his own black father I All: on
eluding these precious orisons—nud they hsted genaally till]:
grew hoarse and his voice wns strangled in his thmut—hewoul
be off again: always straight down to the Grange! 1 wood!
Edgar did not send for a constable. and give him into custody
For me. grieved us I was about Catherine. it was impollih'
to avoid regarding this season of deliva from dqldin
oppresion as a holiday

" I recovered spirits sufﬁcient to hear Jouph'seternl lean!
without weeping. and to move up and down the house 15 wit
the foot of a frightened thief than formerly. You would»
think that I should cry at anything Joseph could lay; hut!
and Haretou are detestable oompnnions. I'd nth:- nit wit
Hindley. and hear his awful talk. than with ‘t' little M
and his staunch supporter, that odious old nun l When Hall
cliff is in, I’m often obliged to seek the kitoheuand their we.
or starve among the damp uninhabited chambers; what he
not, as was the case this week, I estnblish a table and chair:
one corner of the house ﬁre. and never mind how Mr. Elmsha
my occupy himself ; and he dos not interfere with ayes-rule
ments. He is quieter now than heused to be. if mwmvdﬂ
him; more sullen and depresed, and Its furious. Jose!
aﬁrms he's sure he’s an altered man: that the Lord lnltouchl
his heart, and he is saved '50 as by ﬁre.’ I'm punled todela
dgns of the favounbh chnnge: but it is not my business

" Yale—evening I sat in my nook reading some old books“
late on towards twelve. It seemed so dismal to go upulr
with the wild snow blowing outside, and my thoughts mtiunll

wornmum HEIGHTS. 163

reverting to the kirkyani and the new-made grave! I dared
hardly lift my eyes from the page before me, that melancholy
scene to munun it: place. Hindky at opposite. his
head. leant on his hand : perhaps meditating on the same subject.
He had used drinking at a point below irrationality. and had
na’thz atirred not- spoken during two or three hours. There
was no Ionnd through the home but the moaning wind. which
shook the window: every now and then, the faint crackling of
the unis, and the click of my snuﬂ'en as I removed at intends
the long wick of the candle. Human and Joseph were probably
ﬁstuhepinbed.-Itwasvery.verysad:and whilelrudl
sighed. {or it seemed as if all joy had vanished from the world.
never to be mend.

"Thedold'uisilanewns broken at lengthbythesound ofthe
um latch: Heathcliﬁ‘ had returned from his watch earlier
than usual: owing. I suppose. to the sudden storm. That en-
uancewu Muted. udwe heard himcoming roundtoget in
by the other. 1 rose with an irrepressible expression of what I
felt on my lips. which induced my oompanion. who had been
staring towards the door, to turn and look at me.

“ ' I'll keep him out ﬁve minors; he “chimed. ‘ You won't
object?‘

“ ‘No. you my keep him out the whole night for me,’ I
answered. 'Do I put the by in the lock. and draw the bolts.‘

" Eat-tubaw accomplished thisere his gout ruched the front;
he then amend brought his chair to the other side of my table.
1min; are it. and searching in my eys for a sympathy with
the burning hate that gleaned from his: as he both looked and
feltlihe an mmhe couldn't auctly ﬁnd that; but he dis~
coined cough to encourage him to speak.

“‘Yotr and I.‘ hesaid. ‘have each 131's: debt to settle with
ll: man out yonder! Ifwewere neither of us cowards, we
mightoomhinetodisdurgeit. Are yonassoit aa yourhrother?
Axe yonwiﬂingtnendure In the iast.and not onoeattempta
nil-Fl“ ? '

"'I'ni wearyof enduring now,‘ I replied: 'and I‘d be glad
alum thmwnldn'trecoilonmyteﬂ; buttrucheeyarm
inhosarespeanpointedat both ends: theywonnd thouewho
mart tothan worse than thu'r enemiu.‘

“ ‘headaery and violence are u just return for traeha-y and
Violeneel' aied Htodley. 'Mrs. Heathcliﬂ‘, I'll ask you to do

164 W’VTHERIXG HEIGm

nothing: but sll still and he dumb. Tell me nor. an yul
I‘m stueyourouldluveasmueb pletsnrens l intimqu
oonclusionot' the ﬁend's existatee: he'll beyo-r ht.me
youmhhimzandhe‘llhenyrnin. mum
villain! Heknocksat thedoorasifhewaemb!
nlrendy! Promise to hold your tongue. and befue the: chi
strikes-it wants three minim: of one—you're a tree m?

“ He took the implements which I dumbed toyon in mylﬂh’
fromhisbteut, andwonldhavetnmeddarnlheandle l
snatched it away. however. llld sailed his um.

“ ‘ I'll not hold my tongue ! ‘ I slid ' ‘ you mm't tondlll'l
Let the door remain shut. and be quiet ! '

“ ' No! I've formed my resolution, end by God I'll wait?
ﬂied the desperate being. ‘ I'll do you n kit-Adm in spied)!!-
sell. and Hareton justice ! And you needn't trouble ymrlﬂll
Inscreen me: Catherine is gone Nobody alivean ﬁll
me, or beashamed, though I cut my throat this minute—end?!
timetomakeanend!’

“ 1 might aswell have struggled with a hair. or rescued!“
a lunatic. The only muroe left me was to run to n latt’nelbd
m his intended victim of the fate which united him.

" 'You'd better seek shelter somewhere else to-night!’ ld‘
claimed in rather a triumphant tone. ' Mr. brush"! ban nind
to shoot you. if you persist in endavouring to enter.‘

“ ' You'd better open the door. you '-—- he answered. W
ing the by some elegant term that I don’t rare to renal.

“ ‘ I shall not metldlein the matter,’ I moned again. ‘leI
in and get shot. if you please! I've done my duty.‘

" With llut I shut the window and retumed to my plead?!
the ﬁre: having too small a stock 0! hypocrisy at my comm
to pretend any anxiety for the dongs that Inenaoed hlﬂl. Elm
in. more passionately at me : affirming that I loved thevilhil
yd; nndcnlling me all sorts ot'nam for thebnsespirit I evinced
.And I, in my secret heart (and conscience never reprunehed It'
(taught what I blessing it would be for Air! should Hathdi
phimontofmisery; and whntablessingforusbonldhesw
.Wtohis right abode I As I sat musing theseer

ﬁgment behind me was hanged on to the ﬂoor bynhlo
 th latter individual, and his black countenance look!

though. The stanchion: stood too close to anti
.‘hl to (allow. And I smiled, exnlting in my fend:

 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 16;

security. His hair and cloths were whitened with snow. and
his sharp cannibal teeth. revealed by cold and wrath, gleamed
through the dark.

“ ‘ Isabella. let me in, or l’llmalte you repent!‘ he ‘ gimed.’
as joseph ralls it.

“ ' I cannot commit murder.’ I replied. ' Mr. Hindley stands
smtinel with a knife Ind loaded pistoL'

“ ' let me in by the kitchen door.’ he said.

" ' Hindley will be there before me,’ I answered: ‘ and that's
n poor love of yours that cannot hear: shower of snowl We
were left at puree in our bodsas long as the summer union shone,
but themoment nblnst of winter returns, you must run for shelter 1
Heathnliﬂ'. if I myou. I'd go stretch myself ovu- her grave und
die like a faithful dog. The world is surely not worth living in
now, is it? You had disincdy impressed on me the ida that
Cuba-inc was the whole joy of your life: I can't imagine how
you think of sirviving her loss.’

" ' He‘s there. is he?‘ exclaimed my companion. rushing to
thegap. ‘iflmngetrnyarmoutlcanhithiml’

" I‘m afraid. Ellen. you'll set me down us really wicked ; but
you don't know all. so don't judge. I wouldn't have aided or
abetted an nttempt on even no life for anything. Wish that he
weredead, I must ; and therefore I was fearfqu disappointed.
and unnerved hy terror for the consequences of my taunting
speech, when he ﬂung himelf on Enrnshaw's weapon and
Mencth it from his grasp.

" The chargeexploded. and the knife. in springing back. closed
into its owner’s wrist. Healhcliﬁ' pulled it away by main force,
slitting up the ﬂesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into
his poem He then took a stone. struck down the division be.
tween two windows. end sprangim His adversary had fallen
sensele with excessive pain md the ﬂow of blood. that gushed
iron: an artery or a large vein. The ruﬂ'un kicked and trampled
on him. and dashed his head repeatain against the ﬂags. hold-
ing me with one hand. meantime, to prevent me summoning
Joseph. He exerted preterhuman self-dean in abstaining from
ﬁnishing him completely; but getting out of brath he ﬁnally
desisted, and dragged the apparently inanimate body on to the
settle. Then he tore oil' the sleeve of Earnshaw’s coat, and
bound up the wound with brutal roughness ; spitting and cursing
during the operation as energetically as he had kicked before.

166 WTHERING HEIGHTS.

Being at liberty. I lost no time in seeking the old servant; who.
having gathered by degrees the purport of my hastytnle. hurled
below. gasping. as he descended the steps two at once.

" 'What is ther to do, now? what is ther to do. now?"

" ‘There's this to do,’ thundered Heathcliﬁl ' that ymr
masta's mad ; and should he last another month. I'll have him
to an asylum. And how the devil did you come to fasten II:
out. you mothlass hound? Don't stand muttering and m4
blinz there. Come. l‘m not going to nurse him. Wash that
stuﬂ' away ; and mind the sparks of yourmudle—it ismthln
half handy I '

" ' And so, ye’ve been murthering on him? ’ exdnirued Jonah.
lifting his hands and eyes in horror. ' If iver 1 seed asegbt
loilre this ! May the Lord'—

" Heathcliﬁ‘ gave him 2 push on to his knees in the middle“
the blood. and ﬂung atowel to him ; but instead of proceeding
to dry it up. he joined his hands and began n prayer, which
excited my laughter from its odd phraseobgy. I was in the
condition of mind to be shocked at nothing: in that, I was Is
reeklss as some malefactors show theme“: I! the foot of ill:
gallows.

” ‘Oh. I forgot you.‘ said the tyrant. 'You shall do thIL
Down with you; And you conspire with him against me. do
you. viper? There. that is work ﬁt for you I’

"He shook me till my teeth rattled. nnd pitched the hesidt
Joseph. who steadily concluded his supplieatlons and then ruse.
vowing he would set at? for the Grange directly. Mr. Linton
was a magistrate. and though he had ﬁfty wives dead, he should
inquire into this. He was so cmtinate in his resolution. thet
Huthcliii‘ deemed it expedient to compel from my lip I te-
upitulation of what had taken plane ; standing over me. having
with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the account in answer
to his questions. It required I grandad of labour to satisfy the
old man that Heatheliﬂ‘was not the aggressor; espedally with
my hardly-wrung replies. However, Mr. Earnshaw noon com
vineed him that he was alive still ; Joseph hastened to adminth
3 dose at spirits. and by their sueeour his master pnsently re-
gained motion and consciousness. Heathcliﬂ', aware that hit
opponent was ignorant of the treatment received while insensible.
called him deliriously intoxicated ; and said he should not notice
his ntrocimu conduct further. but advised him to get to bed.

wu-mmnc amen-rs. :67
To my M. be left us. mar giving this judicious counsel. and
Kindley stretched himselfon the hearthstoue I deported to my
own room, tunnelling that I had escaped so easily.

" This morning, when I name down. about hull-on-hwrhefore
you. Mr. WV was sitting by the ﬁre. deadly sick; his
evil genius. almost as gaunt and ghastly, lean! ugnimt the
chimney. Neither append inclined to dine. And, having waited
till all was cold on the table, I commenced alone. Nothing
hindaed me from eating heartily. and I experienced noertain
lone «ablation and superiority. as, at intervals. I cast a look
towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet
Went: within me. Alter I had done. I ventured on the
usual lihaty of drawing near the ﬁre. going round I’Arnshaw’s
sat, and kneeling in the corner beside him.

“Heathdiﬂ’ did not glance my way. and I gazed up. and
“upload his {aim almost as oonﬁdently us if they had
bent turned to stone. Hi: forehead, that I once thought so
mlnly, and that I now think so diabolical. was shaded with a.
lﬂatly cloud: his badlisk eyes were nearly quenched by sleep-
ltmss, and. weeping. perhaps. for the lashes were wet then ;
his lips devoid of tha‘r ferocious sneer. and sealed in an
Winn of unspeakable sadness. Had it been another. I
Iould lave covered my hoe in the prsence of such grief. ln
‘1': use. I was gratiﬁed: and. ignoble as it seems to insult a
fillen my. I couldn’t unis this chance of sticking in I don :
h'u weakness was the only time when 1 could taste the delight or
ﬂying wrong for wrong."

" re. ﬁe. miss!" I interrupted. “ One might suppose you
had Deva opmed 1 Bible in your life. If God afﬂict your enemies,
ﬁnely that ought to some: you. It is both men and presump-
lmtooddyourtonureto Hisl"

“ in gench I’ll allow that it would be. Ellen," she continued :
"but what misery lnid on Hathcliﬁ‘ could content me. unless I
lnven hand in it? I'd nther he suﬂ‘ered kn. if i might muse -
hi nﬁering! and he might him that I was the muse. Oh, I
We him I0 much. On only one condition can I hope to forgive
hill. It is. H l moy mite nn eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth ;
lureunry trench at'ngony return I wrench: reduce him to my
10d. As he was the ﬁrst to injure, make him the ﬁrst to implore
Plrdon: Ind then—why then. Ellen, I might show you some
ltnerosity. But it is utterly impossible I can ever be raver-god.

I63 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

and therefore I cannot forgive him. Kindle] wanted all
water, and I handed him a glass, and asked him how ll:
was

 

 

Not as ill as I wish.’ he replied. ' Butlesving out myam
every inch of me is as sore as if I hndboen ﬁghting with aleg'n
of imps I ' '

“ ‘ Yes. no wonder.’ was my next remark. ' Catherine and”
boast that she stood between you and bodily harm: she malt
that certain persons would not hurt you for fear of What
It's well people don't really rise from their grave. or, last nil“.
she might have witnssed a. repulsive soeneI Are not you
bruised and cut over your chest and shoulders?‘

“ ‘I can't sny,’ he answered: ‘hut what do you mean? Did
he dare to strilre me when I was down?‘

“ ‘ He trampled on and kicked you, and dashed you on the
ground,‘ I whispered. ' And his mouth watered to [arm with
his teeth; because he's only half man: not so much, and til
rest ﬁend.’

" Mr. Earnshaw looked up, like me, to the countenunoe of our
mutual toe; who, absorbed in his anguish. scarred inseam:
to anything around him: the longer he stood. the phiner hi
reﬂections revealed their blackness through his Tutors.

" ‘ Oh, if God would but give me strength to strangle him in
my last agony. I'd go to hell with joy.’ wood the imperial
man. writhing to r'Be, and sinking hack in despair. convinced of
his inadequacy for the struggle.

" ' Nay. it's enough that he has murdered one 0! you,’ I
observed aloud. ‘ At the Grange, every one knows your sister
would have been living now. had it not hour for Mr. Hathclil'.
After all. it is preferable to he hated than loved by him. Whm
I recollect how happy we were—how happy Catherine was before
he came-I‘m fit to curse the day.“

" Most likely. Heathclitf noticed more the truth a! what was
said, than the spirit of the person who said it. His attention
was roused, I saw, for his eyu rained down tears among III
ashes, and he drew his breath in suffocating sing. I stared full
at him. and laughed sootnt‘ully. The clouded windows of hdl
ﬂashed I moment towards me; the ﬁend which usually looked
out. however, was so dimmed and drowned that I did not fear
to hmrd another sound of derision.

" ' Get up. and begone out of my sight,’ said the manner.

 

WIJTHERING 31516313. 169

"I guessed he uttered those words, It least. though his voice
'IS badly intelligible.

" ' Ihegyour pardon.’ I replied. ‘ But I loved Catherine too;
and his brother requires attendance, which. for her sake, I shall
Supply. Now that she's dead, 1 see her in Hindley: Hindley
Manually her eyu. if you had not tried to gauge them out. and
Mathemhiackand rad; and MRI—-

"‘Get up. wretched idiot. before I stomp you to dealh!‘ he
ﬂied. making a. movement thnt caused me to make one also.

"’But then,’ ! oontinued. holding myself ready to ﬂee: 'if
M Catherine hnd trusted you. and assumed the ridiculous,
contempu'ble. degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliﬁ'. she wmud soon
he praemed n n'milu' picture 1 SM wouldn‘t have borne your
abominable behaviour quietly : her detestation and disgust must
have found voia'

“ The back of the settle and Eu-nshnw's person interposed
between me and him: so instead of endeavouring to rack me.
hemtched a dinner knife from the table and ﬂung it at my head.
I! struck henenth my enr. and stopped the sentence I was ulter-
i'lt: but, pulling it out. I span; to the door Ind delivered
another : which I hope went A little deeper than his missile. The
ha glimpse I caught of him wns n furious rush on his pan.
Checked by the embrace of his host : and both fell locked together
onlhehenrth. In my ﬂight through the kitchen I hid Joseph
sped to his muster ; I knocked over Haretnn, whowu bulging
Ililtcr o! puppies from n chair-bunk in the doorway ; end. but
Illsoul escaped from purgnmry. I bounded. leaped. and ﬂew
down the steep road: then. quilting its windings. shot direct
Ions: the moor. rolling ave huh. and wading thmugh
Misha: precipltnting mysell, in fact, towards the hereon light
of the Grunge And for rather would I be condemned to aper-
Pﬂlﬂl dwelling in the infernal regions, than. even foronenight.
abide heath the roof of Wuthering Heights again."

Isabelle. cased speaking. and took I drink of ten; then she
Vole. Ind bidding me put on herhonnet, and ngrat shawl l had
bought. nod turning a. dafenr to my entreatiel for her to rennin
Moths hour. the stepped on to a chair. kissed Edgnr’s Ind
Calla-ind- pnrtroits, bestowed 1 similar salute on me. nnd de-
md to the carriage. accompanied by Fanny. who yelped wild
'kh joy ll recovering her mislless. She was driven oway, never
bleth this neighboluhood : but u regular cormpondenoe was

F I

170 WTHERING KEIGHIS.

cmhlisbcrl between her nnd my master when things use me
settled. I believe her new abode was in the earth. near laden;
there she had a son born, a few monthssnhsequent to hereupr.
He was christened Linton. and, frvmtbe ﬁrs. she reported hill
ta be an ailing, peevish creature.

Mr. Heathclﬂt'. meeting me one day in the villnge, inquire!
where she lived. I refused to tell. He rennrked the: it var
not of any moment. only she must beware of coming to her
brother: she should not be with him. if he had to keep h:
himself. Though l wattld give no idol-menial. he discovered.
through some of the other sermts. both her plat: ofrﬁdenct
and the existence of the child. Still he didn't moist hav: hr
which forbeannee she might thank his “axial, I mpg: He
onen asked about theinhnt, when henw me; endouhezring
its name. smiled grimly, and observed—

" They wish me to hate it too. do they?"

“ I don't think they wish you to know anything about it."
I answered.

" But I'll have it." he said, “ when I want it. They may
recline on that l"

Fortunately. its mother died before the time arrived: m
thirteen years alter the deeeaee of Guttering when Linton VIII
twelve. or a little more.

On the day succeeding Isabella's unexpected vis‘t. I hed no
opportunity of spuking to my master; he shunned converse
tion, and was ﬁt for discussing nothing. When I could get him
to listen, istw it pleased him that his sister had left herhm-
band; whom he abhorred with an intensity which the mildnes
of his nature would scarcely seem to allow. 50 deep and sets"—
tive was his aversion. that he refrained from going anywhere
where he was likely to see or hear of Huthcliﬁ: Grief, and
that together, transformed him into a complete mil: he
threw up his oﬁee of magistrate. ceased even to attend church.
avoided the village on all ocmsions. and spent a. life of entire
seclusion within the limits of his park and grounds: only varied
by Inlitnry rambles on the moors. and visits to the gruve of his
Vite, mostly at evening, or early morning before other wanders:
we abroad. But he was too good to be thoroughly tu-ihnppy
m. He didn't prey for Catherine’s soul to haunt him. Time
nought resignation, and a. melancholy sweeter than common
g: mulled her memory with ardent, tender love. and hopelnl

WIRING HHGHTS. 17!
aspiring to the better world; where he doubted not she was

gone.

And he had tartth eoneolntion nnd aﬁ'eaions and. For a
few dnys. I said. he named regardless of the puny summer to
the deported: that coldness melted as fast as snow in April,
and erethe tiny thing could stunner l word or toner instep.
it wielded I dupe“ leeptre in his heart. It was ruined
Catherine: but he never tailed it the name in full. uhe had
nequ the ﬁrst Catherine short ; probably because Heath-
clitf had a habit of doing so. The little one was always Cathy :
.it formed to him 1 from the mother. end ye: neon-
neetion with her; and his Attachment sprung from its zeluion
to her, far more than from its being his own.

I used to draw e comparison between him and Hindley Eun-
ehaw, And perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their
conduct was so opposite in similar circumstances. They had
both been food husbands. Ind were both attached to their chil-
dren ; and I could not see how they shouldn't both have taken
the same reed, {or good at eviL But, I thought in my mind.
Hindley, with nppumtly the stronger head. has shown himself
sully the wone and the waiter man. When his ship struck,
the captain uhnndoned his post; and the new. instead of trying
to save her. rushed into riot and confusion. lamina no hope for
their luckien vsel. Linton, on the contrary. displayed the
trueeowngeot'nloyalnnd faithful soul: he tmstedGOd: Ind
God micrted him. One hoped, and the other dupeired : they
choc: their own lou. nnd were righteoust doomed to endure
them. But you'll not want to hear my momising. Mr. Look-
wnod; you‘ll judge on well as I an, all these things: at least,
you'll think you will. and that's the some. The end of Earnshuw
In: whet might have been expected: it followed last on his
sista'l: there were swoely six months between them. We.
at the Grange. never got n very succinct account of his state
preceding it; I“ diet I did learn, was on occasion of going to
aid in the preparations for the funeral. Mr. Kenneth «me to
announce the event to my muster.

"Well. Nelly.“ said he. riding into the yard one morning.
too arly not to alarm me with an instant prenentiment of bad
news, “ it's your: and my turn to go into mourning at presun.
Who's given us the slip now. do you think P"

"Who?" lukedinnﬂurry.

172 WUTHERING HEIGH‘IS.

"Why, gum!" he returned, dismounting. and slim
bridle on I hook by the door. " And nip up the comet
npron: I‘m eertnin you‘ll need it.”

" Not Mr. Heathcliﬂ', surely?" l exclaimed

"What! would you have tears for him?" said the
“No, Heatheliﬁ‘s a tough young {ellovn he looks hi
to-dny. I've just seen him. He‘s rapidly reguiuingﬂe
he lost his better half."

" Who is it then. Mr. Kenneth?" I repented impatier

" Hindley Earnshawl Your old friend Hindley," he
“ and my wicked gossip: though he‘s been too wild {or
long while. Therel I said we should draw water. Br
up. He died true to his character: drunkas alord. P<
I‘m sorry. too. One can’t help raising an old corn:
though he had the worst tricks with him thnt ever man itr,
and has done me many a msmlly turn. He's barely
seven. it seems; that‘s your own age : who would have
you were born in one year?"

I mfess this blow was gmter to me than the shock
Linton's death: ancient associations lingered round m:
I sat down in the porch and wept n5 for n blood relation,
Mr. Kenneth to get another servant to introduce hin
master. I could not hinder myself from pondering
question—" Had he had fair play?” Whatever I did, I
would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious th
solved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heigl
assist in the last duties to the dead. Mr. Linton was a:
reluctant to consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the Ir
condition in which he lay ; and I said myold master anv
brother had n clnirn on my services as strong as his ow
sides. I reminded him that the child Hareton was hE
nephew. and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought to e
gunrdian: and he ought to and must inquire how the 1
was left. and look over the concerns of his brother—ins]:
was unﬁt for attending to such matters then. but he
speak to his lawyer; and at length permitted the to g
hwyer had been Earnshaw's also: Icalled at the vilh
aired him to ueornpnny me. He shook his head. and
M Heathcliﬁ should be let alone: aﬁrming, if the tn
m, Harem would be found little else than n begg:

" His father died in debt," he said; “ the whole prt

 

 

 

r:
re?
RV

vi?

WTHERING HEIGHTS. I7 3

MW. and the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow
him an opportunity of crating some interest in the creditor's
heart. that he may be inclined to deal leniently townrds him."
When I ruched the Heights, I explained that I had come to
‘2an urried on decently; and Joseph. who appeared
in suﬂ‘icient distress, expressed satisfaction at my presence,
Mr. Hentheliﬂ' said hedid not perceive that Iwas wanted ; but I
might my and order the arrangements {or the funeral, if I chose.

" Correctly," he remarked. " that fool’s body should be buried
at the clues-roads. without ceremony of any kind. I happened
whee him tan minuta yesterday afternoon. and in that inter~
iFiling-fastened the two doors at the house against me. and he
hm spent the night in drinking himself to death deliberately!
We Incite in this morning, for we heard him snorting like a.
bone; and there he was. laid over the settle; ﬂaying and
ﬁlling would not hnve wakened him. I sent for Kenneth,
Ind he tame; but not till the beast had changed into carrion:
hem both dead and cold. and stark; and so you'll allow it
“3M6! making more stir about him i"

The old servant conﬁrmed this statement. but muttered—

“I‘d rayther he'd goan h'useln for t‘ doctor] I sud ha' taen
Ento' t' maister better not him—and he wam't dead when I
Himaughuf t’loart I"

l insisted on the funeral being respectable. Mr. Iieathcliﬂ‘

Slid I might have my own way there too; only, he desired me
Wranemher that the money for the whole affair dime out of his
Net. He maintained n hard. careless department, indicative
o{neither joy nor sorrow: if anything. it expresed a ﬂinty
(Initiation nt a piece of difﬁcult work successfully executed. I
w once. indeed, something like exuitation in his aspect:
lint jm when the people were bearing the coﬂin {mm the
Mae. He had the hypocrisy to represent an moumcr: and
lithium to following with Hareton. he lifted the unfortunate
diild on to the table and muttered. with peculiar gusto, " Now,
my bonny lad. you are mine! And we'll see if one tree won't
gmuerooked as another, with the tune wind to twist it!"
The mispeaing thingwes pleased at this speech: he played
with Huthcliﬂ's whiskers, and stroked his cheek ; but I divined
it! meaning, and observed tartly, " That boy must go hack
with meta Thruth Grange. sir. There is nothing in the
world less yours than he is l "

r74 wummzma moms.

"Does Linton say so?" he demanded.

"Ofeourse—he hasordered metotakehim," Implied.

"Well," said the mandrel. "we'll not argue the mid
nowzhutlhaveafnnoytotrymyhnnd mating-yum:
one; sointimate to yourmuterthot l multsupplyhplnd
this with my own, if he attempt to remove it. I don’t-agar!
let Hutton go undisputed; but I'll be pretty lure to ninth
other camel Remember to tell him.”

This hint was enough to hind our hoods. I repeated in sub-
stance on my return; and Edgnr Linton. little intermd It til
commencement. spoke no more of inheriting I'm not nut
that hecould have done it toanypm-pose,.had. hehuelu'b
willing. ‘

The guest was now the master of Wuhaing Height: I!
held ﬁrm possession, and proved to the ottomey—who, la HI
turn. proved it to Mr. Linton-that Enmhnw had In
every yard of land he owned, for cash tolupply his link I!
gaming: and he. Heathnliﬁ‘. was the mortgagee. in that
manner Hareton. who should now be the ﬁrst garment“ in the
neighbourhood, was redumd to estate of complae dependence
on his {othei’s inveterate enemy; Ind liven in his own hauls
n servant. deprived of the advantage of was: : quite nmhleb
right himself, because of his friendlessnest, and his km
that he has been wronged.

...

  
 

CHAPTER XVIII.

THE twelve yms. continued Mrs. Dean, following that distant
period. were the happiest of my life: my gmtat trouhla in
their passage rose from our little lady‘s triﬂing illness, which
she had to experience in common with all children. rich end
poor. For the rest. aha the ﬁtst six months. she grew like I
larch. and could walk and talk too. in her own my. before the
heath blossomed a second time over Mrs. Linton‘s dust. She
was the most winning thing the: ever brought sunnhine into I
desolate house: arm] huuty in face. with the Earnnhuu' tund-
some dark eyes. but the Lintons' fair skin and small feotnru.
and yellow curling hair. Her spirit was high. though not rough.
and qualiﬁed by a. heart sensitive and lively to emu: in i6
affections. That mpncity for intense attachments reminded meof

WHERING HEIGHTS. 17$

hammer: still she did not resemble her: for she could he sol!
ind mild as n dove, and she had a gentle voice and pensive
Illusion: hanger": neverturious; her love never ﬁerce:
itns deep and made. However, it must he acknowledged,
that faults.» toil her gifts. A propensityto he suncywas
In; and n peace: will. that indulged cln‘ldren invariably
3min. whether they be good-tempered or cross. If a servant
chanced to vex her. it was always—" I shall tell papal” And if
he med her. nan by a look. you would have thought it a.
hurt-braking him: I don't hellevo he ever did speak a
lush word up her. He task her edumtlon entirely on hlmsell',
and made it In amusement. Fortunately. curiosity and aquick
intellzr made he an apt scholnr: she learned rapidly and
early. all did honour to his teaching.

'51! sheathed the age olthinlenahe had notoneeheen
beyond. the mg: of the park by herself. Mr. Linton would
talc: ha wida him a mile or so onuide. an rare mions; but
he ﬁnned he: to no one else. Gimmenon was In unsubstanan
name in *- ers; the chapel. the only building [he had ap-
prouhed neutered, except herown home. Wuthering Heights
and Mr. Henthcliﬁ‘ did not exist {or her: she was a. perfect
recluse; Ind. uppanmly, perfectly commuted. Smuctirms,
indeed. while mzying the country {tom her nursery window.
she would aha-ve—

“Ellen,hawlongwill is he beforelcnnwalk to the top of
those hills? I wonder whnt: liu on the other side—is it the
my.

"No. Min Cathy." lwwld answer; "it is hills ngniu, just
In: that."

" And wh-t are those golden rocks like when you stand under
them i’ " the once asked.

The nhupt desoent of Penistone Crag: pnrticnlzrly attracted
her nod-x; specinlly when the setting sun shone on it and the
topmost heights. and the whole extent of landscape besides lay
in ahndow. I explained that they were bare masses of stone,
with hrdly awash earth in their cleft: to nourish a stunted tree.

"Andwhy Ire they bright m long that it is evening here?"
she pointed.

" Beam they Ire I great deal higher up than we are," replied
I; “ you could not climb them. they me too high and steep. In
winter the frost ls nlwny: there before it comes to IE; and deep

176 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

into summer I have found snow under that black hollow on d:

northwt side I " ..
"Oh. you have been on them!" she cried gleefully. "Thu

1 range. too. whenlamawomnn. llnspnpabeeu. Eleni"

” Papa would tell you. miss." I answered hnstily. " that they
are not worth the trouble of visiting. The moors. where you
nmble with him. are much nicer : Ind 'Dlrushuos Park is the
ﬁnest plane in the world."

“But I know the park. and I don‘t know those." she inur-
mured tohetsell. "And I should delight to look mndme from
the blow of that tallest point: my little pony Minnysh-ll take
me some time."

One of the maids mentioning the Fairy Cave. quite turned he
had with a desire to fulﬁl this project: she tensed Mr. Linton
about it: and he promised she should lava the journewa
she got older. But Miss Cntherinemmred hernge hymontls.
and. “ Now. am I old enough to go to Penistone Crags?" 'IS
the constant question in her mouth. The road thithetwound
dose by Wuthering Heights. Edgar had not the hurt to ps5
it; so she received as constantly the answer, “Not yet, love:
not yet.”

I said Mrs. Heathcliﬂ' lived ebove a. dozen ymrs aﬁel- quitting
her husband. Her {1.111in were of a delicate constitution: she
and Edger both lacked the ruddy health um you will genenlly
meet in [lane pans. What her last illness wns. I am not certain:
I conjecture. they died of the some thing. a. kind of fever, slow
at its commencement, but incurable. and rapidly consuming life
towrds the close She wrote to iniorm her brother of the pm
bahle conclusion of a four month's indisposition underwhich sh:
had suffered. and entreated him to come to her. if possible; fol
she had much to settle, and she wished to bid him adieu, Int
deliver Linton safely into his hands. Her hope was. that Lintar
might be left with him. as he had been with her: his fnther. 5hr
would fain convince herself. had no desire to assume the hnrdet
of his maintenance or education. My master hesitated not :
moment in complying with her requrst: reluctant as he was It
leave home at ordinary calls. he ﬂew to answer this : commending
Catherine to my peculiar vigilance, in his absence, with reitentet
orders that she must not wander out of the park, even under my
escort : he did not calculate on her going unaccompanied.

He was away three weeks. The ﬁrst clay or two, my chug:

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. I77

sat in a. corner at“ the library. too sad for either reading or play-
ing: in that quiet state the caused me little trouble; but it was
succeeded by on intervnl of impatient fretlul wearines ; and being
too busy. nod too old then. to run up and down nluusing her. I
hit on a method hywhich she might entertain herselll I used to
send her on her travels round the grounds—now on foot, and
now on a pony; indulging her with 9. patient audience of 31!
her rul and imaginary ndventnrs. when she returned.

The sonnet-shone in full prime; and she took such I. taste
{or this solitary rambling that she often contrived to remain out
from brakiut till tn; end then the evenings were spent in re-
counting her tnncil'ul rules. I did not {earlier breaking bounds :
because the glieewere generally locked; and i thought she would
saroer venture forth alone. if they had stood wide open. Un-
lucktly, my conﬁdence proved misplaced Catherine came to me.
one morning. nt eight o'clock, and said she was that day an
Arabian merchnnt. going to cross the Daert with his maven ;
and I must give her plenty of provision {or herself and beasts :
a horse. Ind three camels. pasonnted by v. large hound and a.
couple a! pointer: 1 got together good store of daintics, and
slung them in n lnsket on one side of the saddle; and she
sprung up 5 gay n: a fairy, sheltered by her wide-brimmed hat
Ind gauze veil from the July sun. and trotted oﬁ'with a merry
laugh. mocking my cautious counsel to avoid galloping, and
come back early. The naughty thing never made her appear-
ance or ten. One traveller. the bound. being an old dog end
fond of its ease. returned ; but neither Cathy. nor the pony, nor
the two pointer: were visible in any direction: I despatched
emisnries down this path. and thnt path, and at last went
wandering in Search of her myself. There was at labourer work-
ing at n fence round a plantation, on the borders of the grounds.
I inquired of him if he had seen our young lady.

" 1 saw her at morn," he replied ; “ she would have Inc to cut
her I. haul switch. and then she leapt her Galloway over the
hedge yonder. where it is lowest. and galloped out of sight."

You my guess how I felt at hearing this news. It struck me
directly she must have slurred for Penistone Cmgs. " What
will become of her? " l ejnculated. pushing through A gnp
which the man was repairing. and making straight to the high-
road. 1 Med as if for a wager, mile alter mile. till it turn
brought nein View of the Heights ; but no Catherine could I

:78 “remains HEIGE'IS.

detect far or near. The Crag: lie about a mile and : half be-
yond Mr. Hutheliﬁ": plea, and that '5 four haul the Gum.
eoIhegantofuruightwanldfnllereIemldmehthm
" And what if she should have slipped in clunhering um!
them," I reﬂected, "end been kind. or mien some 0(ka
hones?‘-' My snepense was truly painiul: and. It first, it pvt
me delightful relief to obsme, iu' hurrying by the familiarise.
Chnrlie, the Germs! of the pointeu, lying unds I window. with
swelled bead mdhleedingau. Impaled thewielnetudnntc
the door, knocking vdmneutly for Idnirtnce. A woman what
1 knew. and who formerly lived a Gimmervon. answered: sh
had been servant there since the death of Mr. Elmsluw.

"Ah." said she, "you are come a. aching yum-little mines
don't be frightened. She's hue safe: but I’m glad it isn‘t th
mum."

“ He is not at home than. is he?“ I palatal. quite breath):
with quick walking and alarm.

"No, no." :he replied: “ both he and Julep]: are 08‘. and
think they won't letum this hour or non. Step in Ind rut yo
1 hit."

I entered. and beheld my stray lamb seated on the heard
rocking heme“ in a little chair that had been her mother's whe
a child. Her hat m hung against the wall. and she seine
perfectly at home, laughing and chattering, in the best spit-iv
imaginable. to Harmon—now a great. strung lid of eighteen-
who stated It her with considerable curiosity and utanishmenl
comprehending precious little of the ﬂuent succession of marl
and qustions which her tongue never ceased pouring forth.

“ Very well. miss 1" I exclaimed. concealing my joy under a
angry commence. “ This is your last ride. till papa cow
back. I’ll not trust you over the threshold again. you naught}
naughty girl 1"

“Aha, Ellen!" she cried gaily. jumping up and running I
my side. “ I shall have a. pretty stury to tell tin-night: and :
you‘ve found me out. Have you ever been herein you: ll
before P "

" Put that hat on. and home at once." said I. " I'm cheat
fully grieved at you. Miss Cathy : you've done extremely mu;
It's no use pouting and crying: that won't repay the trouble I'\
had, scouring the country after you To think how Mr. Linte
charged me to keep you in; and you stealingotl' sol it sham

WUIHERIN G HEIGHTS. I 79

Mare a cunning little (ox. and nobody will put faith in you
My more."

"What huve I done P“ sobhed she, instantly checked " Papa
Charged me nothing : he‘ll not scold me, Ellen—he's never cross.
ll}: you! "

"Come, come I " I reputed. " I‘ll tie the n'bnnd. Now, let
ushave no petulnnoe. Oh. for shzlnc ! You thirteen yearsold.
and sud: a hub] i"

This exehtmtinn was cursed by her pushing the but from her
bad. and retrating to the chimney out of my reach.

“ Nay,” mid ti: servant. “don’t be hard on the bonny lnss,
Mrs. Dun. We made her stop: she’d fain have ridden {ore
wards. nfeard you should be uneasy. Hareton offered to go with
her. and I thong! he should: it's a wild road ova the hills."

Hare-ton. timing the discussion. stood with his hands in his
pockets, too nwkward to speak; though he looked as if he did
not relish my intrusion.

“ How In; In: I to wait 2" I continued, disregnrding the
woman's interferon: " It will be dark in ten minutes. Where
is the pony. Mia Cathy? And where is Phoenix? 1 sin]! lave
you. unless you be quick ; so please yourself."

" The pony in in the yard." she replied, " and thnix is shut
in there. He's bitten—And so is Charlie. I was going to tell
you :11 about it; but yuunre in a had temper, and don’t deserve
to hear."

I picked up be her. and approached to reinstate it ; but per-
ceivingthnt the peopled the house took her part. she commenced
tapering rand the room: and an my giving chase. ran liken.
mouse over and under and behind the furniture, rendering it
ridiculnu for me ta pulsue. Hueton and the woman laughed.
and the Joined them. and waxed more impertincnt still: till I
cried. in [rat inﬂation—

"Well, Misl Cnthy. it you were aware whose house this is,
you‘d be glad enough to get out."

" It's” Ethel-'5. isn't it?" said she, turning to Hareton.

" Nay." he replied. looking down. and blushing bashfnlly.

He could not stand a steady gaze from her eyes. though they
were inst his own.

" Whose then—your master's?" she asked.

He calmed deeper. with a diﬂ'crent feeling. muttered an oath.
and turned "my.

180 WUI‘HERING HEIGHTS.

“ Who is his master?" continued the income girl, nppnl'
ing to me. " He talked about ‘our hause.‘ and '31:: folk.’ I
thought he had been the owner’s son. And he never said. Ms;
he should have done. shouldn't he. If he's a. servant?"

Harem: grew black as a. thunder-cloud. at this childish
speech. I silently shook my quationer. end at Inst snow!”
in equipping her for departure.

" Now. get my horse." she said. addressing her unknon
kinsrnan as she would one of the stable-boy: ot the Grange
“And you may come with me. I want to seewhere thegoblin‘
hunter risa in the marsh, and to hear about the fairﬂhu.”
you call them: but make haste I What‘s the matter? Get Ill
horse. isay."

" I'll see the damned before I be My servant l " growled the
lad.

" You'll see me mint!" asked Catherine in surprise.

" Damned—thou saucy witch l" he replied.

" There. Miss Cathy ! you see you have got into pretty oom-
pony," I interposed. “ Nice words to be used to a. young lady!
Pray don't begin to dispute with him. Come. let us seek for
Minny ourselves, and begone." '

“ But, Ellen." cried she. staring. ﬁxed in astonishment. “how
dare hespeak so to me? Mustn't he be made to do as 1 6i
him? You wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you said.—
Now, then i “

Hareton did not appear to feel this thmt ; so the tan
sprang into her eye with indignation " You bring the pony.'
she exclaimed. turning to thewoman, “ and let my dog free thi:
moment i "

"Softly, miss." answered she addressed : " you‘ll lose nothing
by being civii. 'I'haugh Mr. Benton. there. be not the master's
son. he's your cousin : and l was never hired to serve you."

"He my cousin ' " cried Cathy. with a snornful lnugh.

" Yes. indeed," responded her rcprover.

"Oh. Ellen] don't let them ray such things," she pursued. i1
grat trouble. " Papa is gone to {etch my cousin from London
my cousin is a gentleman’s son. That my "—she stopped, nut
wept outright ; upset at the bare notion or relationship with suel

u clown.

“ Hush. hush ! " I whispered. " people can have many cousins
and 0! all sorts. Miss Cathy. without being any the worse for it

 

W'DTHERING HEIGHTS. 181

only they needn't keep their oompany. if they be disagreeable
and had."

" He's not—he's not my cousin, Ellen l” she went on. gather-
ing (rah grief from reﬂection. and ﬂinging herself into my arms
for Iefuge from the idu.

I was much vexed at her nnd the servant for their mutual
revelations; having no doubt of Lintun's approaching arrival,
communicated by the former. being reported to Mr. Henthclift' ;
and feeling a conﬁdent that Catherine‘s ﬁrst thought on her
father's return. wattld he to Seek an explanation of the latter's
wertion concerning her rude-bred kindred. Hareton. recover-
ing from his disgust at being taken for e servant. sewed moved
by her distras ; and. having fetched the pony mund to the door.
he took. to pmpitiate her, a ﬁne crooked-legged terrier-wth
from the kennel, and putting it into her hand bid her whist I for
he meant nought. Pausing in her lamentations, she surveyed
him with aglanoe of awe and horror. than burst forth anew.

lennld sureer refrain from smiling at this nntipnthy to the
poor fellow; whom a well-made. athletic yauth, good-looking
in features, and stout and healthy. but attired in garments be-
ﬁtting his daily occupations of working on the farm. and hung-
ing among themcots alter rabbits and gene. Still. 1 thwght I
would detect in his physlognomy n mind owning better qualities
than his father ever med. Good things lost amid awilder‘
mot weeds. to be sure. whose ranknes far avertopped their
neglected growth: yet. notwithstanding. evidence of a wenlthy
m1, that might yield luxuriant crops under other and favourable
rim Mr. Huthcliﬂ'. I believe. had not treated him
Phle ill: thanks to his fearless nnture. which offered no
lanpmion to that course of oppression: he had none of the
timid susceptibility that would hive given ust to ill‘trentment.
in Hentheliﬂ”: judgment He appeared to have bent his male-
Vdenceon making him a brute: he was never taught to tend or
Itite : never rebuked for any bad habit which did not annoy his
Repel: net-er led a single step towards virtue. or guarded by a
single precept against vice. And from what I hard. Joseph
contributed much to his deterioration. by a nnmwminded
llniality which prompted hint to ﬂutter and pet him, as a boy.
hearse hurls thehend of the old family. And as he had been
in the habit of accusing Catherine brnshaw and Heathcﬂﬁ'.
“In children. of putting the master past his patience, nnd

18: wvmkma HEIGE‘IS.

compelling him to seek solace in drink by what he termed thl
" oﬂ‘alld ways." so at present he hid the whole burden of ﬁll
mn‘s {nults on the shoulders of the usurper of his papery.
the lad swore. he wouldn't correct him: norhom onlpll
he behaved. It gave Joseph satisfaction. nppnrmﬂy. tom
him go the worst lengths : he allowed thlt the lad we: mine
that his swim nhnndoned to padition: but that. herded
that Henrhcliﬁ‘ must answer for it. Hudm's blood wonhl
required at his hands: and there by immense consolation
the: thought. Joseph hnd instilled into him a prided name. I
at his linuge; he would, had he dared, have fostered lt
between him and the present owner of the Heights: but
drud of that owner amounted to superstition; Ind he omit
his feeling: regarding him to muttered innwndnu And .priv
cornminstions. I don‘t pretend to beintimstelynoqnnintedu
the mode of living custnmary in those dnys at Wuther
Heights: I only speak from hearsay: for I m. little '1
villagers aﬁmned Mr. Huthcliﬂ‘ was near, end a cruel h
landlord to his tenants; but the house, inside, h-d regained
ancient espect of comfort under ferrule mnnsgunent, Ind
scene of riot common in Hindiey’s time were not now em:
within is walls. The muster was too gloomy to .Ieek o1
panicnship with any people. good or had: M be is yet.
This. however. is not ranking progress with my smry. 3:
Cathy rejected the peace-oﬁering of the terrier. and dermis
her own dogs, Charlie and thnix. They ante limping. t
hanging their heads ; and we set out for home. sadly out of so
every one of in. I could not wring from my little lady how
had spent the day; accept that. as I supposed. the goal of
pilgrimage was Penistone Cngs; and she arrived without 1dr
mm the gate of the farmhouse, when Hareton hoppened
issue forth. sttended by some canine followa's. uholttndted
mtin. Theyhad asmxrt battle, before theirmen mild sepnt
them : that formed an introduction. Catherine told Hareton I
she was, and where she was going; and asked him to show
the woy: ﬁnally, beguiling him to accompany her. He ope
the mystexis of the Fairy Cave. nnd twenty other queer plan
But, being in disgraee. I was not fnvmued with n ductiptior
as: interesting objects she saw. I could gather, however, I
ha- guide had been I. fovonrite till she hurt his feelings
liaising him as s servnnt; and Hutthcliﬁ's housekeeper h

WUTHERING HEIGHTS 183

exs by calling him her cousin. Then the language hehad held
> be" nnlded in her heart : she who was always "love." and
'darling," and "quest." and “angel.” with everybody at the
hinge, to be insulted so shockingly by n stranger 1 She did not
:mnprebmdit; mdhudworkl had mohtainapromisethatshe
nonld nntley the grievance before her father. I explained how
he objected to the whole household it the Heights. end how
sotryhewould he toﬁnd she had been there; but I insisted
most on the int, that if she revealed my negligence of hisvordets,
hewnnld perhaps be so angry. that I shmtld have tn-lave; and
Cathy owldu’t hear that prospect: she pledged hu- word. and
keptlt, formysih. mm. she wasa sweetlittlegirl.

....

CHAPTER XIX.

ALVA-ml. edged with blank. mnouncedthe day of my master's
nun Isabella. was dead ; and he umole to bid the get mourn-
lugfor his daughter. Ind arrange a room. And other ammmodb—
Mt. for his youthful nephew. Catherine run wild with joy at
the'dea of welcoming her father back ; and indulged mastsam
Elﬁn: antidp-tions of the inning-able emulates of her “real "
WI. The evening of their expected arrival tame Since
Edy Inn-hing. shehadbeenhusyarderingherownsmnlleﬂ’nirs;
Ild m, attired in her nee blank {rods—poor thingl he:r aunt‘s
dull: imprused her with no deﬁnite sorrow—she obliged me, by
mum worrying, to walk with her down through the grounds
in meet them.

"Linton is just six months younger than I am,“ she chattered.
35': strolled leisurely met the swells and hollow: of mossy turf ,
under shadow of the trees. “ How delightful it will he to blue
him {or a playiellowl Aunt hahella sent papa a beeutiful lock
“this hair; it was ling than mine—more ﬂnm, and quite IS
ﬁne. I have it wefullypruerved in a little glass box: end I’ve
ohm thought what pleasure it would be to see its owner. Ohl
Iain happy—end papa. dmr. dear papal Come, Ellen, let us
nut! come. run."

Shem,&udretm-ned and run again. manytims before my
Sober footsteps reached the gate. and then she seated herself on
the my bank haide the path, and tried to wait patiently ; but
that was impclsihle: she couldn't be still a minute.

 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 135

v ldo not know whether it was sorrow for him. but his cousin
Put on as and a countenance as himself. and returned to her
Ether. All three entered, and mounted to the library. where tea
mlaid rady. 1! proceeded to remove Linton's cap and mantle,
Indpheedhim onachairhythe table: but hewu nnsooner
“ted than he began to cry afrah. My master inquired what
wit the matter.

“I can't sit on a chair." stabbed the boy.

“60 to the rota, then. and Ellen shall bring you some tea."
Imered his uncle patiently.

He had been grutly tried during the jountey. I felt convinced.
byhisiretful ailing charge. Linton slowly trailed himself oﬂ‘,
Ind lay down. Cathy carried a footstoel and her cup to his side.
Alﬁrst she sat silent ; but that could not last : she had molved
tn make a pet of her little cousin, as she would have him to he;
Ind the commenced stroking his curls. and kissing his cheek. and
thing him ta in her saucer. like a. baby. This pleased him.
for hewaa not much better: he dried his eyes. and lightened
into a faint smile.

" Oh. he'll do very well." said the master to me. after watching
Iberia minute. “Very well. if we can keep him. Ellen. The
company of a child of his own age will instil new spirit into him
10M. and by wishing for strength he'll gain it."

" Ay. it wean keep him I " I mused to myself: and sore mis-
ﬁvings am over me that there was slight hope of that. And
Ilten. I thought. however will that weakling live at Wutheting
Heights? Between his father and Hareton. what playmates
Indiana/non they’ll be. Our doubts were presently decided
men earlier than I expected. I had just taken the children up-
mirs. after tea was ﬁnished. and seen Linton asleep—he would
Mnﬂametolavehim tillthatwasthecase—l hadeorneduwn.
Ind was standing by the table in the hall. lighting a bedroom
and]: {or Mr. Edgar. when a maid stepped out of the kitchen
and hinrnred me thnt Mr. Hethcliﬂ": Servant Joseph was at the
door, and wirhed to speak with the master.

" I shall ask him what he wants ﬁrst." i said. in considerable
trepidation. “ A very unlikely hour to he troubling people, and

the instant they have returned from a long journey. I don't
think the master can lee him."

Joseph had advanced through the kitchen as I uttered these
words, and new pluented himself in the hall. He was donned

186 wtrmznmo HEIGHTS.

in his Sunday gnnnents. with his most snnctitnonlm and smut
(nee, Ind. holding his hat in one hand and his stick in them.
heprooeededtoclanhisxhouonthemu.

" Good evening, Joseph," I slid coldly. “What has!”
brings you he to-night?"

“ It’s Maister Linton I mun spoke to." beanswened. waving
me disdainfully aside. ~

" Mr. Linton is going to bed: unis: you hove something pu-
ticnlar to say, I'm sure he won't hear it now,” I continued. "You
had better sit down in there. and entrust your mesage to me."

“ Which is his nhm?” pursued the fellow, surveying the
range of closed doors.

I perceived he was bent on refusing my mediation. so u]
reluctantly I went up to the library. and nnnounced the m-
able visitor, advising that he should be dismissed till next day.
Mr. Linton had no time to empower me to do to. form
mounted close at my heels, and, pushing into the npnmnenL
planted himself at the far side of the table, with his two 51!
clapped on the hand or his stick. and began in “dented ton.
as if nuticipating opposition——

" Hathecliff has sent me [or his lad, and l munn’t goo Md
'botit him.”

Edgar Linton was silent n minute : an exprusion ot'enzedin:
sorrow overcast his futures: he would have pitied the child 0?
his own account ; but. recalling Imhelln's hops Ind inns, uni
noxious wishes for her son, and her commendation of him to hit
care, he grieved bitterly at the prospect of yielding him up. W
searched in his heart how it might be avoided. No plnn nﬂem
itself: the wry exhibition of any desire to keep him would hﬂl
rendered the claimant more peremptory: there vns nothing H
but to resign him. However. he was not going to rouse hit!
from his slcup.

“ Tell .\lr. llmthcliﬁ‘," he answered calmly, "thnt his so!
slnll come to Wuthering Heights tovmorrow. He '3 in bed
nnd too tired to go the distance now. You my list) tell bin
that the mother of Linton desired him to remain unki- nu
(turdinnship ; and, at present. his health is very precnrions."

"Hon 1 " said Joseph, giving a thud with his prop on thetlovx
“assuming an authoritative air; " Noni that menus taught
about links non ‘count 0‘ t' mother. nor ye norther: bu
“it his Ind: und I mun ta): him—son now ya knnw E "

wummmc Hmcms. 187

" You shall not to might !" answered Linton deckively.
“Wslk downstairs a! once. and rlpcm w your master what I
hmnid. Ellen. shnw him down. Go"——-

And. Minglhcindigmteldervith Iliﬁhy them.herid
the Icon: dlhim. md closel rhe door.

" Varnh will " shouudjuaph, n he slowly drew all: " To-
uaru, he‘s come hiscln, and thus: 11‘»: our, ifye darr l"

»——

CHAPTER XX.

To olnia‘e the dang»! of this threat being fulﬁlled. Mr. Linton
We]. in: lo uke the boy home early. on Catherine's
My : and, said he—

“As we shall war have no inﬂuence over his dutiny. good
or bid. you mt say nolhing of when: he is gone, to my
daughter: she cannot associate with him hammer. and it is
Met tor he to remain in ignnmnce of his proximity ; is! she
lhmld he MUGSS. mud Inxious'to visit the Heights. Merdy tell
her his lithe t for him suddenly. and he has been obliged to
lave us."

Liam I“ very reluctant to be roused from his bed nl ﬁve
debit. and astonished to be informed than he must prepnre {or
Ember travelling; but I roller-ed ofshe mauer by stating that.
h In gning to spend son): time with his father. Mr. Hurhclilf,
who wished u: see him so much. he did not like to defer Lhe
I'd-In till he should recover from his Lu: journey.

“ My mixer l" he cried. in suuge perplexity. " Manna
mulch-line! lad: falhu. Where does helive? I'd rather
say with uncle."

"Ha live 1 little distance from the Grange," ! replied : “just
5910!!! than hills: not so far, but you may walk over here when
Mp! hearty. And you should be glad to go home. and to
lehim. You must try to love him. as you did your mlher.
and then he will love you."

“him have I am heard of him before?" asked Union.
"Why didn‘t mm: Ind 13: live together. as other people do? "

"He had bulim to keep him in the north," X answered.
"Ind your mother's health required her to reside in the
uh.”

"And why didn't mammn speak to me thou: him?" perse-

188 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

vered thechild. “Sheoﬂentalkedofundgmndlhmtmh
him long ago. How am 1 to love papa? I dm'thnuh'l"

“ Oh. all children love their wants." I hid. "Youruih
perhaszhoughtyouwouldenttobewithhimifshemmitl
him often to you. Let us make haste. An earlyride on.“
beautiful mnrning is rnurh preferable to In hour's me shat'

“ Is .rlzeto go with us." he demanded: "the little girll-
yesterday 2 "

“ Not now," replied L

“ ls uncle?" he continued.

" No. I shall be your companion there," 1 mid.

Linton sank back on his pillow and fell into a brown may. '

" I won‘t go without uncle." he cried at length: “ I un‘tﬂ
where you mean to take me." .

I attempted to persuade him of the naughtinal of shah
reluctance to meet his father; still he ohminntelyrsistdq
prom towards drasing. and I hnd to all for my“!
assistance in coaxing him out ofbed. Thepoor thing!-
ﬁnally got OK. with several delusive assumes that his abs!
should be short; that Mr. Edglr and Cathy would viit It"
and other promisa. equally ill-founded. which I invenculld
reiterated at intervals throughout the way. The pure hath
scented sir, the bright smshine. and the gentle mute of“.
relieved his despondency after a while. He began to putqlb
tions concerning his new home, and its inhnbitnnts. with gm!
interest and livelinas.

" Is Wuthering Heights as plasma 1 place us W
Grunge?" he inquired, turning to take a last gluwe int» the
valley. whenee a light mist mounted and formed a hasty dad
on the skim of the blue.

" It isnotso buried in trees." I replied. "end it is notquilen
large, but you can see the country hautifully Ill round; ad
the air is healthier for you—fresher and dryer. You will. Fr
harps, think the building old and dark at ﬁrst: though it BI
respectable house: the next best in the neighbourhood. M
you wﬂl have such nice mmbla on the moors. Hueton m-
shnw—that is Miss Cathy's other cousin. andso your: in I run-
ner—Mill show you all the sweetest spots: and you an brill
n book in ﬁne weather. and make a green hollow your 5nd,:
nnd. now and then, your uncle may join you in a well: : he that
kcquently, walk out on the hills."

   
  
  

.n

wu-rrrenmc HEIGHTS. 189

"And what ‘u my father like?" he risked. “ Is he as young
Ind handsome as uncle?"
. "He's In young." said I; "but he has black hair and eyes.
Dd looks sterner; and he is taller and bigger altogether. He‘ll
In seem to you so gentle and kind at ﬁrst, perhaps, because it
knot his way: still. mind you, be frank and cordial with him;
ml naturally he’ll be lander of you than any uncle, for you are
Us on."

“ Black hair and eyes ! ” mused Linton. "I can‘t fancy him.
:I'henlam notlilcehirn, am I?"

"Not much," I lnswered: not a. monel. I thought, survey-
Ing with regret the white oomplon and slim frame 04’ my oom-
hnion. and his large languid eyes—his mother’s eys, save that,
labia morbid tomhiuess kindled them a moment. they had
ht: vestige of her sparkling spirit.

"How strange tint he should never come to see momma and
‘l" hemurrnured. "Has he ever soon me) “he hes, I
“I: have been a baby. I remember not a. single thing about

,.

"Why, Master Linton," said I, “three hundred miles is a
.mdktnnce; Ind ten years seem very different in length to a
[on-up person compared with what they do to you. It is
Fohhle Mr. Hathelil‘t‘ proposed going from summer to sum-
-, but never found 1 convenient opportunity; and navy it is
table. Don’t trouble him with questiou on the subject: it
ill disturb him. tor no good."

The boy wu lully occupied with his own cogitaxions {or the
Moder of the ride, till we halted before the farm-house
m late. I wretched to catch his impressions in his counte-
mnoe Hesurveyed the carved from and low-braved lattices.
"Emuling gooeeherry bushes and crooked ﬁrs. with solemn
interim. and then shook his had: his private ieelings entirely
diupprovedoftheexteriorofhis newebode. Buthehud
Sense to postpone complaining: there might be compensation
Iithln. Before he dismounted. I went and opened the door.
has half-pest six; the ternin had just ﬁnished breakfast; the
Irv-tit m ole-ring and wiping down the table Joseph stood
by“: water's chair telling some title concerning I lame horse :
lid Home was prepm'ng hr the hay-ﬁeld.

"Hello. Nelly l ” said Mr. Heathcliﬂ', when he saw me. “I
and I should have to come down no {etch my pmperty

190 WUTHERXNG EDGE“

myself. You've brought it. hatre you? Let us until“
make 0! it."

He got up and strode to the door: Hm Ill 1“
followed in gaping curiosity. Poor Linton run I it.
eye or: the {has of the three

"Sure-1y." said Joseph. after I grave ipemitnl. '
“upped wi' ye. mnister. an' yon‘: his lass l"

Heathcliﬂ‘. having stared his son into an ugue of malt
uttered a scornt‘ul laugh.

"Godl what a. heautyl what alovely, charming thin:
exclaimed. “Haven‘t they reared it on snail: Indian!
Nelly? 0h. damn my soul! but thnt's worse tinan
~¢ndthedevilknowslwasnotsanguinel"

I hid the mhling and bewildaed :hildgetdorn,lnd
He did not thoroughly comprehend the tanning of hit
speech, or whether itwete intended for him : indeed. hen
yet eataln that the grim. sneering stranger“: his ﬁlm
hocking to me with growing trepidation: nndm Mr. 1
did": taking a seat and bidding him " come hither." he]
lane on my shoulder and wept.

"1m. tut I " said Heathcﬂft‘. stretching out u in
dragging him roughly between his lures. Ind then it
up his had bythe chin. "None of that nonsensel
not going to hurt thee. Linton—isn't that thy name?
on thy mother‘s child. entirely! Where is my share it
puling chicken P"

He took off the boy's cap 3nd pushed back his thick
citrls, felt his slender um: and his small lingers; during
examination, Linton cased crying, and lifted his an
eye: to inspect the inspector.

" Do you know me?" asked Heatheliﬁ'. hlving Iﬁsﬁ
self that the limbs were all equally (nil nod feeble

" No." said Linton. with a gaze of vacant tear.

“ You've heard of me, i dare say?"

" No," he replied again.

“Nol What a shameot’ your mother. mentor-ha
Ilinl regard {or met You are my sou. then. i’ll tell you

mother was A wicked slut to leave you in ignorance
sort of father you postssed. Now. don‘t wince. Ind cola
Though it it something to see you have not white blood.
and M; and ill do {or you. Nelly. if you be tired yo

WU'IBERING HEIGHTS. )9!

sit down: if not, get home again. I gums you'll report what
you hear and see to the cipher at the Grange; and this thing
won't be satled while you linger about it."

"Well." replied l, "I hope you‘ll be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliﬂ’. or you'll not keep him long; and he‘s all you have
akin in the wide world, that you will ever know—rem ."

" I'll he very kind to him, you needn't fear." he said. laughing.
" Only nobody else mist be kind to him : I’m jealous of mono-
polis‘ng his Meet-ion. And. to begin my kindnss, Joseph, bring
the lad some brakinst. Haretan. you infernal calf, hegnne to
your work. Yes, Nell." he added. when they had departed,
" my son is prospective owner of your place. and I should not
wish himtodie tillIwns certainof'being his snnessor. Be-
sides. he's min. and I want the triumph of seeing my descendant
hirly lord of their estntes : my child hiring their children to till
their father's lands for waga. That is the sole consideration
whidz can make me endure the whelp : l dewise him for himself,
and hate him for the memories he revives 1 But that considera-
tion is Went: he's as safe with me, and shall he tended as
carefully as yonrmastertends his own. I have a room upstairs.
furnished for him in handsome style: I've engaged a tutor.
also. to come three times a week. from twenty miles distance.
to teach him what he pleasa to learn. I've ordered Haremn to
obey him; and in fact I've arranged everything with a view to
pram-re the superior and the gentleman in him. nhovve his
associates. I do regret. however. that he so little dserves the
trouble: if I wished any blessing in the world. it WAS to ﬁnd
him a worthy object of pride; and I'm bitterly disappointed
with the whey-heed whining wretch ! "

While he was speaking, Joseph returned hearing a basin of
milhvpon'ldge. and placed it before Linton ; who stiﬂed round
the handy m with a look of aversion, and aﬁn-ned he could
not at it. I saw the old man-servant shared largely in his
masters sear-n of the child: though he was compelled to retain
the remit-neat in his heart, because Hmtheliﬂ plainly meant h's
outlet-tings to hold him in honour.

“Cannot ate it?” repented he. peering in Linton's Tone. and
snhdning his voice to a whisper. for fear of being overheard.
"But Maister Harexon nivir ate naught else. when he wer 9.
little um; and what \ver gooid eneugh for him's gooid enmgh
for ye. 1's myther think 1 "

192 manna mans.

“I siu': an i:!"a.usu-:ml Enron snapp'nhly. "Tahi
m’ ' L

l.. aghs'mxied uprhebnd indignanﬁy. and Milton

“Etheaughl :f-s lh' WE'healhd. thrusting"!
mynuderﬂmlhciifs nose.

"W‘klshmﬂdaﬂthm?"hsid.

“WEI!” answeredjoseph, "you hinge-pays hen-ml
ate '21 Ex: I guts: it's night! Hismotheriujuﬁsoe—n
ma'rnnst toomuckymsawt'enmfarmkkinghzhrud”

" Dan't mention his mother to an,” said them-Illa].
"dethiur something that he can at. thl's all. Whnlshis
mu: food. Nelly?"

Isuggrsted h1edmikorlen;undlhehonsebzperreeeimd
instructions to prepare some. Came. I reﬂected. his W5
selﬁshnes my conm'blne to his mien. He perede his
deﬁcit: constitution. and [he My“ unlinng tow].
I'll console Mr. Edgar by acquaiuu'ng him will: the [urn Hm
clill's humourhzsuheu. Havingmacusebrlinga’inglmﬂ
I slipped out. while Union wasenglged intiidly rebuﬁuglh
adumsol‘afriendlysheep-dog. Buthenlloomhmﬂ!
almlohechalrd: aslelosed the door. I [Indium-Ml
frantic repetition of the worth—

"Dun'tleaveme! l'llnotsuyhrrel l'llnotsuyheul"

Then the latch was raised Ind fell: theydid hula-maﬁa”
melonh. I mounted hlinny. and urged haw Mm: Ind
somy brief guardianship ended.

 

-—u—-

CHAPTER XXI.

\Vr'. had sud work with little Cathy that day: she rule in high
sleet mger to join her cousin. and such pasionm Ian ind
lamentalions followed the news of his departure. (ht Edgar him-
self wasobliged to soothe her. by aﬁrming he should come luck
soon: he added, however, "if! tan get him;" and there we“
no hope of that. This promise poorly paciﬁed her: but time
was more potent: and though still at intervals she inquired of
her lather when Linton would return, helm she did see him
Igain his futures had waxed so dim in her memory that she
did um recognise him.

When I chanced to encounter the housekeeper of Wutbering

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 193

Ieights, in paying brainless-visits to Ginunerton. I used to risk
low the young master got on : for he lived almost as secluded as
iatherlne herself, and was never to he seem I could gather from
«at that he continued in wuk health. and was a tlrmrne inmate.
She said Mr. Heatheliﬂ' seemed to dislike him ever longer and
tone. though he took some trouble no concul it: he had an
.ntipnthy to the sound of his voice. and could not do At nil with
tis sitting in the same room with him many minutes together.
rhet'e seldom passed much tnlk between them : Linton learnt his
Essen: end spent his evenings in a. small apartment they called
he parlour: or else lay in bed all day: for he was constantly
letting caught. Ind colﬂ, and aehs. and pains of some sort.

"And I never knew such it faint-hurled ctuture." added the
Iran-n: " nor one sa careful ofhisseln. He willgo on, i” leave
the window open a bit late in the evening. Oh I it's killing! it
hath of night air! And he must have a ﬁre in the middle of
mater; nnd J oseph‘s bacca pipe is poison : and he must always
have sweets and dainties, and always rnillt, milk for ever—heed-
ing naught how the rest of us are pinched in winter; and there
he'll sit. wnpped in his furred cloak in his chair by the ﬁre. with
92m: toast Ind wnter UI’ ether slap on the hub to sip at : null if
Hanan, fur pity. comes to amuse him—Harmon is not had-
mlnnd. though he's much—they're sure to pert. one swearing
lldlhe other crying. I believe the master would relish Earn-
Shv‘s thrashing him to a mummy. it he were not his son ; end
“a certain he would be ﬁt to turn him out of doors. if he knew
lull the musing he gives hisseln. But then. he won't go into
danger of temptation: he never enters the parlour, and should
Lintnn show those way: in the house where he is. he sends him
“will! directly."

ldivined, from this account, thnt utter lack of sympathy had
rwidens-i young Hentheliﬂ selﬁsh and disagremhle. if he were
mnmiginnlly ; and my interest in him. oousequently. decayed :
though still I was moved with I sense of grief at his lot. and a.
"BI! that he had been left with us. Mr. Edgnr encouraged me
“plaintormntion: he thought I great deal shout him. I fancy.
Ind would have run some risk to see hint : and he told me once
10 ask the housekeeper whether he ever came into the village?
Shenid he had only been twice. on hersehaelt, accompanying
his (Ither. Ind both time he pretended to be quite knocked up
l0! three or {our days afterwnrds. That hunselteeper left. in

u

194 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.
recollect rightly, two years after he came: and maths. when
1 did not know. we: her successor: she lives the-e still.

Time wore on at the Grange in in former pie-sot 'ly. til
Miss Cathy ruched sixteen. 0n the anniverwa hr: birth“
never manifested any signs of rejoicing. been” it wee-lead:
ulnivernnry of my late mistras's death. Her fathu- mini-Hy
spent that day alone in the library; and walked. I: M. ssh
u Gimmerton kirkyard, where he would {reqnmly prdqhit
stay beyond midnight. Therefore Catherine was thmn on her
own mounts forminsement. Thisaoth ofMarehvaIIhunti-
i'ul spring day. and when her father had retired. my'mhdy
came down dressed for going out. and slid she asks! to here
u nimble on the edge of the moor with me: Mr. Linton had
given her leave, if we went only a short distance and mild
within the hour.

“80 make haste, Ellen !" she cried. " I know whetelv'nll
toga; where ncolonyol moor garnearesettled: I wanton
whether they have made their nests yet."

" Thnt must be a. good distanee up." I answered: “ Ill!
don't breed on the edge of the moor."

" No, it's not." she said. “I've gone very near with ppI.’

I put on my bonnet and sallied out, thinking nothing named
the matter. She hounded before me. had retwnd to my side.
and was oﬂ' ngain like: young greyhound ; and, It tint. I found
plenty ot‘ entertainment in listening to the larks singing it led
near. nnd enjoying the sweet, warm sunshine : and watching ha.
my pet. rind my delight, with her golden ringlets ﬂying bole
behind, nnd her bright cheek, as soft and pure in is bloom u 5
wild rose, and her eyes mdiant with clondless pheaeure. She
was a happy creature. and an angel, in those days. It's I pity
she could not be content.

“ Well." said I. " whete are your moor-gum. M‘s Cathy?
We should be at them: the Grange perk-fem» is n greet nay
off now."

"Oh. rt little further—only | little further. Ellen." 'IS her
answer continually. " Climb to that hillock. pas tint bank,
and by the time you reach the other side I shall have raisai
ﬁle birds.“

But there were so many hillndu and banks toclimh Ind pass.
that, at length. I began to be weary. and told her we must hair,
and rclmcc our steps. I shouted to her, as she had amtripped

WUTHERING 3121161115. [95

me u long way: she either did not bar or did not regard, for
she still spun; on, and I was compelled to follow. Finally. she
dived into n hollow; and before 1 came in sight of her again,
she was two miles mm Wuthering Heights than her own
home ; old I beheld: coupleof persons arrest her. one of whom
I hit convinced was Mr. Huthcliﬂ himself.

Cathy had been caught in the fact of plundering, or. at least,
hunting out the nests of the grouse. The Heights were Heath-
diﬂ's land. ind he was reprovlng the poneher.

"l've neitha' taken any not found any." she said, Is I tailed
to them. expending her hands in corroboration of the statement.
“I didn't mean to take them; but papa told me there were
qmntities up here. and I wished to see the eggs.”

Hmtheliﬂ' glanced at me with an ill-meaning smile. exprssing
his loqnnintanoe with the party, and. consequently. his male-
volence townrds it. and demanded who " papa " was?

"Mr. Linton of Thntshcross Grange.“ she replied. “ I
thought you did not know me, or you wouldn‘t have spoken
in that way."

“ You suppose papa is highly steamed nnd Iespected then?"
he snld magically.

“And what are yon?" inquired Catherine. gazing enriomly
on the WI. " That man I've swn before. Is he your son?"

She pointed to Hareton. the other individual. who had gained
nothing but inmsed hulk end strength by the addition of two
yet: to his nge : he seemed as nwkwnrd and rough as ever.

" Miss Cathy," l interrupted, “ it will be three hams instead
of one thnt we are ant. presently. “’e really must go back."

" No, that man is not my son." answered Heatheliﬂ’, pushing
me aside. “ But I have one. and you have seen him before too ;
and, though your nurse is in a hurry, I think both you and she
would he the better for a little rest. Will you just turn this nab
oi hath, nnd walk into my house? You'll get home earlier for
the use; and you shall receive a kind welcome."

[whispered Cntherine that she mustn't. on any uoonnt, nooede
to the proposal: it was entirely out of the queslion.

“\Vhy?" she asked. aloud. “ I‘m tired of running. end the
gmdis dewy: I mn‘t sit here. Let us go. Ellen. Besides.
bony: I have-seen his son. He’s mistaken, i think ; but I guess
when he lives: at the tam—house I visited in coming from
Penistone Cmgs. Don't you ?"

1% WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

“ I do. Come. Nelly. hold your tongue—it will he s tleat it!
her to look in on us. Hareton. get forwuds with the lass. You
shall walk with me. Nelly."

" No, she's not going to any such place," I cried. small“
torelusemynrm. whichhehnd salted: but shew almastll
the door-stones already, soampering round the hour It humped
Her appointed companion did not pretend to «cart her: heshiel
oﬁ'by the road-side. and vanished.

" Mr. Heuthelil'f. it's very wrong." I continued : "you but
you mean no good. And there she‘ll see Linton, and olivile
told as soon as ever we return: and I shall hnve the blame"

“ I want her to see Linton." he answered: " he’s Iooltinghdu
these few days : it‘s not often he's ﬁt to heseen. And we‘llsomI
persuade her to keep the visit secret: whae is the harm of it?”

" The harm of it is, that her father would hate me if hefmd'l
suﬂered her to enter your house; nnd I not oonvineed you have
shed design in encouraging her to do so," I replied.

" My disign is as honut as possible. I'll inform you of its
whole scope." he said. " Thnt the two eonsins may [all in Ian.
and get married. I'm acting generously to your master: his
young chit has no expectations, Ind should she seoond my wishes.
she'll be provided for at once as joint successor with Linton."

“ If Linton died." Ianswered, "and his life is quite uncertain.
Catherine would be the heir."

“ No, she would not," he said “There is no chime in the will
to secure it so: his property would go to me; but. to prevail
disputes. I daire their union. and am resolved to bring it nhouL"

"And I'm resolved she shall never approach your house with
me ngain," I returned, as we reached the gate. where Miss CIM
waited our coming.

Heathcliﬂ‘ bade me be quiet: and, preceding us up the path.
hastened to open the door. My young lady gave him seven“
looks. as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to
think of him; but now he smiled when he met her eye. and
softened his voice in nddresing her; and I was foolish enough
to imagine the memory of her mother might disarm him from
desiring her injury. Linton stood on the hearth. He had been
out walking in the ﬁelds. for his cnp was on. and he was ailing
to Joseph to bring him dry sham He had grown toll of his 936.

still wanting some months of sixteen. His {anus were pretty
yet. and his eye and complexion brighter than I rememtmrd

wurnznma HEIGHTS. 197

hem, though with merely temporary lustre bot-rowed from the
alnhrious air Ind genial sun.

" Now, who is tint?" asked Mr. Hnthclin'. turning to
My. “Can you tell?"

"Your son?" she said, having doubtfully surveyed. ﬁrst one
md then the otha.

“ Ya. yes." uswernd he: " but is this the only tirneyou lntve
)eheldhimP Thinkl Ah] youhaveashort memory. Linton.
inn‘t you recall your cousin, that you used to tease us so with
ﬁshing to see?"

"What, Linton l " cried Cathy. kindling into joyful surprise
it the name. "II that littleLinton? He‘s taller than 1 mil
\re you Linton? "

The youth stepped forward. and acknowledged himself : she
:issed him fervently. and they gazed with wonder I! the change
ime had wrought in the appennnee of each. Catherine had
mnhed her full height; her ﬁgure was both plump and slender,
lastic as steel. end her whole aspect sparkling with health and
pirits. Linton's looks and movements were very languid. end
is form extremely slight : but then was a grace in his manner
hat mitigated these defects. and rendered him not unpleasing.
\ﬂer exchanging numerous marks of fondness with him. his
'nusin went to Mr. Huthcliﬂ'. who lingered by the door.
lividing his attention between the objects inside end those that
ﬂy without: pretending. that is. to observe the latter. and
rally noting the tanner llone.

“And you are my uncle, then!" she cried, reaching up to
ﬁlm: hint. “I thought i liked yen. though you were cross at
ﬁrst. Why don't you visit at the Grange with Linton? To live
all thee years such close neighbours. and never see us. is odd:
lint hnve you done so for?"

" I visited it once or twice too oﬂen before ynu were born," he
turned. " There—dunn it I Ifyou have any kisses to spare,
give them to Linton: they are thrown away on me."

"Naughty Ellen l " exclaimed Catherine, ﬂying to Attack me
but with her lavish caresss. “ Wicked Ellen l to try to hinder
me from entering. But I'll take this walk every naming in
inane: may I, uncle? and sometimes bring pupa. Won't you
be llad tn see us?"

“01' nournel" replied the uncle. with n hardly suppressed
tritium. mulling from his deep aversion to both the proposed.

198 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

visitors. " But stay," he continued. turning towards the young
lady. " Now I think of it. I’d better tell you. Mr. Lian
aprejudioengnlnstme: weqlutrrelledntone timode
withunchristinn ferocity: and. ifyou mention comingheretolill.
he'll put 1 veto on your visits altogether. Tha’elvre. you must
not mention it. unltss you he careless of seeing you-Mink!-
after: you my come, if you will. but you must not mama it'

"Why did you quarrel?" asked Catherine. conside
Mien,

" He thought me too poor to wed his sister," answered Hath-
cliﬂ', "and was grieved that I got her: his pride was hurt. and
he'll never forgive it."

"'I‘hat's wrongl" said the young lady: "some mu. 11H!“
him so. But Linton and I have no share in your quneL 111
not come here. then; he shall come to the Grange."

" It will be too far for me." murmured her coun'n: "tooth
four miles would kill me. No, come here. Miss Comet-inc, m
and then: not every morning. but once or twice a. week."

The father launched towards his son a glance of bitla
contempt.

" I am afraid. Nelly. I shall lose my labour," he muttered It
me. " Miss Catherine. as the ninny calls her. will discover if
value, and send him to the devil. Now. if it had been Homo“
-Do you know that. twenty limes a day, I covet Hareton.wid
all his degrndntion? I‘d have loved the lad had he hen saw
one else. But I think he's safe from her love. I’ll pit hin
against that paltry creature. unless it bestir itself briskly. “1
calcium: it will smrcely last till it is eighteen. 0h, oonfonﬂl
the rapid thing! He‘s absorbed in drying his feet. and new
looks at hen—Linton I"

" Yes. father." answered the boy.

" Have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere nboul
not even in rabbit or n wmsel's nest? Take her into thegnrdeﬂ
before you change your shoes: and into the stable to see yo“
horse."

"Wouldn't you rather sit here?” asked Linton. nddreﬁiﬂ:
Cathy in a tone which expressed reluctance to move ngnin.

"I don't know," she replied. casting l. longing look to ill
door, and evidently eager to be active.

He kept his seat. and shrank closer to the ﬁre. Heathcliﬂ'ms‘
end went into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard. tall-ill;

WTHERING HEIGHTS. 199

Huston. Herero-i responded, and presently the more»
The young man had been washing himself. a: who
1y the glow on his cheeks and his vetted hair.
I'll nkyn. uncle." cried Miss Cathy. recollecting the
eps’s assertion. “ That is not my cousin. is he? "
." bereplied. " your mother's nephew. Don't you like

rine looked queer.
ie not a handsome lad?” he continued.
uncivll little thing stood on tiptoe. and whispered a
: in Heatheliﬂ’e ear. He laughed ; Haretoo dammed :
ved he we: very sensitive to suspected ﬂights. Ind had
y n dim notion of his inferiority. Ext his mastu- or
1 chased the frown by exelairning—
’1] he the favourite among us. Hereton l She says you
What was it? Well. something very ﬂattering. Here!
vith her round the farm. And behave like a gentleman.
Don't use any bid words; and don‘t sure when the
rdy is not looking at you. end be ready to hide your faee
e is; and. when you speak. any your words slowly. and
.II' hands out of your pockets. Be oﬂ'. end entertain hu-
7 us you can."
itched the couple walking past the window. Earnshatv
eountenanee completely evened from his companion.
led studying the familiar landscape with A stranger's and
,'s interst. Catherine took a sly look at him. expressing
Imitation. She then turned her nttention to seeking out
)f amusement for herself, and tripped merrily on. lilting
a supply the lack of conversation.
tied his tongue," observed Heatheliﬁ'. “ He‘ll not
a single syllable, all the timel Nelly. you recollect me
e—nny. some years younger. Did I ever look so stupid :
mless.’ as Joseph cells it?"
use." I replied. “ because more sullen with it."
a plane in him." he continued. reﬂectingnloud. “ He
sﬁed my expectations. If he were A born fool i should
y it halfso much. But he's no fool : and I can sympa-
:li ell his feelings. having felt them myself. I know what
,1 now. for instance. metly: it is merely n beginning
he shell suffer. though. And he‘ll never be able to
from his bathe: ofconrseness and ignorance. I've got

200 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

him faster than his soonndtel of: father leaned me. end lower
for he takes I pride in his hrntishnm I‘ve taught him town
everything utm-lnimll Is silly and Ink. Don't m thin]
Hindleywouldhe proudofhissan. il'heeouldsee him? All!!!
nsproudns lama! mine. But thae's this dilemma; nne't
gold put to the Iue of paving-stones. and the other is tin pdisli
to ape 1 service of sliver, Mine has nothing valuable Mil
yet I shall havethenieritol' melting it (on: in! Is mnhpw
stud‘ can go. Hi: had ﬁrst-rule qualitiu. and they Ire lol
rendered worse than unavailing. l have nothing to reglu: I
would have more than any but I are aware of. And the b6
of it is, Harmon is dnmnuhly fond of me I You'll own that I'm
out-mtched Hindley there. If the dead villain could rig in
his grave to abuse me for his oﬂ'spring’s wrongs, I should lIlVI|
the fun of Seeing the said aBpi-ing light him back ngni-n. indit
nunt that he should dare to rail at the one friend he has it
the world l "

Heathclil‘t' chuckled n ﬁendish laugh at the iden. I madam
reply. because I saw that he expected none. Mantime. outwit
companion. wha sat too removed Irons us to hear whatwns Hid
began tu evince symptoms of uneasiness. probably repeating thl
he had denied himself the treat of Catherine's society (or {an
a little fatigue. His father remarked the restless glances Vanda
ing to the window, and the hand ins/eluter extended toward
his cap.

“Get up, you idle boy !" he exclaimed, with assumed hem
ness. “ Away after them! they are just at the corner, by ll:
stand of hives."

Linton gathered his energies. and left the hearth. The lull:
was open. and, Is he stepped out. 1 hard Cathy inquiringof he
unsociable attendant, what was that inscriptian over the duo!
Harmon stared up. and scratched his head like a true clown.

" it's some damnahle writing." he answered. " I untu
reed it."

“ Can't read it? " cried Catherine ; " I can read it : it‘s Englisl
hit I want to know why it is there."

unton giggled : the ﬁts! appearance of mirth he llld. exhibited

" He dos not know his letters." he said to his cousin. " Coll!

believe in the existence of such a colossal duneer"

"II he all Is he should be?“ asked Miss Cathy seriously

a. in be simple: not right? I've questioned him twice no:

51 u): 'I'

nunvna

n

on

....‘1-

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 20!
and with time he looked so stupid I think he do: not understand
me. I can hardly understand Itior. I'm sun: I "

Linton repeated his laugh. nnd glanced st Hnreion hauntingly;
who ceruinly did not seem quite clear of comprehension at that
moment.

“Time's nothing the matter but lazinns; is there. Enni-
Ilnw?" he said. My eous‘m {Andes you are an idiot. There
ya: experience the consequence oi“ seaming ‘boolr-luning.‘
Is you would say. Hue you noticed, Catherine. his frightful
Ywhhire pronunciation?"

"Why, where the devil is the use on't?" growled Hueton.
moreJeody in answering his daily companion. He was nbout

In enlnge further, but the two youngstets broke into a noisy ﬁt
If Inen'lnient: my giddy miss being delighted to discover that
she might tum his strange talk to matter of amusement.

“Where is the use of the devil in that sentence?" littered
Union. “ Pepe told you not to say any bad words. and you
can't open your mouth without one. Do try to behave like it
mﬂemn. now dol "

"It thou weren't more a lass than a lad, I‘d fell thee this
minute, I would; pitiful lath of n crotcrl" retorted the angry
boar. retreating. while his face burnt with mingled urge rind
notiﬁcation; for he was conscimu of being insulted. and em-
barrassed how to resent it.

Mr. Heatth having overheard the conversation. as well as
l. railed when he saw him go; but immediately afterwards cast
ﬂank of singular aversion on the ﬂith pair. who remained
chattering in the doorway: the hay ﬁnding animation enough
While discussing Hareton’s faults and deﬁciencies, and relating
War h‘u goingyon; and the girl relishing his pert and
ivitu‘ul sayings. without considering the ill-nature they evinced.
I begin to dislike. more than to compassionate Linton. and to
nurse his father. in some measure, [or holding him cheap.

We stayed till afternoon: I could not tar Miss Cathy nwny
Sooner: but happily my master had not quitted his apartment,
Ind remained ignorant of our prolonged absence. As we wnlkcd
honte,l would {sin have enlightened rny chnrge on the char-
mer: of the people we had quitted ; but she got it into her head
lhlt I was prejudiced ngolnst them.

"Ah-l" the cried, "ya: take pnpa's side. Ellen: you me
Mill I know: or else you wouldn't have chanted me so many

G 2

202 WUTHERING HEIGH’IS.

years into the notion that Linton lived I long wnyfmnhen
I‘m really extremely angry ; only I'm so pleased I isn't she“
But you mm! hold your tongue-bout my uncle: he's Iryum’t
remanber: and I'll scold pop- [or gnu-telling with him.“

And so she ran on. till I relinquished the endeavour incl
viuoeherothermishke. Shedidnotmaitionthevisitth
night, m she did not see Mr. Linton. Nm dly itd
«meant. sadlyto my clugrin; and still I we: notnhngnh
sorry : I thought the burden ofdirecting and warning IIth
more eﬁeicntly borne by him than me. But he \nsmrn‘n‘
in giving satisfactory rusons for his wish that eh shouldshl
connection with the household of the Heights. nnd Cnthuinelih
good reasons forenrynstmintthnthnnssedhepettedvﬂl.

" hips l " she exclaimed. liter the morning’s m
"guess whom I saw yesterday. in my wllk on the moon. N
papa. you startedl you've not done right. hove you, new?
saw—But listen. and you shall henr how I found you out; a
Ellen, who ‘5 in league with you. and yetpretended to pity:
so. when I kept hoping. and was always disappoimed aho
Linton's coming back l "

She gave I faithful account of her exqusion end its can
queues; and my master. though he cut more than one!
proacth look at me. said nothing till she had concluded. Tb
he drew her to him. and asked if she knew why he Ind no
ccalcd Linton's near neighbourhood from her. Could she thin
it was to deny her a plusure that she might harmlesst enjoy

" It was heuuse you disliked Mr. Heathcliﬁ'." she answer:

" Then you believe I care more for my own feelings tinn you!
Cathy?" he said. " No. it was not because I disliked M
Heatheliff. but because Mr. Heathcliﬂ’ dislikes me: end is
most diabolical mnn, delighting to wrong nnd ruin Ihnul
hates. if they give him the slightut opportunity. I lutewth
you could not keep up an acquaintance with your cousin, wit
out being brought into contact with him ; and I lmew he '0!
data you on my account; so for your own good. and Milk
else, 1 took precautions that you should not see Hmong-ll
I meant to explain this some time as you grew older, And 1"
sorry I delayed it."

" But Mr. Heathclii‘f was quite cordial. papa." ohservr
Catherine, not at all convinced; "and he didn't object tom
seeing each other: he snid I might come to his house what

wu'mmma r-ruams. 203

M; onlylmnstnot tell you. hemmeyunhldqumelled
with him, and would not forgive him for nmrryingaunt lsahella.
And you won’t. Yul ere the one to be blamed: he is willing
Inlet n: be friemk. et least; Linton and I : and you are not."

My master, perneiving that she would not take his word fer
landﬁll-law‘s evil disposition. gave a hasty sketch of his con-
dnato Inhelh. Ind the manner in which Wutheriug Heights
beanie his property. He could not hear to diser long upon
the topic: for though he spoke little of it. he still felt the same
lunar utd demtion of his ancient enemy that hadotxupled
his hurt ova- sinee Mn. Linton’s death. "She might have
hen living yet. if it had not been for him!" was his constant
bitter reﬂection ; end, in his eyes. Heathch seemed n murderer.
Miss Cathy-conversant with no bad deeds except her own slight
has of dhobedimoe. injustice, and passion. arising from hot
temper and thaughtlumss, and repented of on the day they
were committed—m amazed II the blackness of spirit that
mold brand on [Dd cova- revenge for years. utd deliberately
pro-acute its plan: without a visilntion of remorse. She up
[and so deeply imprmed Ind shocked at this new View of
hm “Walled from nll her studies and all her ideas
ﬁlm—unit Mr. Edgar deemed it unnecessary to pursue the
whim. He merely added——

“Yum will know hereafter. darling. why I wish you to avoid
hit but: Ind may ; My! return to your old emplayments and
alumna. Ind think no more shout them."

Catherine kissed her father nnd sat down quietly to her lessons
for n couple of hours. wording to custom; then she uncom-
hlnied him into the grounds, and the whole day passed unsunl :
lm in the evening. when she had retired to her room. and I went
tohelp her to undrss. l {mind her crying. on her knees by the
halide.

"0h. ﬁe. silly child I " I exclaimed. "If you had any real
M. you'd be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrnriety.
Yum Ind um: shadow of lubaantial sorrow, Miss Catherine.
Suppose. for a minute. that master Ind l were dead. and you
“I! by ymmelf in the world: how would you feel then? Com-
Fﬂ! the praent oomsinn with such an nﬂiiction as that, and he
Mﬂul for the friends you hnve, instad of coveting more."

"I'm not crying for myself, Ellen," she answered, "it's for
him. He expected to see nu: again tomorrow. and there he‘ll

204 W‘UTHERING HEIGHTS.

be so disappointed: and he'll wait for me. and I shln'l
come ! "

"Nonsense," said I, "do yon imagine he has thought.
muehof you as you haveof him? Hasn't he Hm bu
companion? Not one in A hundred would weep at lain;-
relntion they had just seen twice. for two afternoons Um
will conjecture how it is. and trouble himself no fuﬂher shall
you."

“ But my I not write a. note to tell him whyI cannot com”
she asked, rising to her feet. “And just send those hooks!
promised to lend him? H‘s hooksarenotu nioeaslninennd
he wanted to have them extremely. when I told him bovine
resting they were. May I not. Ellen?"

“ No, indeedl no. indeed I " replied I, with decision. "Tl!!!
he would write to you. and there'd never he an end of it. NA
Miss Catherine. the acquaintance must be dropped entirely: l
papa expects, and I shall see that it is done."

“ But how can one little note"— she recommced, pntt'wl
on an imploring countenance.

"Silence I“ I interrupted. “ We‘ll not begin with yourliﬂl
notes. Get into bed."

She threw at me a very naughty look. so naughty that I null
not kiss her good-night at first : I covered her up. and shut ht
door. in great displeasure; hut, repeating half-wny. I m
softly. and 10! there was this standing at the tnble withabi
of blank paper before her and a pencil in her hand, which sll
guiltin slipped out ofsight. on my entrance.

" You'll get nobody to take that. Catherine." I said. “if yo
write it; and at present 1 shall put out your candle."

I set the extinguisher on the ﬂame, receivingas i did so ash
on my hand. and a petulant " Cross thing i " 1 then quitledh!
again, and she drew the bolt in one of her worst, most peevis
humours. The letter was ﬁnished and forwarded to its denim
tion byn milk-fetcher who came from the village: hut that
didn't learn till some time nﬁerwnrds. Weeks passed on. III
Cathy recovered her temper; though she grew wondrous {ml
of stealing 05‘ to corners by herself : and often, if I came Ia
her suddenly while reading. she would start and bend overth
book. evidently dairous to hide it: nnd l detected edgﬁ t
loose paper sticking out beyond the leaves. She also got attic
of coming down early in the morning and lingering about 11'

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 205

as if she were expecting the arrival of something: and
a small drawer in a cabinet in the library, which she
the over for hours. and whose key she took special care
1: when she left it.
ay, as she inspected this drawer, I observed that the
gs. and trinkets which recently formed its contents, were
.ed into bits of folded paper. My curiosity and suspi-
‘cnroused ; I determined to take a peep at her mysterious
.; so. at night, as soon as she and my master were safe
I stitched and rudin found among my homekeys
would ﬁt the lock. Having opened. I emptied the
)ntenls into my apron, and took them with me to en.
ieisure in my own chamber. Though I could not but
1 was still surprised to discover that they were a mass
penitence-daily almost, it must hove been—from Linton
ﬂ‘: answers to documents forwurded by her. The
ated were embarrassed and sham gradually. however,
anded into copious love letters. foolish. as the age of
:r rendered natuml. yet with touches hero and there
:hought were borrowed from s. more experienced source.
them struck meas singularly odd compounds of nrdour
as; commencing in strong feeling. and concluding in
zed, wordy style that a schoolboy might use to u fnncied.
:nl sweetheart. Whether they satisﬁed Cathy. I don't
mt they appeared very worthless trash to me. After
wer as mnny as I thought proper, I tied them in a hand-
nnd set them aside. revlocking the vncnnt drawer.
ing her habit, my young lady descended early, and
re kitchen: I watched her go to the door. on the arrival
tin little boy; Ind. while the dairy-maid ﬁlled his can.
:d something into his jacket pocket. and plucked some
1. I went round by the garden, and laid wait for the
3r; who fought valorously to defend his trust. and we
milk between us; but I succeeded in nhstractingtbe
and. threatening serious consequean if he did not
12 home. I remained under the wall and peruSed Miss
tﬂ'ecrionate composition. It wns more simple and more
than her cousin's; very pretty and very silly. I shook
. and went meditating into the horse. The day being
could not divert herself with rambling about the pork:
to conclusion of her morning studies, she resorted to

306 wu-runnmo HEIGHTS.

the solace of the drawer. Her father sat reading at the tabll
and I. on purpose. had sought u bit of work in some unrippt
fringes of the window curtain, keeping my eye starlin ﬁxedo
her proceedings. Never did any bird flying hock to nplundat
nut which it had left hrimful of chirping young ones. explu
more complete despair in its anguished ed: and Running!
thnu she by her single " Oh l" end the change that umﬂzm
her late happy countenance. Mr. Linton looked up.

“What is the matterr love? Have you hurt yoursell?” herald

His tone and look assured her kehnd not been the disoovu!
of the hoard.

“Nomapal” shcgasped. “Ellenl Ellen! oomeupstn'un-
I'm sick 1 "

I obeyed her summons. and accompanied her out.

“ Oh, Ellen! you have got them." she commenced immediakﬂ)
dropping on her knees. when we were enclosed Alone. “ Oh. :i‘
then to me. and I‘ll never. never do so ngnin l Don't lell pool
You have not told papa, Ellen? say you have not? I'vebe¢
exceedingly naughty. but I won't do it any more l"

With a grave severity in my manner. I bade ht: stand up.

I‘ So," 1 exclaimed, " Miss Catherine. younre tolunhly for on
it seems: you may well be ashamed of theml A ﬁne bundlm
tmh you study in your leisure hours, to be sure : why. it‘s got
enough to be printed I And what do you suppose the mnstervl
think. when I displayit before him? I hnven't shown it yet. b
you needn't imagine I shall keep your ridiculous Secrets. F:
:hnmel and you must have led the way in writing such Ilsa
dime: he would not have thought of beginning. I'm eeruin."

" I didn't! I didn't!" sobbed Cathy. ﬁt to breek he be]!
“I didn't once ihink of loving him till"-——

"Loving!" cried L as soornfully as I could utter them
"Lgving/ Did anybody ever hear the like I I might just i
vdl talk of loving the miller who coma once a year to buy at
m Pretty loving. indeed I and both times together you hm
m Linton hardly four hours in your life] Nowhue is tl

trash. I'm going with it to the library; and we'll 51
ﬁt your {other ssys to such loving."

ﬂowing at her precious epistlu. but I held them above!»
”; nod then she poured out further frantic entrentia the!
d bun them-do anything rather than show them. An
u sully fully as much inclined to laugh as scold—Jot

WIRING HEIGHTS. 207

Muﬂghﬂshnnity—latlmgthulmtedinnm.
In! asked—-

“I” muobumthm,vmyouptmkefulthfully, neithe
alndnu'neeivealemminmotubookﬂotl perceiveyou
Inlanth books), ant-locks a! hull. nor rings. nor phythlngs?‘

" We don't send phylltings l " aid Catherine. her pride over-
:uning he llama.

"Nor anythingnt Ill, than. my I said. “ Unlcs you
will. he I go.”

"lpmlsc,Ellatl" theta-ha, atehingtnydlm " 0h. put
them in the ﬁre. do, do!"

But-haul pmaededlnopenupluewith me pohﬁJhe
sacriﬁce wu too painful to be me. She carnatly mpplimted
:hat I would spare he: one or two.

"Oneortwo. Eliza, (cheep forljntnn'ssml"

l unbound the hm, Ind commenced dropping them
.1: from an angle. and the ﬂame curled up the chimney.

"! will have one, yottcmzl wretchf' sh: summed. darting
hie-hand imn the ﬁle. Ind dnwing furth some hall—mutilated
inguinal. It til expats: of her Eugen.

“Very well—and I will have some in exhibit to papal" I
meted.shnking buck the rest into the We.“ turning
anew to the door.

She emptied he: blackened pleas into the ﬂamesmnd Inclined

metoilnishth: initial-don. ltwudnne: {stirred upthenshs.
and tamed them under I ghnvelful ciao-ls; and she mutely.
and with I sense of intense injury. mind to her prince m-
ment. I ducznded to tell mymaster that theyoung hdy‘sqnalm
«my» almost gone, but I judged it be: {or halo lit:
darn I whila She wouldn't dine; but sh: reappured It ta.
P19. ﬁnd red about tit: cya. Ind mmdlmly subdued in out-
hnl aspect. Next morning, I mm the In“: by I slip of
FIR. luscﬂbxl, “Mm:- Hathcliﬁ' is requested to send no
mm to Mix baton. ushe willnot mutant." And.
Worth. thallulehoyamc'ithucant pat-ht;

—«—

CHAPTER XXII.

“fun.” to an and: Incl curly autumn: it W wt
Ww.butthehmutwuhtethum.ndl‘

293 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

our ﬁelds were still uncleared. Mr. Linton end his awn
would frequenlly walk out emong the mpers : at the arrin
of the last sheaves. they stayed till dusk. and the evening be»:
ing to hechill and damp, my nustercaughtahodoold. that setth
obstinater on his lungs. and conﬁned him indoors through
the whole of the winter. nearly without intermission.

Poor Cathy. frightened from her little romance, had be:
considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and h
father insisted on her reading las. Ind taking more exercii
She had his companionship no longer: I steemed it aduty'
supply its luck, as much as possible. with mine: on incﬁcin
substitute: for I could only spare two or three hours, Iron”!
numerous diurnal occupations, to follow her footsteps, and tilt
my society was obviously less desirable tlntn him

On on afternoon in October. or the beginning of Novemb
—o {rah watery afternoon, when the turf and paths were rustlit
with moist. withered leaves. and the cold. blue sky Wu h
hidden by clouds—dork grey streamers, npidly mounting fro
the west. and boding abundant min—l «ousted my young in
to forego her ramble. because I was oemin of showers. S
refused ; and I unwillingly donned a cloak. and took my umbrei
to mmpany her on a stroll to the bottom of the ml: : a (on:
walk which she generally affected if low-spirited—nnd that s
invnriably was when Mr. Edgar had been worse than ordinal
a thing never known from his confession. but guessed both '
he: and me, from his increased silence and the melancholy
his countenance She went sadly on : there was no running
bounding now. though the chill wind might well have tempt
ha to race. And often. from the side of my eye. I could dett
w raising a hand, and brushing something oﬂ' her cheek.

round for :t means of diverting her thoughts. On one si
«themed rose a high. rough bank. where hauls and 5|“an
mks, with their roots half-exposed, held unoettain tenure:
Ion was too loose for the latter: and strong winds had blot
me nmly horizontal. In summer, Miss Catherine delight:
‘9 dimly along these trunks, and sit in the branches, swingiv
"any feet above the ground; and I. pleased with her agili
“a he: light, childish heart, still considered it proper tosoo
as; time I caught her at such on elevation, but so that she km

nu no necessity for descending. From dinner to tea 3‘
‘wld lie in her breeze-rocked cradle, doing nothing cxet',

 

 

WUTHERlNG HEIGHTS. 209

singing old songs—my nursery lore-40 herself, or wntehing the
birds, ja'nt tenants. lead and entice their young ans to lly: or
nailing with cloned lids, but thinking. half dreaming, happier
than words an expreﬂ.

" look. mlssl“ I exclaimed. pointing to n nook under the
roots of one mined tree. " Winter is not hen: yet. There's n
little ﬂower up yonder. the lat bud from the multitude of blue»
bellstlm clouded those turf Reps in July withn lilac rnist. Will
you clamber up. and pluck it to show to papa? "

Cathy stared I long time n: the lonely blossom trembling in
i“ unhy shelter, and replied. at length—

“ No. I'll not touch it: but it looks melancholy. does it not.
Ellen P "

"Ya." I observed. “about as starved. and sacklcss as you:
your M! are bloodlas; let us take hold of hands and run.
You're so low, I dare my I shall keep up with you."

" No." she reputed. and continued snunlering on. pausing. at
intavnln. to muse over a bit of moss, orn ml: of binnched grass.
a n fungus spmding its bright orange among the heaps ofbrown
foliage; and. ever and anon. her hand. was lifted to her nverted
face.

" Catherine. why are you crying. love?" I asked. nppronehing
and putting my nan over her shoulder. “ You mustn't cry. be-
cause pupa In: n cold : be thankful it is nothing worse."

Shnmputnoﬁinherrestnimonherm; herbmlhvas
stiﬂed by sell.

"Oh. it will be something worse." she said. "And what
shall I do when pupa Ind you lave rne. 1nd [am by myself?
I can't forget your words. Ellen: they are always in my air.
How life will be abused. how dreary the world will be. when
papa and you ore dud."

"None con tell. whether you won't die before us.” I replied.
" It's wrong to anticipate evil. We'll hope there are years nnd
yenro to come before any of us go: master is young, and Iain
my. and hardly forty-ﬁve. My mother lived till eighty. a
cant, dame tn the Inn. And suppose Mr. Linton were spared
till he aw sixty. that would be more yars than you have counted.
Ilia. And would it not be foolish to mourn n mlarnily above
Nutty yarn beforehand? "

" Bot Aunt Isabelle was younger than papa." she remnrked.
[axing up with timid hope to seek further mnsolation.

210 WU'I‘HERING HEIGHTS.

"Aunt Isabellahndnotyouandmeto nurseher." I mph!
" She wasn't as happy as master : she hadn't as much to live {on
All ywneed do, is townitwdl onyour father, Ind eheerhim
by letting him see you cheerful: and avoid giving him anxiety
on any subject: mind that. Cathyl I'll not disguise but you
might kill him. if you were wild and reckless. and eherished a
foolish. fanciful ntl‘ection for the son of a person who would be
glad to have him in hisgrave: and allowed him todim that
you fretted over the equation he has judged it expediutt to
m.”

“ I fret about nothing on earth except papa’s illnus," answered
my companion. " I care for nothing in comparison with pupa.
And I'll never—never—oh. never, while I have my seam. do an
actorsayawordtovex him. [love him hettuthan myself,
Ellen ; and I know it by this: I pray every night that I may live
alter him; bemuse I would rather be misenhle than that he
should he: that proves I love him better than myself."

“Good words," I replied. “But deeds mint prove it also:
and sits he is well. remember you don't forget renoan
formed in the hour of fear."

As we talked. we nmred a door that opened on themed ; nnd
my young My. lightening into sunshine again. climbed up and
seated herself on the top of the wall,read1ing oven-to gather
some hips tint bloomed scarlet on the summit branches of the
wild ruse tree, shadowing the highway side: the lower fruit had
disappeared. but only birds could touch the “PM. Mt ﬁom
Cathie present station. In stretching to pull them, her in: fell
oﬂ'; nnduthedoarwaslodxed,she proposedscramblingdm
to recover it. I hid her be cautious lest she got I fall. and she
nimth disappearedt But the return was no such my matta:
the stones were smooth and neatly cemented. and the ruse-bushs
and hlacltbetrystragglers could yield no assistance in te-asoend—
ing. 1. like a. fool. didn't recollect that, till 1 hard hellughing
and exclaiming—

“ Ellenl you'll have to fetch thelte'y. or else I mm rnnround
to the planet’s lodge. 1 can't scale the mmpnn: on this side I"

"Stay wheteyounre." I muted, “ I havemy bundleoﬂneys
in mypocltet: perhaps [my mnnnge toopcn it: it'not I'll go."

Catherine amused heiselt' with daan ta and fro beanie the
“.mIn-Hnllthelnueheysinm lhnd
:- ‘dthntlonewoulddOHOJepenting

WUTHERING BEIGE-11$. 21 I'

my dds: that. she would remain there. I was about to hurry
home us test s I cauld, when an approaching sound arrested me.
It was the trot ofa horse: Cathy's dance stopped also.

“Who is that?" I whispered.

" Ella. I wish you could open the door." whlspaed buck my-
companion anxiously.

“ Ho. Miss Linton!" cried a deep voice (the riders). "I‘mr
glad to meet ycu. Don't be in haste to enter. for I have an»
explanation to ask Ind obtain."

“ I shnn’t speak to you. Mr. Heatheliﬁ.“ answered Catherine.
"Pupcssysyonareswicled mus, sndyauhmboth himand
me; and Ellen my: the same."

"That is nothing to the purpose." said Hmhcliﬂ'. (He it
was.) " I don't hate my son, I suppose; and it is concerning

'him that I demd your attention. Yes ; ynu hive cause to»
blush. Two or three months since. were you not in the habit of'
writing“: Linton? making lovein play, eh? You deserved. both
of you. ﬂogging {or that! You specinlly. the elder; and Ins»
sensitive. as it turns ant. I've got your letters. Ind if you give
me any perma- I'll send them to your father. I presume you
grew wary of the 1mm! and dropped it, dich't yuu P Well.
yau dropped Linton with it into a Slough of Despoud. He was
in earnest : in love, really. As true as I live. he's dying for you:
braking his heart nt your ﬁckleness: not ﬁguratively, but actm
ally. Though Hnreton has nude him It standing jut for six
was. and I have used more serious measures. and nttemptcd
to frighten him out of his idiocy. he gm worse duly; and he'll,
beunderthesodbefvresummer, unlessyourestorehiml"

“How can you lie so glsringly to the poor child? " I called
from the inside. “ Pray ride on! How am you deliberately
get up such pnlxry falsehoods? Miss Cathy, I'll knock the lock
aﬂ‘with n stone: you won't believe that vile nonsense. You can
lid in yotn'lell', it is impoﬁhle that a person should die for love
of a stranger."

"I Ins not swan-e there were eavesdroppers." muttered the
detected villain. “Worthy Mrs. Dean. I like you. but I don't
me you MHz-dealing." he added aloud. " How could you
lino [In-ingly. Is to uﬁrm I hated the ' poor child 2- and invent
“that stems to terrify her from my door-stones? Cuberine

Union (the very name warms me), my bonny Ins. I shall be
1mm home ell this week : go and see if I have not spoken truth:

2X 2 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

do, there's a darling 1 Just imagine your father in my plane. Ill
Down in yours; then think how you would value your nub
lover if he refused to stir a step to comfort you, when your W
himself entrusted him ; and don't. from pure stupidity, uni-m
the same error. I swear, on my salvation, he’s going to his grave.
and none but you can save him I "

The lock gave way and I issued out.

" I swear Linton is dying." repeated Heathclid', looking hard
at me. “ And grief and disappointment are hastening his dad.
Nelly, if you won‘t let her go. you can walk over yourself. But 1
shall not return till this time next weelr ; and I think your master
himself would scarcely object to her visiting hercousin I “

" Come in," said I, taking Cathy by the arm and half ford“!
her to rte-enter; for she lingered, viewing with troubled eyes the
(eatures of the speaker, too stem to expres his inward deceit.

He pushed his house close. and, bending clown. observed—

" Miss Catherine, I'll own to you that I have little patience
with Linton ; and Hamton and Joseph have less. I'll own that
he's with a harsh set. He pines for kindness, as well as love:
nnda kind word from you would be his best medicine. Don‘t mind
Mrs. Dan's cruel cautions ; but be generous. and contrive to see
him. He dreams of you day and night, and cannot be persuaded
that you don't hate him, since you neither write nor calL”

I closed the door. and rolled a stone to assist the loosened
look in holding it ; and sprmding my umbrella. I drew my charge
underneath: for the rain began to drive through the moaning
hunches of the trees, and warned us to avoid delay. Our hurry
prevented any comment on the encounter with Huthcliﬂ‘, as we
stretched towards home ; but I divined instinctively that Cathcv
rine's heart was clouded now in double darkness. Her future
were so sad, they did not seem hers: she evidently regarded
what she had heard as every syllable true.

The master had retired to rest before we came in. Cathy stole
to his room to inquire how he was: he had fallen asleep. She
returned. and asked me to sit with her in the library. We took
our tea together: and afterwards she lay down on the rug. and
told me not to talk. for she was weary. I got a book. and pre-
tended to read. As soon as she supposed me absorbed in my
occupation, she recommenoed her silent weeping: it appear-cl.
at present. her favourite diversion. I suffered her to enjoy it
A while; then I expostulated: deriding and ridiculing all Mr.

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 2 l‘ 3

Hathclilf's assertions about his son, as if I were certain she
Vr'wld mincide. Alas I I hadn't skill to counteract the effect
In“mount had produced ‘ was just what he Intended.

"You may be right. Ellen." she answered ; " but I shall never
Manse till I know. And I must tell Linton it is not my fault
that I don't write. and convince him that I shall not change."

What we were anger and pmtatations agllnst her silly
cl’edullty? We parted that night—hostile ; but next day beheld.
mean the road to Wuthering Heights, by the side of my wilful
loung mlstress's pony. I couldn't bar to witness her sorrow:
to See her pale dejected countenance, end heavyeyel; and I
yielded. in the faint hope that Linton himself might prove. by
h's reception of us. how little of the tale was founded on fact.

 

—N—-—

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE rainy night had ushered in a misty morning—halﬂfrost,
hall-drizzle—nnd temporary brooks crossed our path—gurgling
from the uplands. My feet were thoroughly vetted: I was moss
and low : exactly the humour suited for making the most of those
Iisngreeahle things. We entered the farmhouse by the kitchen
tiny, to useertain whether Mr. Heathclitl' were really absent:
muse I put slight (Aid: in his own emanation.

Joseph seemed sitting in a sort of elysium alone. beside it
roaring ﬁre: a quart of ale on the table near him, bristling with
large pleas of toasted oat-qu; and his black, short pipe in
his mouth. Carherine ran to the hearth to warn: herself. I
lsked If the meter was in? My question remnined so long
unanswered. that I thought the old man had grown deaf. and
repeated it louder.

" Nil—ﬂy ! " he snarled, or rather screamed through his nose.
" Na—ayi ynh muh got back wheat ysth morn Trough."

"Joseph l " cried a peevish value. simultaneously with me. from
the inner room. “ How often am I to call you? There are only
:few red ashu now. Josephl come this moment."

Vigorous puﬂs. and I resolute stare into the grate declared he
Md no ear for this appeal. The homekeepu- end Eamon were
iﬂVklble; one gone on an errand, and the otha- at his work,
Probably. We knew Linton‘s tones. and entered.

"Oh. I hope you'll die in a gnrret l sunrved to death," said the

2 l4 WU'I‘HERING HEIGHTS.

boy, mistaking our approach for Lhat of his negligun It“
dent. ‘

He stopped. on observing his error; his cousin ileum hirn-

"lsthuyou. MissIJnton?" heuid. ruidnghishndfmmtbe
.urur of the great chair, in which he reclined. " No—dou't h‘ﬁ
me: itukamybrulh. Dar-Mel Pnpuseidyouwuuldul
cantinued he. ulter reeavaiug :1 little {mm Cuhu-ine's saints:
while she stood by looking very mun-ire. "wm yaushmthe
door, il'ynu plase? you left it open; and those—mde
cream wou'tbring eaulsto their: It'sneold!"

I stirred up the cindels. and fanhed u scnnlefnl mysdl.
The invalid complained of being covered with nabs; but he
hadutiresomeeough,andlookedfeverishnud ill,” I didnut
rebuke his temper.

"Well, Linton." murmured Catherine. when his oor-rugued
brow relaxed. " Are you glad to see me? Can I do you any
good P ..

"Whydidn‘t youcunrehefore?" Masked. "Youshmtld have
come, insterd of writing. It tired me dreadfully. writing that
long letters. I'd far rather have talked to yaz. Now. I an
neither hear to tnlk. nor anything else I wonder whee Zilhh
is! Will you (looking at me) step into the kitchen and see?”

I hadreceivednothulgfor myorhenervice; andheingun-
willing ta run to and fro at his behest. I replied—

" Nobody is out there but Joseph."

" ! want to drink," he exclaimed fretfully. turning ﬂay.
“ Zilhh is constantly gldding oﬂ'ro Gimmenon since pp: went:
it's miseruhlel And l'ur obliged to come dawn hue—02y re-
salved never to hear me upsuirs."

" Is your father uttentive to you. Muster Heathdiﬁ?" Inked,
perceiving Catherine to be checked in her friendly adv-hes.

"Artenlive? He mains the. n little more strentiven leusr,"
he tried. “The wretchesl Do you know. Miss Linton. that
brute Hinton laughs a me ! I hate him! indeed. I hate them
1“: they are odious beings."

Cathy began searching for some water: she lighted on n
pitcher iu the dresser. ﬁlled a tumbler, and brought it. He hid
her Idd u spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ; and
lining swallowed a small pomon. appeared more tranquil. mud
said she was very kind.

"And are you glad to see me?“ asked she. reiterating her

WUTKBRING HEIGHTS. 21 S

farmerqmtian,andplessedmdetectthefnintdawnofa
mile.

“Yes I am. It‘s something new to hear a voicelikeyunxs l "
he replied. " But I have been vexed, because you wouldn't
come And papa swore it was owing to me: hequ men
WM, shading. worthlus thing: and said you despised me:
Indifhehadbwiin my plan. he would he more the luster
Oldie Grunge than your further. by this time. But you don't
dspise me, do you. Mix"—

"1 wish you would my Catherine. or Cathy." interrupted my
mung lady. "Despise you? No! Next to papa and Ellen.
llove you hater than anybody living. I don‘t love Mr. Heath-
cliﬁthough;mdldmnotoomcwhenherehuns: willhe
my away my days?"

"Not my," answered Linton; "but he goes on to the
moors frequently. since the shooting season commenced; and
you might spend nu hour or two with me in his absence. Do
say you will. I think I should not be peevish with you: you'd
not provoke me. and you'd always be ready to help me,
wouldn't you P “

“Y,” slid Catherine. stroking his long soft hair: " if I could
only get pnpa's consent. I'd spend half my time with you.
Pretty Lian I wish you were my brother."

"And then you would like me as well as your father?"
observed he. more cheerfully. " But papa says you would love
mebeua then himnnd all theworld. ifyonwere mywii'e; so
I'd rather you were tha "

"No. I should never lave anybody belts than papa," she
mat-net! gravely. “ And people hate their wivu. sometimes ; hut
notthelrsitenlnd brothers : andifyouwere the latteryms would
Enwuhugnndpnpnwonldbeasfondofyousshe‘uolme'

lintondenled that peopleever hated theirwiva; but Cathy
timed they did. and, in her wkdom, insuneed hisown father‘s
amnion to her aunt. l endeavoured to stop he thmaghtless
m I couldn't succeed till everything she knew was out.
“In! Hentheliﬂ. much irritated. asserted her telatlnn was false.

"Pap- told me; and papa does not tell alsehoods." she
III-cad nerdy.

"U1 pap. seams yours!" cried Linton.

ML»
"Yams is n widted man." retarted Catherine; " and you are

"He ails him a

2:6 wort-mums Hi!le

very noughty to dare to repeat what he says. He must heviah
to have made Aunt Isabella leave him as she did."

"She didn‘t leave him," aid the boy: "you shun't can“
dict me."

" She did," cried my young lady.

" Well, I'll tell you something i " said Linton. "Your Ml
hated your father: now then."

" Oh I" exclaimed Catherine, too enmged to continue.

“ And she loved mine." added he.

" You little liar! I hate you now!" she printed, and her i:
grew red with passion.

" She did! she did I" sung Linton. sinking into the rows
his chair. and leaning back his head to enjoy the agitade '
other disputant. who stood behind.

" Hush. Muster Heathclin'l " I said: " that‘s your {am
tale, too. I suppose."

" It isn't: you hold your tongue l " he answered. " Shet‘
she did. Cntherinel she did. she did i"

Cathy. beside herself, gave the chair I violent pull. 1
caused him to {All against one arm. He was immedintelysei
by a sutl’ocating cough that soon ended his triumph. It la:
so long that it frightened even me. As to his cousin, she wt
with all her might ; aghast at the mischief she had done : thou
she said nothing. I held him till the ﬁt exhausted itself. 'l'
he thrust me away. and lent his head down silently. Cnthel
quelled her lamentalions also, took I sent opposite. and loo
solemnly into the ﬁre.

" How do you feel now. Muster Healheliﬂ'?" I inquired. a
waiting ten minutes

"I wish rhe felt as I do.“ he replied : “spiteful. cruel thi‘
Harmon never touches me: he never struck me in his life. I
I was better to-duy: and there "— his voice died in a whim]

" I didn‘t strike you I " muttered Cathy, chewing her lit
prevent another hum of emotion.

He sighed and moaned like one under great sutl'ering.
kept it up fora qunrter of an hour; on purpose to distres
cousin apparently. {or whenever he caught a stiﬂed sob from
he put renewed pain and pnthos into the inﬂections of his vo

"I'm sorry I hurt you, Linton." she said nt length. no
beyond endurance. " But I couldn‘t have been hurt by that 1
push, and I hnd no idva that you could, either: you're

WVTI-IERING HEIGHTS. 2 I 7

much. are you. Linton? Don‘t let me go home thinking I‘ve
dune you harm. Answer! speak to me."

"I an”: speak to you." he murmured; “you've hun me so.
lht I shall lie awllte all night choking with this cough. If you
h«lit yau’d knmv what it was: hutm‘ll he eornlortahly asleep
while I‘m in ngony, end nobody near me. I wonder how you
“mild like to pas these fearful nights 1" And he begun to wail
Idoud. for very pity of himself.

" Since you are in the habit of pusing dreadful nights," I said.
“it won‘t be this who spoils your use: you’d be the same had
She never come. However. she shall not disturb you Ignin ; and
Durham you'll get quietu when we leave you.”

“Must I an?" asked Catherine dolefully‘ bending over him.
‘ Do you wnnt me to g0. Lintan?"

" You un‘t alter what you’ve done." he replied pettishly,
hrinking from her. " unless you alter it for the worse by teasing
ne into a lever.”

“Well, then, I must go?" she reputed.

" Let me alone. at lmt."uid he: “ I can’t hear your talking. "

She lingered. and resisted my persuasion to departure l the
orne while; but as he neither looked up her spoke. she ﬁnally
nude a movement to the door and I (allowed. We were mailed
y n scrum. Linton had slid from his seat an to the hearth-
tone, nnd lay writhing in the mere perverseness of an indulged
:hgue of n child. determined to he as grimus Ind harassing 1s
Iran. I Ihoronghly gauged his disposition from his behaviour,
Ind I“ at once it valid be fully to attempt humouring him.
‘lot so my mmpanion: she nu hack in terror, knelt down. and
fried, and loathed, end entreated. till he grew quiet from lack
if breath : by no nuns from campunction at distrusing her.

"1 sh“ lift himon to the settle.“ I said, “and he may roll
ﬁnal I: he pleasu: we can't stop to watch him. I hope you
Ire satisﬁed. Miss Cathy. that you are not the person to beneﬁt
him; and that hiscondition of hulth '5 not ocusianed by attach-
ment In you. Now. then. there he is! Come sway: ism
I! he know: there is nobody by to care for his nonsense. he'll be
M to lie still."

She placed a cushion under his heed. and aimed him some
liter ; he rejected the latter, and tossed uneasily on the {omen
uilitwezeutoneonblock ofrvood. She tried topux it more
ml‘ortnbly.

21 3 WU’I'HERING HEIGHTS.

" I tan't do with that." he said ; “ it's not high enough.”

Catherine brought another to lay above it.

“ That’s (on high," murmured the provoking thing,

“ How mm: I amnge it. thus?" she asked despairingly.

Hetwined himself up whennsshehnli'knelt bytheutth
and converted her shoulder into n mppnn.

" No. that won't do." I said. " You'll be eontait wilhtil
cushion. Master Heatth Miss has wasted too manhunt-
you already : we cannot rennin ﬁve minuta longer."

“ Yes,yes.wecan I" replied Cathy. “ He'sgoodudpuiu
now. He's beginning to think I shall have far greaterlnisa]
than hewill to-night. if I believe he is the worse fortnyvilt
and then I dare not come again. Tell the truth thou: it. 1m;
for I mustn’t come; it I have hurt you.”

“ You must come. to cure me," he answered. “ Yououghm
come. because you: have hurt me : you know ywhnve extremely!
I was not as ill when you entered as I am at Wt—m Ii"

" But you've made yourself ill by crying and beinginnpun‘u'

“I didn't do it all," said his cousin. “ However, we'll bl
friends now. And you want me: you would wish to me I!
sometimes, really P "

" I told you I did.“ he replied impatiently. “ Sit on the“
and let me learn on your knee. Hat's as innmmn used todo
whole afternoons together. Sit quite still and don't talk: bill
you may sing a song, if you can sing; or you may say nninelnnt
interesting ballad—one of those you promised to tench me; u
a story. I‘d rather have a ballad. though : begin.”

Catherine repeated the longest she could remember. Til
employment pleased both mightily. Linton would Invented!
nnd after that mother. notwithstanding rny strenuous «W
and so they went on until the clock struck twelve. and we half
Hareton in the court, returning for his dinner.

“And tomorrow. Catherine. will you be here unnumth
asked young Heathcliﬁ‘. holding her frock us she use I'an
tantly.

"No," I answered. “ nor next day neither." She, have“!
gave a. diﬂ'erent response evidently. for his forehnd eluted I!
she stooped and whispaed in his ear.

" You won't go to-mormw. recollect, miss 1 " l commenced
when we were out of the house. “ You are not dreamingd'il-
are you ? "

WWHERING HEIGHTS. 219

She smiled.

"Oh. I’ll take good can." I continued: “ I’ll have that lack
howled, and you an gape by no my else"

" I an get cm the well." she slid. laughing. “ The Grunge
7: ma prison, Ellen. and you are not myglnla. And besides.
I'm slmoﬁ seventeen: I‘m a women. And I'm oeruin Linton
'mlquniehlyifhehsdmetoinokaﬂahim. l'molder
manheisdonlmomandvlser: lessehﬂdish.amlnot? And
he‘ll soon do as! direct him, with some slight coaxing. He's A
Pretty little darling when he's good. I’d make such a pet 0! him.
ll: weremine. Weshoold never quarrel. should we. alter we
we used to each other? Don’t you like him. Ellen?"

“Like him!" 1 uni-ﬁned. “The wast-mowed hit oi'u
sickly slip tint ever struggled into its teens. Happily, as Mr.
Huthdﬂ conjectured, he'll not win twenty. I doubt whether
he'll see spring. indeed. And small less to his family whenever
he drops ad‘. And lucky it is for us that his father took him :
Lhe kinder he was trusted. the more tedious and selﬁsh he’d be.
I'm glad you have no chanoeot' having him for a husband. Miss
Camel-inc."

My “point waxed seﬂous at hearing this speech. To
Spuk of his death so regardlessly, wounded her feelings.

“ He's younger than I." she answered. after a protracted pause
ofmeditntion. " and he ought to live the longest: he will—he must
live is long as I do. He‘s as strong now as when he ﬁrst came
into the north ; I'm positive of that. It’s only a cold that ails him.
them a pope has. You say papa will get better. and why
shouldn't he?"

“Well. well,” I cried. " the: all. we needn't tumble outselva:
h Mn. min. end mind. I‘ll keep my wont—if you attempt
[King to Wuthering Heights again, with or without me, I shall
inform Mr. Linton. and. unless he allow it. the intimacy with
you cousin must not be revived."

" It be hoe: revived," muttered Cathy Iulkily.

" Must not be continued. then," I said.

"We'll lee." In her tepiy. end she 3a oﬂatagallop. leaving
me to toil in the rear.

We both ruched heme berm our dinnmu'me: my master
Wuhadheeunndeﬁugtlnough the path-mi there—
mhedeonndednoexplnneﬁonofmnhseoce. Assoonnsl
clued. lhastenedtochnge mysoaked thou Ind stockings;

2:0 WU‘X'EBRING HEIGH'IS

but sitting such a while at the Heights had acne the Mischa
0n the succeeding morning I was bid up. end din-In; (hm
weeds I remained incapacitated {or attending to my dntluzl
enlauityneverexperieneed prior to that peliod. end “,1-
thnnkl‘ul to sly, since.

My little mistres behaved like an angel, in coming lama
nie. Ind cheer my solitude : the conﬁnement hronghtmeenll»
ingly low. It is wear'some. to a stirring naive body: huh
have slighter reasons {or complaint than I had. The Ina-ﬂ
Catherine left Mr. Union‘s room. she unpaved It myhetH-II.
Her dny WIS divided between us; no Amusement unrde
minute: she neglected hermenls. betstudis. endhcphy: Id
shewnslhe fondut muse thath She ninth-valid
lwnrrnheart, whenshe lovedherfatherso. togire so mud":
me. Isaidherdayswere divided between us; but thew
retired early, and I genenﬂy needed nothing Ilka six o'doé:
thus the evening was her owIL Poor thing I I never eozuiduﬁl
what she did with herself after ten. And though frequently.
when she looked in to bid rne good-night. I renal-bed 1 {Id
colour in her cheeks and n pinknas over he: slendu Emu:
instead a! fancying the hue borrowed from neold ride-email!
moors. I laid it wthe charged-hot ﬁreinthelibrnry.

...

CHAPTER XXlV.

AT the clam: of three week. I was able to quit myehunber. Ind
move about the house. And on the ﬁrst occasion of my sittinl
up in the evening. i asked Catherine ta reed to me. hen-Be my
eyes were weak. We were in the library. the mute hnving [out
to bed: she consented. rather unwillingly. I facial: and lint
gluing my son or books did not suit her. I bid he: please hail
in the choice ol'what she penised. She selected one of hu on
favourites, and got forward steadily about tn hour; then all
frequent questions.

“ Ellen. are nnt you tired? Hadn‘t you better lie down not.
You'll be sick. keeping up so long. Ellen."

" No, no, dear. I'm not tired." I returned continually.

Perceiving me immovnble, she anyed mother method 0'
shaving her disrelish for her occupation. it chmged to yin
ill. and stretching, and-—

WUTHERING HEIGH'IS. 21!

" Ellen. I'm tired."

"Give over then and talk." I answered.

That's: worse: she fretted and sighed, and looked at her
itch till eight, and ﬁnally went to her room. completely over-
ue with sleep: judging by her peevisb. heavy look. and the
mat rubbing she inﬂicted on her eyes. The following night
he learned more impatient still : and on the third from recover-
); my comp-III. she complained of a huduhe, and left me.
thought her conduct odd: and having remained alone a long
mile. 1 relolved on going and inquiring whethershe were better.
nduklngha-tooomeand lieoa the sofa, instead afupstairs
l the dub. No Catherine could I discover upstairs. and
cnebelnw. Theservmt: aﬁrmedtheyhnd not seenber. 1
We: Mr. Edgar: door: all wassilenee. I returned to her
punment. utinguished my mndle. and seated myself in the
rind”.

The moon shone bright; a sprinkling of snow covered the
round. and I reﬂected that she might. possibly. have taken it
me ha had to walk about the garden. {or refreshment. I did
meet a ﬁgure creeping along the inner fence of the park: but it
was not my young m’mressz on its merging into the light. I re-
ognised one of the grooms. He stood a eonsidenble period,
'iewing the carriage-road through the grounds : then started off
it a brisk pace, as if hehul detected samething. and reuppenred
neserrtly, hurling miss's pony ; and there she was. fast dis-
rioumed. and walking by its side. The man took his charge
-tenlthily m the mus towards the stable. Cathy entered by
-he anement—windowof the drawing-loom. and glided noiselessly
up to where I awaited her. She put the door gently too, slipped
ﬁlter snowy shoes. untied her hat. and was proceeding. nnoonv
who: of my spionnge. to lay aside her mantle. when I suddenly
hue and revuled myself. The surprise petriﬁed her an instant:
in uttered I.“ inaniculate emclanration, and stood ﬁxed

“ My dear Miss Catherine." I began, too vividly impressed by
her recent kinan! to break into: scold. “ where have you been
riding out at this hour? And why should you try to deceive me.
by tellinga tale? Where have ynu been? Spade"

“ To the bottom of the park," she stamlueled. " I didn't tell
I rule."

" And nowhere else? " l demanded.

" No." was the muttered reply.

222 WHO HEIGHTS.

“ Oh, Catherine l " I cried sorrowfully. "'Ynn bio! F
have been doing wrong, or you wouldn't be driven tn ntuh
an nntruth to me. That dosgrieve me. I'd rah:th
months ill. than henr you frame I delibu-nte lie."

She sprang forward. and burstingintotan, rhuba—
ronnd my neck.

" Well, Ellen, I'm so afraid of you being lam."le
" Promise not to be angry, and you nlnll know them-yin.
I hate to hide it."

Wesntdowninthewindaw-natt: I numedhalwnlldl
scold, whntever her secret might be. and I grassed itdm
so she commenced—

" I've been toWuthering Heights, Ella. Ind I've never-1'-
golng a day since you fell ill: uoept thrice he!“ Ind I"!
«Rayon leftyourroom. I goveMichulbooband giants!
prepare Minny every evening, and to put her hnd: in the In“!
you mustn't scold him either. mind. 1 Wu It the Hdghul
halt-put six. and generally stayed till half-put eight. end Ill
gnlloped home. it wns not to amuse myself tint I went: It
often wretched all the time. Nownnd then I was happy: I:
innweek perhaps. At ﬁrst. Iexpectedthctewould bead“
persuading you to let me keep my word to Linton : {or I had!
gaged to call again next day, when we quitted him: but. u y
stayed upstairs on the marrow, I amped that trouble. W3
Michael wns refnstening the lock of the park doorin them
I got possession of the key, and told him how my cousin will!
me to visit him, became he was sick. and waldn't winch!
Grange: and how papa would object to my going: nnd die
negotiated with him about the pony. He is fond of ruding. t
hethinksol‘ leavingsaontn get married ; inboard. iﬂwu
lend him book out of the library. to do what I M: II
preferred giving him my own, and that satisﬁed hirn him.

"On my second visit. Linton seemed in lively spirits; I
Zillnh (that is their housekeeper) made us I dun room Ind
good ﬁre, and told us that, “Joseph was out-t npnyer-Inuti
and Hnreton Enmshnw was off with his dogs—robbinwa
of pheasants, as I heard afterwards—we might do what I! “It
She brought me some wnrn-i wine and gingethteld, nnd nan-t
exceedingly goodmaturcd ; and Linton sat in the arm-chi, l
I in the little rackiu -ch:tir on the hearthvstone. and we hngt
and talked so merrily. and found so mud: to say: we plnnn

 

WING HEGHTS. 223‘

Vice '1: would gn, and win: we would do in summer. I
w'tmmmmwanldnnitsﬂly.

'Ouﬁmhmvever. remnan- qnamlling. Hesidthe
[hams mm of snarling: bu July daym lying from
uningtiﬂmingonahankofhemhinlhemiddleofthe
mmdnhashnmmingdmmﬂyabommongihchloom.
ll II: lurks singing high up owned, and the blue sky and
light III shining starlin and clondlssiy. Th1! was his most
Within! haven’shappimss: minemsrockingintrnsb
b; gran tree. with avast wind blmving. and bright white clouds
ﬁning rapidly nhove; and not only inks, hm. threads, and
hiankhinis, and linnets. and cuckoo: pouringaln music on every
ide,andlhemoorl muadislanee, broken into cool duky
an; hutdnsehygmtswellsoflonggnssmdnhﬁnginnves
lo the breeze: nndwoods and soundingwnurmnd khcwhole
Iu'ld awake and wild with joy. He untied all to lie in an
Maryanne; I wanted all to sparkle and danceina
glorious jubilee. Isaid his haven wouldbeonlyhﬂfﬂive;and
hesaidminewouldhcdrnnk: lsaid I should fall nsleepinhis:
mdhenidhecwldmthwheinmine. nndheguwgrvwvery
snappish. A: last. we agrmd to try both. as soon as umﬁgh:
paths-me; andlhmwekisedachothu'nndverefriends.

“ After sitting still an hour. I lookcd auhe gm: room with its
smooth unwpetcd ﬂour, and thought how nice it would he to
playhifnrcmovedtheublegudlaukndmmntomll
Elihhmhdpus.andwe'dhaveagm atblind-man'sbuﬁ';
hmwywcnchns: youusedm, you know, Ellen. He
Innidn't: Memnuplusmein it. hesaid: bathe consulted
unhyaxhnllwilhme. Wefoundtwninacupbouiamnga.
hay of old lop. mp3, and hoops, and hattledom, and shun]:-
nnchl. Onemsmarkcdc..andtheotherﬂ:lwishcdto
have the C.. humus: tin: stand [or Catherine, Ind the H. might
hehﬂazhﬂiﬂ‘.hismme; anhe bran cannon: oil-Land
[immdidn'tlihciL Ihen‘ him constantly: and hgotcmss
again. Ind mgbd, And returned to his chair. That night.
dutchheasilymcomedhisgnod humour: hewascharmcd
wiih m or three preuy soup—W songs. Ellen; and when
[moﬂiged to gmhe begged and inmadmczocomethe
following evening: Ind I promised. Minny and I went ﬂying
home as light as Iil' : and I dreamt of Wuthering Heights and
my sweet. chriing cumin, till morning.

 

WDTEERING HEIGHTS. 225

learnnuelytosbowoﬂ‘:youhadmadehimashamdofhis
Wham. I hnvenodoubt; andhewishedtorernedyit
and plenayon. Tosneerathisimperl’ectauelnptwnsveybad
breeding. Hade been hmught up in his circumstances. would
youbelesrnde? Hewunsquickandasinlelligentachﬂdas
ever you were; and I'm hurnhatheshould he dspised now,
because um base Heathcliﬁhns hated him so unjustly.”

“ Well, Ellen. you won't cry about it. will you?” she ex-
claimed. surprised at my mamas. " But wait, and you shall
bearilhecnrmedhkABCtoplmseme; nndilitwaeworth
while being civil to the brute. I entered : Linton was lying on
thesatle. and hall'got up to welcome me.

" ‘ I'm ill to—night. Catherine. love.’ he slid; ‘and youth
havenllrhe “ligand letme listen. Come,and sitbyme. I
wassure yonwouldn‘t breakynurword, and I'lllnake you prom‘se
again. before you go.‘

"I knewnovnhnt I mustn'nease him. ashewasill: and I
spoke softly and put no questions. and avoided irritating him
in any way. I had brought some of my nicst books for him:
he asked me to read a littleof one. and I was about to comply.
what Eumslnw burst the door open: having gshmd venom
with reﬂectiom- He advanced direct mus. seined Linton by the
arm. and swung him oﬁlhe seaL

"‘64 to thy own rooml' he said, inovoioe almost inani-
culnte with passion: and his face looked swelled and furious.
'Takeherthereifsheoolnes to see the: thoushnlln'l keep
ontoﬂhls. Beganewi'ycbolhl‘ -

" He swore at us, and left Linton no time to answer. nearly
throwing him into the kilchen; and he clenched his ﬁst u I
followed. seemingly longing to knock me down. I was'afmid
for a moment, nod I let one volume ml; he kicked it the: m.
and Illut us out. I heard a maligntnt. moldy lau'gh by the
ﬁre. and turning. beheld that odious Joseph standing rubbing
his bony bonds. and quivering.

“'Iwersnre he’d sarve ye out! He’s a grand lad! He's
getlen t‘ nigh! sperrit in him! 11: knaws—Ay, he knows. IS
weel u I do. who sud be t' Innisteryonder—Ech, ech, ech l He
made ye shift properly! Ech. ech. ech l '

" ' Wbue must we go?’ I asked of my cousin. disregarding
the old wretch's mockery.

" Linton was white and trembling. He was not pretty then-

H

226 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

Ellen: oh no! he looked frightful: for his thiufoeendhp
eyes were wrought into an expression affrontie. purulent-y.
Hegraspedthehandle ofthe dorm-MM it: items“
inside.

" ‘ lfyou don't let me in I'll hillyoul—lfyon dm‘tlntne'l.
I’ll kill yuul'he rather shrieked than said. ‘Devill devil-
l'll kill you—I'll kill you | '

“Joseph uttered his creaking laugh again.

" ' Thar, that’s t' father I ' he cried. "l'hlt's tuba-l We"
allas summut 0' either side in us. vaer heed, Ham H»-
dunnnt be Tend—he mono! get at the l '

“ I took hold of Linton't hands, and tried to pnllhimtny:
but he shrieked soshockingly that I dud not pruned. MB
his cries wu-e choked by a dreadful ﬁt of coughing: bhvl
gushed from his mouth, and he fell on the ground. I ruin”
the yard, sick with terror; and called for Zilluh, as loud .1
could. She soon heard me : she was milking the cows in aid
behind the barn. and hurrying from her work, sheiuqnired I“
there was to do? I hadn't bruth to explain : dngy'ng lull.
I looked about for Linton. Earnshnw had oomeout toenail
the mischief he had caused, and he was then conveying Ill
poor thing upstairs. Zillnh and l ascendede him ; hath
stopped me at the top of the steps. and said I shouldn't go ll:
l must go home. I exclaimed that he had killed Linton. and
I would enter. Joseph looked the door. and dedard I M
do ‘nosichstuﬂ’,’ and asked mewhetha lwere ‘lnhntoh!
mad as him.’ I stood crying. till the housian append.
She afﬁrmed he would be better in a bit, but he couldn't do will
that shrieking and din; and she took me. Ind mlym'li
me into the house.

“Ellen. l was ready totarmyhniruﬂ'myheadl laobhld
and wept so that my eyes were almost blind; and the nth!
you have such sympathy with stood opposite : presuming eve!
now and then to bid me ‘wisht.’ and denying that it was he
fault; and, ﬁnally, frightened by my assertions that I wotlldtell
papa. and that he should be put in prison and hanged. I:
commenced hlubhering himself, and hurried out to hide lt'l
cowardly agitation. Still, I was not rid ofhim: what at lat“
theycompellcd me to depart, and I had got some hundred yard!
03' the premises, he suddenly issued from the shadow of Ill
roadside, and checked Minny and took hold of me.

WETHERING HEIGHTS- 227

" ' Mile Cnthﬂ'ine. I‘m ill grieved.’ he began. ‘bnt it's 11th ‘
too had '—

" i gave him a cut with my whip. thinking painps hewould
nude me. He let go. thundering one of his hon-rid curses.
and I gdlopod home mare thnn half out a! my m

“ I didn't bid you goodmighx that evening. and I didn't go to
Wnthu'ing Heights the hat: I wished to go ameedingly; hut
lwasnnngelyexcitod. uddmdedtohenrthntumcnwal
deed. semantics: and longtime: shnddezed 1t the thought of
encountering Human. 0n the thixd dny I took mange: at
least. I couldn‘t hen: longer nuspensc. and stole :16 once none.
I went at ﬁve o'clock, and walked ; ﬁncying I might manage to
ueep into the home. nnd up to Llnton's mom, unobserved.
Hm, thcdogs gave main of my nppronnh. Zillnh received
use. and saying ‘ the 1nd wl: mending niady.’ showed me into n
zmnll, tidy. urpeted npnrtlnent. where. to my inupressible joy,
I beheld Unton laid on 1 little wfa. raiding one of my books.
But he would neither speak to me not look at me. through a
whale hour, Ellen: he husuch an unhappy temper. And what
quite confounded we. when he did open his mouth. it was to
utter the hkehood that I had occasioned the uproar. Ind Hone-
lon wu- not to blame] Unable to reply. wept passionately. I
gmup nmlwnlked {mm the room. He Ientnl‘ta me n faint
‘Cntherine l ' He did not reckon on being nnnwend so : but I
wouldn't turn back; and the marrow was the second day on
which I stayed at home. nearly determined to visit him no more.
an it win In miner-hie going to bed and getting up. nnd never
baring anything Ihout him. that my resolution melted into nit-
heﬁoleitwu pmperlyformed. Ithadnppcaredmngtomke
mm“; mltseemedwmngtonfnin. Minimal
ulna touk if he mm saddle Minny; I said 'Yel.‘ and con-
dd-edmylell'doing ndnty nsnhe boremeoverthe hills Inns
{otnedto posthel'rontwindows toga lothecourt: itwnsno
the trying to conceal my presume.

" 'Young router is in the houne.’ said Zillnh. n she saw me
making tor thepeﬂonr. Iwent in; minim: therellso.
ht: he quilted the mom directly. Linton Int in the m ann—
ehnir hnlfuleep: walking uptotheﬁre,1 begun in a serious
tone. pnnly manning it to he h'llh

" ‘AI you don’t liknnze. Linwn, Ind as ynu think I come on
mummnndpmendthntldommry time, thisi:

:28 wu-mnmna union-rs.

our last meeting: let us say good-bye; and tell Mr. Hatlil
that you have no wish to see me, and that he mustn't invunl
more Msehoods on the subjeaf

“ ‘Sit down and take your hat of. Catherine. be m
‘Youare somueh happier than I am. you ought to be hell:
Papa talks enough of my defects, Ind shows enough sun
me, to make it nature! I should doubt myself. I doubt who!
I an not altogether asworthless us he calls me, frequently ; u
then I feel so cross and bitter. I hate everybody] I annual
I55, and had in temper. end had in spirit. almost nlvnrys: u
if you choose. you may say goodbye: you'll get rid ofnnnnnt
once. Only. Catherine, do me this justice: believe thet ll
might be as sweet, and as kind. andas good I: yon-re, I‘m
he: as willingly. and more so, than as happy and as halt
And believe that your kindness has nude me love yondeq
than if I duerved your love: and though I couldn't. undunt
help showing my nature to you, I regret it and repent it: I
shall regret and repent it till I die I ”

"I felt he spoke the truth; and I felt I must forgive hit
and. though he should quarrel the nut moment. I must fort
him again. We were reconciled; but we tried. both of us.|
whole time I stayed: not entirely {or sorrow: yet I w u
Linton had that distorted nature. He‘ll never let his friends
at ease. and he'll never be at ease himself I I hnve nlvlays gt
to his little parlour, since that night; because his father return
the day miter.

“ About three times, I think. we have been mary and hopd
aswe were the ﬁrst evening: the rest of my visits were dtu
Ind troubled: now with his selﬁshness and spite. end m V
his sud‘crings: but I've learned to endure the former with net
as little resentment as the latter. Mr. Hmthcliﬁ' pox-pan
avoids me: I have hardly seen him at all. Last Sunday. indnl
coming earlier than usual, I herd him abusing poor Lint!
cruelly, {or his conth of the night before. I can‘t tell he!
knew of it. unless he listened. Linton hid certainly Mm
provokingly: however. it was the hminss of nobody but I!
end I interrupted Mr. Heatth lecture byentering end It
in; him so. He burst into a laugh. and went away. nyinz
was glad I took that View of the matter. Since then, I'velt
Linton he must whisper his bitter things. Now. Ella. y
have heard all. I mn‘t be prevented from going to Wuthal

WTHERING HEIGHTS. 229

5, except by inﬂicting misery on two people; whet-ens, if
-nly not tell papa. my going need dis|urb the tranquillity
:. You'll not tell. will you? It will be very heartless if
make up my mind on that point by to-mm'mw. Miss
M," I replied. “It requires some study; and so I'll
an to your rest. and gothlnk it over."

night it over aloud. in my master‘s presence: walking
girom her room-to his. and relating the whole story:
e exception of her conversations with her cousin. and any
2 of Humour Mr. Linton was Alarmed and distressed.
him he would acknowledge to me. In the morning.
ne leunt my betrayal of he: conﬁdenoe, Ind she learnt
1t ham visitawere to end. In vain nhewept and
: ngeinstjhe inierdict. and implored her [anther to have
Linton: all‘she got to comfort her was apromise that
ld write and give him lave to come to the Grange Vlhﬂl
sed ; hut explaining that he must no longer expect to see
ne It Wutherlng Heights. Perhaps. had he beennwnre
:pbew's disposition end state ofhealth. he would have seen
lthhold even that slight consolation.

-—~—

CHAPTER XXV.

:3 things happened last winter. sir," said Mrs. Dean:
ymnrethannyearlgo. hstwinter. I did not think. It
- twelve months' end, I should be amusing n stringer to
1in with relating then: I Yet. who know: how long you'll
Inger P You're too young to rest nlwnys contented. living
self; and Isomewnyfmcynn one could neCntherine
and not love her. You smile: but why doyou lookso
nd interested. when I talk about her ? and why but you
me to lung her picture over your ﬁreplace 2 and why "—
Ip, mygood friendl" I cried. "It mnybeverypossihle
should loveher; butwauldsheloveme? [doubtittoo
:o venture my tranquillity by running into temptation:
to my home is not here. I'm of the busy world, and to
a I must return. Go on. We: Catherine obediazt to
:er’: commends 7 "

e was.“ continued the housekeeper. “ Her Imection for

310 WTHERING HEIGHTS.

him wns still the chief sentiment in her hart : outlaw-ill-
out nnger: he spoke in the deep tenderneuoi' one shout Inks!
his treasure amid perils end ton. where his mberutwuds
would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide in lie
aid to me, n few days afterwards-—

“ ‘ I wish my nephew would write. Ellen. or call. Tell me.
sincerely. what you think of him : is he change! {or the heats.
a is there I prospect 01 improvement. as he grows a m?‘

" 'He's very delicate, sir,’ I replied ; ‘nnd scarcelyle
reach manhood; but this l can say. he does not membieh'l
father: and it Miss Catherine had the misfortune to hurry him.
he would not be beyond her control : unless she were extend]
Ind foolishly indulgent. However. master. you‘ll have plentyoi
time to get mqminted with him. and see whether he wonidllit
her: it wnnts {our years and more to his being of sge.’

Edgar sighed ; and walking to the windw. loom onttmlis
Gimmerton Kirk. It was s misty afternoon, but the Fetal-my
sun shone dimly. and we could just distith the two inns
in the yard, Ind the spareiy scattered grammes.

" I've prayed often." he half soliloquised. " for the
of what is coming: and now I begin to shrink. and far it. i
thought the memory of the hour 1 came down that glen a bride
groom would be less sweet than the anticipation that I was soon.
in a few months. or. possibly. weeks, to he carried up. and laid
in its luner hollow i Ellen. I’ve been very hnppy with my link
Cnthy : through winter nights and summer doysshewnsn living
hope at my side. But I’ve been I! happy musing by lapel!
among those storm. under that old church : lying. through thr
long lune evenings, on the green mound ot‘ her W. gun.
and wishing—yearning for the time when I might lie heath it.
What an I do for Cathy P How must I quit her? I'd not at!
one moment {or Linton being Headiclii’f's son : nor forhls akin;
her from me. if he could console her for my loss. I'd not an
thnt Heathcliﬂ' gained his ends. nnd triumphed in robbing me o'
my inst blessing i But should Linton be unworthy—only n behh
tool to his father—I cannot abandon her to himl And. hut
though it be to crush her huoynnt spirit. I must penance ll
uniting her sad while I live, and lesviug her solitary whm I die
Darling l I'd rather resign her to God. and lay ha in the uni
before me"

"Rain hertOGodnsit is. sir,"IImered, "andit‘m

WV'IHERXNG HEIGHTS. 231

abould lose you—which my He forbid—under His providence,
I‘ll stnnd ha- friend and counsellor to the lasL Miss Catherine
hngoodgirl: I don't farthetshew-illgowilfully wrong; and
MI: who do their duty are always ﬁnally rewarded"

Spring advanced ; yet my master gathered norm] strength.
though he rmed his walks in the grounds with his daughter.
To her inexperienad notions. this itself was a sign of convales-
deuce: mdthenhischeekwuoftenﬂushed, and hiseyeswere
height: she felt sure of his recovering. On her seventeenth
birthdny. he did not visit the churchyard: it was mining. and I
observed—

" will surely not go out to-night. sir?"

He III-weed—

“ No. I'll defer it this yer 1 little longer."

He wrote again to Linton. upreesing his gm: desire to see
him; Ind. had the invelid been presentable. I've no doubt his
tether would have permitted him tn wrne. As it was. being
inmueted, he returned an answer, intimating that Mr. Heatheiiﬁ
objected to his ceiling st the Grange; but his uncle's kind re-
manhrance delighted him,and he hoped to meet him. some-
times in his rambles. end pencnslly to petition that hiscousin
end he might not run-in long so utterly divided.

m: port of his letter was simple. and prohebly his own.
Hatth knew he could plad eloquently for Catherine's corn-
PIn’. than.

" 1 do malt." he said, " that she may visit here; but. am I
new to Ice her. Marne my Ether forbids me to go to her home.
and you fuhid ha- to come to mine? Do, now and then, ride
with her towards the Heights ; and let nsexchnngen few words.
in your presence! We hnve done nothing to deserve this sem-
liou: udwa notmgrywithnte: youhavenoreasontodis-
like me. you allow, yourde Dear unech send me a kind note
tom and leave to join you anywhere you please, except
at Thnnherou Grange. I believe an interview would convince
you that my W: character is not mine : he nﬂ‘trrns I am more
your nephew than his son ; and though I have faults which
render me unworthy of Catherine, she has excused them, and for
52 “in, you should also. You inquire after my health-4t is
better; but while I rennin out off from all hope, and doomed to
allude. or the society ofthoee whenever didnnd neverwilllike
“Mmlhchadnlandweu?”

131 WU‘X'HERING HEIGHTS.

Edgar, though he felt for the boy. could not consent
his request; because he could not Incompany Cat-her
slid. in mm. per-taps, they might meet: maritime, [1
him to continue writing at internls. and engaged to I
what ndvinennd comfort he wunblehyletter: beingw:
of his hard position in h‘ufnmily. Linton complied ; an
been nnrattained. would probehly hove spoiled III by i
epistles with complaints and hmenutions : but his fatht
sharp watehoverhim; nnd.ofoourSe.lnsisted on e‘
that my master sent being shown; so. instead of pen
peculiar personal suﬂerings Ind dist-rm. the themes :1
uppermost in his thoughts. he hnrped on the cruel obli;
being held asunder from his friend andlme; and gently it
that Mr. Linton must allow an interview soon. or he sho
be m purposely deceiving him with empty promises.

Cathy wss a Math! ally at home : end. between ti)
1! length persuaded mymnster to acquiesce intheirhnvil
ornwalktogetheraboutonee a week, under my guest
and on the moors I“! the Grunge: for June found
declining. Though he hnd set nside ymrly : portin
innome for my young lady's fortune. he hnd nunturaldr
she might retain—or at last renu-n in a short time to—t
of her mentor: ; end he considered her only prospect
that washynunion withhisheir; hehnd noiden that!
was failing almost as fast as himself; nor hnd any one, I
no doctor visited the Heights. and no one saw Master
cliﬁ' to make report of his condition among us. I. for
began to fancy my forebodings were false, and that he
actually rallying, when he mentioned riding and walkin
moors, end seemed so earnest in pursuing his object.
not picture a father treating a dying child as tymnic
wickedly as I afterwards learned Heathcliff had tmted
oompel this apparent agernesn : his efforts redouhling I
immineutly his uvnricious and unfeeling plans were th
with defeat by death.

-——~—

Z V CHAPTER xxvx.

Summit was already past its prime. when Edgar re'
yielded his assent to their entruties. Ind Catherinennd

wrmmnmc HEIGHTS. 2;;

:n our ﬁrst ride to join her cousin. It was a. close. sultry any:
devoid of sunshine, but with n sky tno dappled And hazy to
theaten rain; and our piece of meeting hnd been ﬁxed It the
snide-stone, by the cross-roads. On arriving there. however, a
little herd-boy. dupatched as n messenger, told us thet—

"Mnister Linton wer just 0' this side th’ Heights: and he‘d
b witch ohleeged to us to gang on a bit further."

"Then Mater Linton has forgot the ﬁrst injunction—of his
uncle," I observed: "he bid us keep on the Grange laud, end
here we are off at once.”

"Well, we‘ll turn our horses' heads round.th wermnh him,"
Insweredrnyoompunion, "our excursion shall lie towards home."

But when we reached him, and that was scarcely a quarter of
n milel‘mmhlsawndoor,wefound hehnd no home: and we
were forced to dismount. and lave our: ta graze. He lay on
the hath. uniting our approunh. and did not rise till we mime
within a fewynrds. Then he walked so fwbly, and [naked so
pale, that I immediately exclaimed—

l‘Why. Master Henthcliﬁ‘, younre not ﬁt for enjoyingu rumble,
this morning. How ill you do look 1"

Catherine surveyed him with grief and astonishment: she
chnnged the ejaculation of joy on her lips. to one of ulnrrn: and
the congratulation on their long-postponed meeting. to an
anxious inquiry. whether he were worse than usual? ‘

"No—hetter—betterl" be planted. trembling, and retaining
herhnnd u if he needed its support, while his large blue eye:
mdered timidly overher: the hollowness round thern tune-
!orming to haggard wildness the languid expression they once
wasted.

"Butyouhnvebeenwoue." persiﬂed his cousin: “worsethnn
when I saw you last: you are thinner. and "—

" I'm tired." he interrupted hurriedly. " It is too hot ' {nr
walking, let us rut here. And, in the morning. I often feel ck
—pupe my! I grow so mt."

Badly “tidied. Cathy sat down, Ind he reclined beside her.

“ This is something like your Win." slid she. making an
effort It cheerl‘ulness. - “ You recollect the two days we agreed to
spend in the place and way each thought plmtut? This I:
neuly yours. only there are clouds: but then they are to wft end
mellow: it I: nicer than sunshine. Next week, if you an, we'll
riledowntotheGrangePnﬂrmndtrymine." x ~

2

2 '54 WUI‘HERING HEIGK‘Is.

Lian did not nppar to remember what she talked of; mi
he had evidently [rut diﬂiculty in “staining uy kind of M-
vemtion. His lack of interest in the subject: she Buried. Ill
his equal inapacity to contribute to her enteruinment. were»
obvious that she could not coneml he! disappointllm. Alli
deﬁnite alteration hsd come over his whole pertain-id manna.
The pettishness that might be unveiled into fondness. bod yiddd
tonlistlea npaxhy: therewns has ofthe peevinh humped:
child which {ms and tease: on purpose to hemmed. and no:
of the self-absorbed moraseness of a conﬁrmed int-lid. up!“
consolation, and ready to zegud the gnarl-bummed mirth of
other: as an-insult. Catherine pueeived. I: well Is I did, IN
he held it rather a. punishment, then is mﬁhdon, could-new
company: and she made no sample of plowing, presently. to
depern That proposal. unexpectedly. roused Linton fmm hi
lethargy, and threw him into a strange state of agitation. ll:
glanced fearfully (wards the Heights, beggingshe would will
another half-hour at least.

“But I think,“ said Cathy. "you'd be more comfort-Nell
home than sitting here; and I eannnt amuse you My. IR
by my tales. end songs. and chatter: you have Murine that
I. in these six months; you have little male {or my dim
now : or else, if I could amuse you. I'd willingly my."

“ Stay to Mt yourself." he replied. “And Catherine. don'
think, or any that I'm very unwell: it is the havy wenthc rm
hen that make me dull ; and I wulked about. before you an)!
I great deal fur me. Tell uncle I‘m in tola'ahle'hﬂlth. vril
you ?"

“ I'll tell him that 1914 say so. Linton. x couldn't aﬁm th-
yon are," observed my young lady. wondering At his min-Linn
asscrlion of what was evidently an untruth.

" And be here again next Thursday," continued he. shunning
her puzzled gaze. “And give him my thanks for per-minim
you to come—my best thanks, Catherine. And—Ind. if ynuli‘
meet my father, and he Inked you about me. dou't'lud him “
Inppose that I've been extremely silent and Itupid : don't loci
and and downcast, as you or: doing-vhe'll be angry."

" I care nothing for his anger." exclaimed Cathy. int-[inﬁll
Ike would be its object.

" But I do." said her cousin. shuddering. "Don't pram“
him against me. Catherine. for he is very hard."

WITI‘HERING mm 335

“ Is be severe to you. Muster Heathdm" I inquired. “Has
be grown mot indulgence. and passed from pnsivetnletin
ﬁned?"

Uqun looked at me. but did not answer: Ind, the keep“
her at by his side another ten minutes. during which his bad
fell diowsily on his butt, end he uttered nothing adept lup-
praeed monnsofexhaustion or pain. Cathyhegnnto seekth
in looking for bilberria. and sharing the pmduneot‘herremehes
vithmezshe didnot offer them tohimﬁonhesaw (nether
notice vauld only weary and annoy.

‘ " Is it lumen-hour now. Ellen Web: whispered in my an.“
int. "1 can‘uell why we should any. He's uleep, and pupa.
will he wunting us bunk"

"Well, we must not Mile hirn asleep.” I answered»; " v15: till
he wnkamnd be patient. You were mighty eager to set of,
but your Imaging to see poor Linton inn-noon enporlted 1"

"Why did Invish tosee me?"de Cnhaine. “In his
era-est humoun, formerly. I liked him betta' thin I do in his
eriousmod. “shut as ifitwemutnskhemoom—
pelled to perform—this interview—for fur hisfather should scold
him. But I‘m hnxdly going to come to give Mr. I-Ieathdiﬂ
plus“; whatever reason he mny have for ordering Linton to
undergo this penance. And. though I’m glad he's better in
health. I'll! sorry he's so much less pleasant, and so much is
aﬁectimte to me."

" You think In it better in health then? “ I said.

" Yes," she answered; “ beans: he alwnys made such a great
dealof his snﬂ'erings. you know. He is not tolmbly well. as he
laid me ta tell pane: but he‘s better. very likely."

"Thee you din‘cr with me. Miss Cathy," I remuked; “ I
should conjecture him to he fur worse."

Linton here started from his slumber in hewildaed terror.
and asked if any one hid mlled his mm

" No." said Catherine; " unless indreams. I cannot conceive
how you manage to done out of doors. in the reaming."

“I thought I heard my father." he guped, ghncingnp In the
{running nab above us. " You are am: nobody spoke? "

“ Quite sue." replied his cousin. " Only Ellen and I weredin-
yating concerning your health. Are you truly stmnger. Linton.
thnnvhm we separated in winter? Ifyou be I'm certain one
thing h not mega—your regard tor Inez wash—Ire you?"

236 wry-menus HEIGH‘IS.

The tars gushed from Linton's eyes as he mused, "Ys.
yes. Iaml" And, still underlhespelloftheimnginnryvoiw.
his gaze wandered up and down to detect its owner. Cull]
rose. " For to-day we must part," she said. “And I wat't
con] that l hnve been sadly disappointed with our medial:
though I'll mention it to nobody but you: not that I stand in
awe of Mr. Heathc ' ."

" Hush," munnnred Linton: "for God's sake. hush! He's
coining.” And he clung to Catherine's arm, strivingjo dmin
her: but at that announcement she hastily disengaged ban“.
and whistled to Minny, who obeyed her like a dog.

" I'll be here .next Thursday." she cried. springing to the
saddle. “Good-bye. Quick. Ellenl"

And so Weleﬁ him. scarcely conscious of our departures:
absorbed was he in anticipating his inther’s approach.

Before we reached home. Catherine's disphsure soﬁuiedinln
I perplexed sensation of pity and regret. largely blended uilh
vague. unasy doubts about Lintan's sans! drctnnsm
physical and social; inwhich I panook. though I counselleth
not to say much; for aseeond journey would make us hem:
judgis. My master requested an account of our ongoing;
His nephew's offering of thaan was duly delivered, Miss Cathy
gently touching on the rest: I also lhrew little light on his
inquiries. {or I hardly knew what to hide, and what In rural.

...

CHAPTER XXVII.

SEVEN days glided away. every one marking its course hyth:
henceforth rapid alteration of Edgnr Linton's slate. The havoc
that months had previouly wrought was now emulated by the
inroads of hours. Catherine. we would {sin have deluded yet:
but her own quick spirit refused to delude hes: it divined in
secret. and broodcd on the dreadful probability, gradually
ripening into certainty. She had not the heart to mention her
tide, when Thursday Lame round; I mentioned it let her. not!
obtained permission to order her out of doors: for the library,
where her father stopped a. short lime daily—the brief period he
could bear to sit up—nnd his chamber. had become her whole
world. She grudged each moment that did not ﬁnd her bending
over his pillow, or seated by his side. Her countenance grew

WUIHERING HEIGHTS. 237

Inn with watching and sorrow. and my master gladly dismiseed
her to what he ﬂattered himself would be a happy adage o!
teene and society; drawing comfort from the hope that she
nonld’not 'nowbe 1m entirely alone after his death. -

Hehndaﬁxﬂ idel. Iglressedbyseveml observationthelet
fall, that, n: his nephew resembled him in person. he would
ramble him in mind; for Linton‘e letters bore few or no
indication: of his defective character. And I. through pardon-
:hle wuknes. refrained from correcting the error: asking
myself what good there would be in disturbing his Inst moments
with information that he had neither power Mr opportunity to
turn ‘0 eeeount. '

Wedeferredonrexeursiontill the afternoon: egoldenafter-
noonofAugust: everyhrealhfrom thehille so fulloflil'eﬁhnt
it seemedwhoever respired it. though dying. mighrrevive. Cutte—
r'lne's {we we: just. like the lnndscape—shndows and sunshine
ﬂitting‘ova it in rapid succession : but the shadows rested longer.
and the sunshine was more transient: and her poor little been
mere-chad itself {or even that passing forgetfulnes of its
cars
'Weditcanedmtonwntehingntthenmespothehadseleaed
hdnreu Myyouugmistresselighted.andtold me than: she
was ranked to stay I very little while. I hid better hold the pony
Indrunnlnonhoraehack; bull dissented: l wouldn'trialt los-
ingsight ottheehuge committed to me a minute; so we climbed
the slbpeofhelth togetha. Master Hmthclitf received us with
gruternnimatlonnn thieoeusion: not the animntion of high
spirits though. nor yet ofjoy: it looked more like fear.

" It is lite l " he said. speaking short and with diﬁculty. " I;
not your futhervery ill? I thought you wouldn't come.“
' “ Wk} won't you he undid?" cried Catherine, wallowing
ha greeting. "Why cannot you say or one you don't vrlnt
me? It is strunge. Linton, that {or the second time you have
brought me here on purpose. apparently, to distress us both. and
for no meson baides l " .

Linton shiveted, Ind glanced at her, half eupplicating. hell
unnamed ; but his outsin’: patience was not suﬁeient lo endule
this enigmuiml behaviour.

" My {other inery ill." the said: "andwhy am I onlledfmnr
hie bedlide? Why'didn't you send to absolve me from my pro-
nlte.Ihenyouwi:hedeouldn‘tkeepit? Camel Idesirenn

I33 WING HEIGHTS.

uplnnntlun : playing nnd triﬂing are campletely banished and
my mind; and I can't damn attendance an your W
now I”

" My aﬁecutlons!" he murmured: "whet are they? 1'
Hem-en's 31kt. Catherine, don't look [0 angry! Dap'nrneli
much as yonpleas: ; I am nwnrthless. eowudly match: I can't
hescorned enough ; but I'm too mean for yowuga. Hue.
l‘nlher. and spare me for contempt."

" Nonsense l " cried Cntherine, in a passion. “ Fndilh. ﬂy
boy I And there! he tremble-s. as if I were really guingtotuﬁ
him! You needn't bespeak contempt. Linton: myhody will
have it spontaneously at your service. Get oﬂ‘l I shall rem
home: it is fully dragging you from the heaan and pre-
tending—what du we pretend? Let gn my frockl if I W
you for crying and looking so very frightened. you should spun
sud: pity. Ellen. tell him how disgraceful this conduct is. Rb.
and don‘t degrade yourself into an iject reptile—don?!"

With streaming {Ice and an exprusian of agony, Linton her!
thrown his nerveless frame along the ground: he seemed new
vulsed with exquisite terror.

"Oh i "’ hesob‘hed, " l urinal bear it l Cnthu-lne, Chihuan
I'm a traitor. too. nnd I dare not tell you I But lava nae, and!
shall be killed l Dear Catherine, my lile is in your hands: Ind
yan hnve said you loved me. and if you did, it wouldn't hm
yuu. You'll not go. then? kind, tweet, good Cnlha'lnel Ad
perhaps you will consent—and he'll let rne die with you!"

My young lady. on witnusing his inteme anguish. stooped to
raise him. The old feeling ofindulgentrendemessovm he
nation. and she grew thuroughly moved and alarmed.

" Consent to what?" she Inked. “ To suyl Tell me Ill
meaning of (his strunge talk. and I will. You contradict your
own words. and distract me] Be calm and (rank, Ind emf:
nt ouoe all that weighs on your heart. You wouldn't injure Inc.
Linton. would you? You wanldn‘t let my enemy hurt me. if
you could prevent it? I‘ll believe you are a coward {or yonnelf.
but not a cowardly hetrayer of your best friend."

" But my Luther threatened me," gasped the boy. clupinghi
Attenuated ﬁngers. " and l dread him—I drud him! 1 do!
not tell I"

" Oh. well i " said Cnrherine, with mutual enmpnsdon. "kc-p
you-secret: 1'- nomwnrd. Suveyounelf: Plum-hid!"

WING HEIGHTS. :39

Her zugnuniniity provoked his tears: he wept wildly, kissing
liersupporting hands. end yet could not summon courage tospeak
m I m cogitnting what the mystery might be. end deter-
mined Catherine should never safer, to beneﬁt him or my one
due, hy'myguod will ; when hearing I. rustle among the ling, I
looked up and saw Mr. Heathcliﬁ' almost close upon us. descend—
ing the Heights. He didn’t east n glance townrds my com-
pnnions, though they were sufﬁciently nan- {or lintcn'n subs to
handible ; but: hailing me in the almost hearty tone he mumed
to none besides. end the sincerity of which I couldn't avoid
(imitating, he said—

“Itlesornethingtosee yanso nanomme. Nelly. How
are mu the Gmnge? Let us hear. The rummu' goes," he
added in n lower tune, ” that Edgar Linton in on his duthhed :.
perhaps they exaggerate his illnes l"

"No: my master is dying." I replied: “it is true enough.
A ad thingie will be for us all, but a blessing for him i"

"Haulongwill he last, do you think?" he asked.

" I don‘t know." I said.

"Bum" he continued. looking at the two young people,
who were ﬁxed under his eye—«Linton appeued as it he could
nu venture to stin at raise his head. end Catherine could not
lime; on hi: noennnt—" beuuse thnt lad yonder seems deter-
mined to but me; and I'd think his uncle to be quick. end go
before him. Hallo! has the whelp been playing that game
long? I did give him some lessons nbout snivellinm Is he
petty livdy with Miss Linton generally?“

" lively? no—hehas shown the greet-est distress." I ensured.
"To lee him, I shaild say. that instead or rumbling with his
sweetheanmthehills. he wgbttnheinbed.unda the bend:
at a doctor. "

"He shall' he:ln a day or two,‘ muttered Healhcllﬂl " But
ﬁnk-gm. up. Linton] Get up l " he shouted. “ Don't gravel
on the ground there: up, this moment I "

Liam bud sun]: pro-true again in another paroxym ofhelp-
lea feer, caused by his fuher'a glance tom him, I suppole:
lhlle WI- nothing else to produce such humiliation. He made
sever-l M16 obey, but his little strength was nunihilnted for
the time, and he fell buck again with a moan. Mr. Henthcliﬁ'
adv-need, and lined him to lean against. a rm of turf.

"NWJ'nid he, with when ferocity. "I‘m getting angry:

240 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

and it you don‘t command that paltry spirit of yum—De.
you! get npdirectlyl”

" I will. father," he patted. "Only, let me dune. a Idll
faint. I've dnneesyou wished, I'm sure. Cnthu-lnevilitellyu
that I—thntI—hnveheen cheerful. Ah! keep byme, Csthm'n:
give me yaur hand."

“Take mine." said his father; "stand on you- t'ea Til-I
now—she'll lend you her arm: that's right. look “Id. ‘1-
would imagine I was the devil himself. Miss Liam to at
such horror. Bewltind utownlk homewith minim?
He shudders it I touch him."

" Linton. dear I " whispered Catherine. " I can‘t gowwmhﬂ-
ing Heights: papa. has forbidden me. He‘ll not hurt you:
why are you so ﬂuid?"

" I can never re-enter that hause." he answered. " I'm new
rte-enter it withdut you I "

“ Stop!" cried his father. "We‘ll respect Catherine‘s ﬂlnl
smiples. Nelly. take him in. Ind I'll follow your ulviee m
caning the doctor, withwt deity."

"You’ll do well." replied I. “But I must remain with my
mistress: to mind your son is not my businm"

"Younrevcrystiﬂ‘.” mid Heathcliﬁ'. " Iknawthu : buyuﬂl
tame mtopinchthebebyand makeitscrum hd’oreitmu
your charity. Come, th. my hero. Are you willingtom
escorted by me? "

He approached once more, end mule as ifhe would eein ti:
fragile being: but. shrinking hack. Linton clung to his cousin.
end implored her to accompany him, with n hnh‘c imparmnity
that admitted no denial. However I disapproved, I couldn't
hinder he: indeed. how could she have reﬁned him basal?
What was ﬁlling him with drend we had no means of discerning:
but there he was. powalus under its gripe. ﬁnd my addition
seemed capable of shocking him into idiocy. We remind the
lhmhold : Catherine walked in. and I stood waiting till shehnd
mdneted the invalid tout-hair. expecting her out immediately:
when Mr. Heetheliﬁ, pushing me forward, exclaimed—

" Myhouse is not strickenwith the plngwe. Nelly; end I have
a mind to hehaspitahle to-day: sit down. and slim! me to that
the door."

He Ihut and locked it Ibo. I started.

"Yotulnll hnve tenhet‘ore you go home."he added. “In:

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 24!

self. Heretnn is gone with some tattle to the Lees. Ind
and Joseth nﬁ'cn a jeurneynfplasure: and. though
ed to being alone,'1'd nther have some interesting com.
ii' I angetiv. Miss Lintdn. like your seat byhs'm. I
:irwhnt I have: the present is hardly worth accepting;
have nothing else to oﬂ'er. It is Linton. I man How
:es sure! We odd what a wage feeling I live to my-
that seennufraidoinrel Had I been bornwhet-e laws
a strict and last: less dainty. I should treat myself to I
ivisection 01' those two; as an evening's nrnusemenL"

drew in his hath. struck the lable. Ind more to hintsdi'.
tell! I hate them."

n not afraid of you I " exclaimed Catherine, who enuld not
he latter part of his speech. She stepped close up; her
eyes ﬂashing with passion and resolution. “ Give methat
Iwillhnve it!" she said. “I wouldn't eat or drink here,
re starving."

thcliﬂ' had the lrey in his hand that remained on timetable.
Mupﬁeisedwithnsortofmprlseatherholdnus: or,
ly, reminded by her voice end gimme. of the person from
she inherited it. She snatched at the instrumenl. and
.eeeeded ingettingitnutofhisloosened ﬁngas: but her
recalled him to the present: he recovered it speedily.

aw. Catherine Linton." he said. “ stand off, or I shall knock
I“; and thatwill mkeMrs. Deanrnsd."

ardless of this warning. she captured his closed hand and
tents Again. “ We will go! ” she repeated. exening her
:eﬂ'orts to cause the inn muscles to relax; end ﬁnding
2 nails nude no imp/ﬁssion. she applied her teeth pretty
1. Heathcliﬂ' glanced at me n glance the! kept me {rum
ring I moment. Catherine was too intent an his ﬁngers
ee his face. He opened them suddenly. and resigned the
ofdispute; but, ere she had well secured it. he seized her
1e liberated hand, and. pulling he on it's knee. adminis-
vith the other a shower of terriﬁc slaps on both sides of
ad. eachsuﬁeient to have fulﬁlled his threat. had she been
) ﬁll.

his disboliml violence I rushed en him furiously. " You
I" I began tocry. "yanvillslnl" Ami: on the“
rim: 1 amstantmndsoon putoutofbrenth; nnd.whnt
mendthersge. I staggered disrllyheek.sndfelt nady

242 WUTHERING HEXGH'KS

to some. or to burst a blood-vessel. The scene was om in
two minutes; Catherine. relmsed, put her two hands to he
unpkuandlookedjtsusifshewere notsurewhetheeheran
were oﬂ'oron. Shetretnhledliken reed. poorthiog. Indian:
against the table perfectly bewildered.

" I know how to chastise children. you see." said the soonudrd
grimly. as he stooped to reposess himself of the key, which had
dropped to the ﬂour. " Go to Linton now. as I told you; end
cry at your usel I shall be your fatha, tomorrow—nil tin
father you'll have in a few days—and you shall have plentyd'
thnt. You can hear plenty: you‘re no wedding: youshulllute
a daily taste. if I catch such a devil of a temper in your-e}:
again I"

Cathy run to me instud o! Linton, and knelt down and with:
burning cheek on my lap. weeping nlnud. Heroouinhudlhrunk
into: corner of the settle, as quiet u u mount. congratulating
himself, [dare say, thnt the correction had lighted on until!
than him. Mr. Heathcﬁtl', perceiving us all oonfoundd, m.
mid expeditiously made the tea himself. The cups and sums
were laid ready. He poured it out. and handed me loop.

“Wash awayyour spleen." he snid. "And help your on
naughty pet and mine. It is not poisoned. though I prepared
it. l‘m going out to seek your horses."

Our ﬁrst thought. on his departure, was «a force on exit some-
where. We tried the kitchen door, but that was fastened out-
side : we looked at the windows—they were too narrow for even
Cathy‘s little ﬁgure.

" Master Linton," I cried, seeing wewere regularly imprisoned:
"you know what your diabolical father is after. and you shall
tell us, or I'll box your ears. as he has done your comin's."

" Yes, Linton, you must tell." said Catherine. " Itwas [cryonr
sake I came; and it will be wickedly ungrateful i! you refuse."

“Give me some tea, I'm thirsty. and then I’ll tell you."he
Answered. “Mrs. Deon, go Away. I don‘t like you standing
over me. Now, Catherine, you are letting your tutu tall into
my cup. I won‘t drink that. Give me another."

Catherine pushed another to him. and wiped her (we. “all
disgusted at the little wreteh‘a composure, since he wns no long!
in terror for himself. The anguish he had exhibited on the moat
subsidod as soon as ever he entered Wuthering Heights; sol
guessed he had. been menaced with an awful visitation of truth

WIN G HEIGHTS. 243

it he filled in decaying us there : and, that accomplished, he had
no further immediate falls. -

"Pan wants us to be married," he continued. after sipping
some a! the liquid. “ And he knows your papa wouldn't let us
marry now: and he's afraid of my dying. if we wait: so we are
to he married inrtho morning. and you are to stay here all night :
and il‘ you do as he wishes, youshall return home next day, and
lake me with you."

" Tm yUll with her, pitiful uhangeling?" I exclaimed.
"You many? Why, the man is mud; or he thinks us fools,
everyone. And do youinlngine that beautiful young lady. that
hulthy, M girl, will tie herself to a little periehing monkey
like you i M'yon oherkhingtthe notion that anybody, let alone
Mk! Catherine Linton, would hue you for a husband? You
went whipping for bringing us in here at all. with your dastardly
puling trick: and—don't look so silly, nowl I've a very good
nlind to shall: you severely. for your oontemptible treachery,
and your imbecile conceit."

I did give him I slight shaking; but it brought on the cough,
and he took to his ordinary rsourct: of moaning nod weeping,
and Catherine rebuild me.

"Stay all night? No," she said. locking slowly round.
"Ella. I'll him that door down. but I'll get out."

And Ibe would have commenced the execution of her (hm:
dimly, but Linton was up in nlan'u for his clear self again.
He clasped he: in his two feeble arms, sobbing-

"Won't you have me, md save me? not let me come to the
Grange? Oh I darling Catherine! you mustn't go and leave,
alizr all. You must obey my father—you um! I"

"I must obey my own." she replied, " and relieve him from
ihk cruel suspense. The whole nightl What would he think?
he'll be discerned Ilmdy. l'll either break or burn a way out
a! mo house. Be quiet I You're in no danger; but it you
hinder use—Linton. l love papa better than you I "

Themorul terror he felt of Mr. Heathcliﬂ's anger. restored
'0 I!!! buy his md's eloquence. Catherine was neslr dis-
traught: still, she persisted that she must go home. and tried

mtylu her turn. persuading him to subdue his selﬁsh Agony.
While they was this occupied. our gooler reentered.

“Your bastnhnve trotted 08;" he laid. " and—n“. Linton l
dwelling-gain? What has she been doing to you? Come,

244 WUTHBRING HEIGHTS.

Whit" done, nnd get toned. In a month or two, mylul.
you'll be able to pay her back her present tynnnia with I
vigomu hand. You're pining for pure love. no you not]
nothing else in the world; and she shall hue youl Thee. t:
bed i Ziunh won‘t be here tuanight ; you must undrss

Hush I hold your noise l Oncein your own room. I'll not out
near you: you needn't (ear. By chance you've immediate
ably. I'll look to the rest."

He spoke these words. holding the door 0pm for human
pas : and the latter achieved his exit exactly I: a spaniel with,
which suspected the person who murder! on it of daian
a spiteful squeae. The lock wu react-um. Hathcliﬂ' up
preached the ﬁre, where my mistress and I stood silmt. Cache
rine looked up. and imtinctively raised her hand to her M
his neighbourhood revived a painful sensation. Auybodyeki
would hxve been incapable of regarding the childish not will
sternum, but he soowled on her. and muttered—

"Oh! you are not afraid of me? Your courage iswelldil
guised: you man damnany nfnid l"

" I am afraid now." she replied. “ bemuse, in any, pupavil
be miserable; and how an I endure making him miaunﬂe
—when he—when he—Mr. Henthcliﬁ'. let me go home I l [I0
raise to marry Linton: papa would like me to: and I love him
Why should you wish to force me to do whnt I'll willingly d!
of myself? "

" Let him dare to force you 2 " I cried. "Thae's law inth
lend, thank God there is; though we be in en out-of-thc-n:
place. I'd inform if he were my own son: and it's felony with
out beneﬁt of clergy l "

" Silence I " said the militia. “To the devil with your clan:
ourl I don‘t want you to spak. Mia Linton. I shall enjo}
myself remukahly in thinking your Father will be miserable: I
shall not sleep for satisfaction You could have hit on no sure
way of ﬁxing your residence under my roof for the next trial!!!
four hours, than informing me that such nn event would W-
As to your promise to marry Linton. I'll take weyoushll IMF
it: for you shall not quit this place till it is Milled."

“ Send Ellen. then, to let pnpn know I‘m mfel" «claim!d
Catherine, weeping bitterly. " Or marry me now. Poor pap-l
'Ellen, he‘ll think we're lost. What shall we do?"

“ Not he! He'll think you are tired of waiting on him. Ind

war-ammo HEIGHTS. us

tun oﬁ‘ {or a little amusement.".answered Heathcliﬂl "You
unmet deny that you entered my house of your own accord, in
contempt of his injunctians to the contrary. And it is quite
natural that you ahould desire amusement at your age : and that
youde weary‘oi' nursing a sick man. and that man only your
ﬁtha. Catherine. his happiest days were over when your days
began. He cursed you. I dare say. {or coming into the world
(I did. at least); and it would just do if he cursed you as he
mt out of it. I'd join him. I don't love you I How should 1?
Weep away. As far as I can see, it will be your chief diversion
Manner; unlus Linton make amends for other losses: and your
provident parent appears to fancy he may. His letters of advice
and consolation entertained rue vastly. In h‘u last he recom-
mended my jewel to be useful of his; and kind to her when he
got her. Careful and kind—than paternal. But Linton requires
hilwhole stock of can and kinan for himself. Linton can
play the little tyrant well. He'll undertake to torture any num-
herof an. if their teeth be drawn and their claws pared. You'll
he able to tell his uncle ﬁne tales of his ‘iﬂdﬂm. when you get
home again. I assure you."

"You're right thae l " I said; " explain your son's character.
Show his resemblance tnyoursell‘ ; and then. I hope, Miss Cathy
will think twice Mae she takes the eochatriee l "

" I don’t much mind speaking of his amiable qualities now."
bemused; "becausesheruusteitheraoeept hirnarreruain a
winner. and you along with her. till your master dia. I can de-
tain youboth. quiteonncealed, here. Ityau doubt. encourage her
to retract her word, and you'll have an opportunity of judging l "

" I’ll not retract my word," laid Catherine. “ l'll marry him

within this hour. if I may go to ’l‘hmsheross Grunge afterwards.
Mr. Heatheliﬂ, you're a cnlel man, hutyou're not a. ﬁend : and
you won't. from m malice. destroy irrevocably all my happi-
nus. Hpupa thought I had left himnu W, and if he died
before I returned. mild 1 bar to live? I‘ve given over crying:
but I'm going to kneel here. ﬁt your knee: and I'll not get up,
Ind I11 not take Inyeyufrom your taoe till you look back at me!
No. don't turn away! do look! You'll see nothing to provoke
M 1 don't hate you. I'm not angry that you struck me.
Have you never loved anybody in all your life. uncle? lever!
Ahl you must look once. I‘m so wretched. youm't help being
lorry and pitying nae"

246 WTHEKIKG moans.

" Keep your en's ﬁnger: of; and more. or I‘ll kinltyuuP
cried Heathcliﬁ'. brutally lepubing ha. “ I‘d lube be hw
by a snake. How the devil an you drum of fawning mini
I detest you I "

He shrugged his shoulders: shook himself. ind“. '5 ii If!
ﬁsh crept with aversion : and thrust hack hlschuh- : while I Iv
up, and opened my mouth, to commennen dmright W0
nbuse. But I was rendered dumb in the middle of the ﬁn
sentence, by a threat lhnt I should heslxnwn into: room hymy
self the very nut syllable ! uttered. It was growing duh—I!
heard a sound of voices at the garden gate. Our host hunk!
out instantly: It: had his wits shout him: u bud not. Tha-
was a talk or two or three minutes. And he returned nlnne.

“I thought it had been your cumin Eamon.” I ahead (1
Catherine. "I wish hawouldarrivel Whohnmhm bemigh
.tnke our part? ”

" Itwns three servants sent toned: you from the Gtu'e."li
Huthcliﬂ‘, overbearing me. “ You should haveopmed I W
and culled out: but I could sue: thlt chit iI glad you didﬂ’l
She's glad to be obliged to stay, I'm certain."

A! luming the chance we had missed, weth We m1 0
our grief without control ; and be showed u to unit on till uin
o'clock. Then he hid us go upstairs. though the kilcbﬂl. '1
Zillah‘s chnmber; and ! whispered my compan tn obey
perhaps we might contrive to get through the window the, a
into n gnrret, and out by its skylight. The window. howeva
was narrow. like those below, and the gun-at trap nu sufe In!
our attempts ; {or we were fastened in us before. We with:
or us lay down: Catherine took her station by the lattice. lll‘
watched anxiously for morning: I. deep sigh being the an!
answer I could obtain to my frequent mire-lies that she won}
try to rest. I seated myself in n chm'r, and rocked to Ind fr:
pissing harsh judgment on my many derelictitms of duty; fro:
which. it struck me then. all the misfortunes of my employer
sprang. It was not the can. in reality. I am nwure : but it \Iu
in my imagination, that dismal night: and I thought Heatth
himself less guilty than I.

At seven o‘clock he came. and inquired if Mis Linton h“
risen. She ran to the dnnr immediately, 3nd answered. " YA'
“ Here, then." he said, opening it, and pulling her out. In: K
Swallow. but he turn“. the lock again. 1 demanded mytela:

 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 247

“ plight." he replied; " I'll send up your breakfast in a.
Nubile."

I thumped an the panels. and rattled the latch angrily: and
Woe asked why I was still shut up? He answered. I must try
toauhueitumthnr hour. and they went way. I endured it two
or three hauls ; It length. I heard u footstep : not Heathcliﬁ's.

“'I've brought you something to at," midst voice ; “0an
t' door I "

Complylng early. I beheld Hinton. laden with‘food enough
to last me Ill duly.

" le it." ll: ldded. “tasting the tray into my hand.

"Stay one minute." I began.

" Nay," cried he, and retired. regardless of my prayers I
will pour forth to detain him.

And thrxe I remained enclosed the whole day, and the whole
of the next night : and another. had another. Five nights and
{our day: I remitted. Illogether. being nobody but Harmon.
once nay morning; Ind he was a model a! n. gaoler: surly,
Ind dumb. und den! w evory attempt at moving his sense of
justice 0: companion.

v—H—

CHAPTER XXVIII.

0:! the ﬁfth morning. or rather memo”. - diﬁaent step
stimulant—lighter and shorter; and. this time. the person
entered the room. It waslilluh ; donned in her scarlet shawl,
Vithlbllcksilk bonnet on mm,m Iwillow bultet
swung to her arm.

“Eh. dear! Mrs. Dean I" she exclaimed. “Weill therein:
Uh lbw! you n. Gimmerton. I never thought but you were
sunk in the Blukhorse marsh, and mlssy with you, till master
told me you‘d been found, and he'd lodged you herel Whatl
end you must blve got on an island, sure? And how long were
you in the hole? Did mater save you, Mrs. Dun? But you're
mnthin—you’venothomxopoorly, have you?"

“Your master is I true scannle l" I replied. " But he shall
tuner for it. He needn‘t have raised that tale: it shall all be
bid hue l"

"W! do you W?” asked Zillah. "It's not his tale:
My tell that in the village—about your being lost in the marsh:

348 WTHERING HEIGHTS

and I calls to Eamshaw. when I come in-' Eh, they's qua
things. Mr. Hareton. happened since I went off. It's audp't}
of that likely young ins, and mt Nelly Dean." I-Ie stand
I thought he had not hard nught. so I told him the mm
The master listened, and he just smiled to himself. and said. ‘I
they have hem in the marsh, theyare out now. Zillnh. Nd}
Dean is lodged. at this minute. in your room. You an tell he
to flit. when you go up: here is the key. The hog-waterg'u
into her head. and she would have run home quite digbty; In
I ﬁxed her till she came round to her senses. You can bid he
go to the Grange at once, if she be able. and any a mesh!
from me. that her young lady will follow in time to attend tin
nquite's funeral.‘ " '

“ Mr. Edgar is not dead?" I gasped. "Ohl Zillnh, Zillnltl‘

" No, no; sit you down. my good mistress," she replied," yon‘n
right sickly yet. He's not dead; Doctor Kenneth thinks I)
may last another day. I met him on the road and asked."

Instead of sitting down. I snatched my outdoor things, an
listened below, for the way was free. On entering the how!
I looked about for some one to give information of Cuber-ins
The plate was ﬁlled with sunshine, and the door stood wid
open : but nobody seemed at hand. As I hesitated whetth
go off at once. or return and seek my mistress. a slight cong'
drew my attention to the hearth. Linton' lay on the settle. sol
tenant. sucking a stick of sugar-candy, and pursuing my not!
ments with apathetic eyes. " Where is Mix Catherine?”
demanded sternly, supposing I could frighten him into givitt.
intelligence, by latching him thus, alone. He sucked on Ii]:
an innocent.

" Is she gone?" I said.

" No," he replied ; " she's upstairs: she's not to go: we won‘
let her."

“ You won't let her, little idiot l " I exclaimed “ Direct 1»
to her room immediately. or I'll make you sing out shew-ply."

" Papa would make you sing out. if you attempted to get theta.Y
he answered. " He says I'm not tobesoft with Catherine: 5111':
my wife, and it's shameful that she should w‘uh to leave me
He says, she hates me and wants me to die. that she may hm
a, money; but she shan't have it: and she shan't go home
are never shall l—sbe may cry. and be sick as much as sht

Ml"

.W'UTHERING HEIGHTS. 249

He raumed his former occupation. closing his lids, as if he
want to drop asleep.

" Muster Heathcliﬂ‘," I resumed. " have you forgotten all
Cntherine's kindnes to you lost winter, when you aﬁrmed you
loved her, and when she brought you books and sung you songs.

Indcame many n time through wind and snow to see you? She
wept to miss one evening. because you would be disappointed;
Illi you felt then that shew-sahuudredtimes too good toyou:
and now you believe the lies you: {other tells. though you know
hedetstl you both. And you join him against her. That's
multitudeﬁsitm?" . i, v

The corner of Linton's mouth Sell. and he tool: the sugar-
undy'from his lips. - ‘ >

“ Did she come to Wutheriug Heights. because she hated you?"
I emtinued. "Think for yourself i As to your money. she does
not even know that you will hnve any. And you say she's sick :

Indyayouleaveheralonempthueinusuzngehousel You
who have felt what it is to he so neglected I You could pity your
mountings : undshe pitied them too: but you won't pity hers!
I shed tears, Mme: Heuthcliﬁ'. you see-m elderly woman. and
Invent nerdy—end you. after pretending such uﬂ'ection. and
hill] renson to worship he utmost. store every tear you have
hr younelf. and lie there quite at use. Ahl you're nheurtless.
and: boy I"

" I un't Ituy with he." he answered crossly. “ I‘ll not stay
by mysell. She cries so I an't bear it. And she won't give over.
though I My I'll call my father. I did all him once. and he
W In strangle her. if she wus not quiet; but she began
Inin theinstnnt he left the room, moaning and grieving All night
long, though I mined for vention that I couldn't sleep."

" Is Mr. Heatth out?" I inquired. peroeiving that the
watched cruture had no power to sympathise with his cousin‘s
mm tortures.

“He's in the court." hereplied, " talking to Doctor Kenneth;
who any: uncle is dying. truly. at last. I'm glad. for I shall he
were! the Grange after him. Catherine ltlwnys spoke of in:
hrhonse. It isn't hers! It's mine: pupa 9y: everything she
Winning Allhernicehooksnremine: sheoa'a'ed togiverne

M, end her pretty birds, and her pony Minny, if I.would get
“Ikeyofour room,nnd let herout; but I told her she had
ngiveJheym all. ullluine. Andthen lhecried. and

250 WIRING m

took a little picture from her neck. and aid! Ihmld helm
two pictures in a gold case. an oneside h: moths. null-ll
other, uncle, when they were young. 'I'humymty—lsi
Iwmmine. too; nnduiedtogenhunmhez. 112$
thing wouldn't let me: she pushed me of, end. hurt Ill.
shrielned out—that frighten M heard [up w, I
she broke the hinges and divided the an, ind gave m h
mother's porn-ail; the othex she ntteiupted to hide: imp;
asked what was the mtta, and Iexphined it. Huntth
I hzdaway. andordered hermresignheu come; skid-u
and he—he struck her down. and wrenched it (If the dub.-
cnlshed it with his fad."

"And wereyaupleased to see her struck?" I asked: lath
my designs in «amusing his talk.

“ I winked." he answered: " I wlnl: tone my father“
dogmahmse, hedoesitsohard. YetImgladnxﬁm—i
deserved punishing for pushing me: but when pap- m [a
she made me come to the window and showed me ha chem:
on the inside. against her (cab, and her mouth ﬁlling with New
nndthenshegntherednpthehitsolthepicmn. lndwentllll!
dmwithhufaeetu the wall. nndshehns murmu-
since: and! sommimathinkshecan’tlpakforpnin. Id.
like to think so ; but she's a naughty thing for crying mﬂnﬂﬂ)
and she looks so pale and wild. 1’m afraid of

“And you can get the key if you chm?’ said.

"Yes, when lam upstairs." he answered; "but I can't lIl
upstairs now."

“ In what apartment is it?" I asked.

"Oh." he cried. "I shan't tell” what it is! It is cl
secret. Nobody, neither Hutton nor Zillnh, i to km
There! you've tired me—«go nwly. go away] " And be turn:
his face on to his urn, and shut his eye agnin.

I considered it best to depart without seeing Mr. Huthcliﬂ. ll!
bring a mane for my young lady fromthe Gauge. On India
it. the astonishment of my fellow-servants to see me. and thdrju
else. was intense; and when they heard that their little mil!!!
was safe, two or three were about to hurry up andshaux the W
at Mr. Edgar': door : but I bespoke xhennnounnetnent of it.”
self. Haw changed I (and him. even in those few dnysl 3‘
lay In image of sadness and resignation uniting his death. V61
young he looked; though his actual age was thirty—aim. N

 

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 251

would hm called him ten years younger. at least. He thought
“Catherine: lorhelnurmuredhername. Itouchedhishand,
Ind spoke.

"Catha'ine in coming. dear master!" lwhispered; "she is
alive and well; and will be ham. 1 hope. tan-night."

1 mbled at the 6m eﬁ'ecm of this intelligence: he hull rote
np, looked eagerly round the apartment. and then sank hack in
nmn. As soon I: he recanted. I related our compulsory
visit, and detention at the Heights. 1 said Hmthcliﬁ' forced
nae to go in: which was not quite true. Iuttered as little as
possible against Linton ; nor did I describe all his father's brutal
conduct—my intention: being to add no bitterness. if 1 wild
hdp it. to his drudy nverﬂowing cup.

He divined that one of his enemy's purpose was to secure the
personal pmperty,a: well Is the estate. to his son: or rather
him-elf: yetwhyhedid notwait till hisdeousewns npuzzle to
my waste. became ignornnt how nearly he and his nephew
would quit the world together. However. he felt that his will
had better be altered: instead of laving Catherine's fortune at
her on disposal, be determined to put it in the hands of
mate: for her me during life. and {or her children. if she had
any, alter her. By that mane. it could not fall to Mr. Heath—
eliﬂ' should Unton die.

Having received his orders. I despatched a man to fetch the
attorney. and {our more, provided with serviceable wupons, to
dmand my young lady of her gnoler. Both partia were delayed
verylnle. Thesingle servant returned ﬁrst. He said Mr. Green,
the lawyer. was out when he arrived at his house. and he had. to
Walt two honn for his reentrance; and then Mr. Green told him
he luda little Maine: in the village that must be done: but he
would he at Thrushch Grange helm: morning. The four men
camehack unaccompanied also. They brought word that Cathb
rinewuill: tooilltoquitherroom; and Henthcliﬂ'wouldnot
nﬁer them to see her. I scolded. the uupid fellows well for
betting to that tale, which I would not entry to my master: re.
living to take a whole bevy up to the Heights. at daylight. and
m itliterally, males. the prisoner were quietly surrendered to
In. Her father xltall tee her. I vowed. and med again. if that
devllbchilledonhiaowndoontones in trying to prevent it!

Happily. I Wu spared the journey and, the trouble. I had

mdunminat threeo‘elock to {etch ajug of water; and

152 WUTI'IERING HEIGHTS.

w§s possiug through the hall with it in my hand, wha:
knock at the front door made me jump. “ Oh I it is C
said. recollecting myself—"only Green." and I went on
ing to send somebody eke no open it; but the knock
pated: not loud. and still imponnnalely. I put the in
benign and hastened to admit him myself. The ham
shone clear outside. It was not the attorney. My at
little mistress sprang on my neck, sobbing—

" Ellen! Ellen! is papa Ilive?"

"Yes," I cried: "ya. my nngel. he is. God' be I
you are snfe with us again I "

She wanted to run. breathless as she was. upstairs
Linton‘s room ; but I compelled her to sit down on a ct
made her drink, and washed her pale face. chaﬁng it inl
colour with my apron. Then I snid I must go ﬁrst, at
her arriv ; implorng her to say. she should be happy wiI
Heathen . She stared. but soon comprehending why
selled her to utter the falsehood. she assured me she in
complain.

I couldn't abide to be present at their meeting. 1 st:
side the chambendoor a quarter of an hour, and badly V
nar the bed. then. All was composed, however: Ca
despair was as silent as her father‘s joy. She supper
calmly, in appearance; and he ﬁxed on her features h
eyes, that seemed dilating with ecstnsy.

He died blissfully. Mr. Lockwood: he died so. Kis
cheek, he murmured—

" I am going to her; and you. darling child. shall
us 1 " and never stirred or spoke again; but oontim.
rapt. mdinnt game. till his pulse imperceptibly stopped
soul deported. None could have noticed the exact 11
his dath. it was so entirely without a sxmggle.

Whether Catherine had spent her tears. or whether!
were too weighty to let them ﬂow. she sat there dryneyet
sun'rose: she sat till noon. and would still have runninet
ing over that deathbed, but I insisted on her earning 2'
taking some repose. It was well I succeeded in removi
for nt dinner-time appeared the lawyer, having called at ‘
ing Heights to get his instmetions how to behave. Rel
himself to Mr. Heathcliﬂ‘: that wins the cause of his I
obeying my masters summons. Fortunately, no tho

 

- "w

m...

wtmtnmc HEIGHTS. 253

lnrldly emits crested the lntter‘s mind. to disturb hint. alter
his dutghtefs arrival.

Mr. Green took upon himselfto order everything and every-
body nhout the pine. He gnve all the servants. but me. notice
to quit. He would have carried his delegated nuthority to the
point of insisting thnt Edgar Linton should not be buried bqide
ha wife, but in the chapel, with his family. There was the will.
however, to hinder that. Ind my land protestations against any
infringement of it: directions. The funeral was hurried over;
Cntherine. Mn. Unton Henthdiﬂ‘ now. was suffered to stay at
the Grunge till her fathefe corpse had quitted it.

She told me thnthernnguish had at last spurred Linton toincur

the risk of liberating her. She heard the menI sent disputing
It the door. end the gathered the sense of Heathcliﬁ's answer.
It drove her dspente. Linton, who had been conveyed up to
the little parlour soon alter I left, was terriﬁed into {etching the
key before his {suture-ascended. He had the cunning to un-
lock and block the door. without shutting it; and when he
thould have gone to bed. he begged to sleep with Hareton. and
his petition VIII granted for once. Catherine stole out before
hunk of dny. She dare not try the doors. lest the dogs should
nine In nimn ; she visited the empty chambers and examined
their windows: Ind. luckily, lighting on her mother’s, she got
elsily out of its lattice, and on to the ground, lyy means of the
ﬁr-tree close by. Her accomplice suﬁered for his share in
the nape. notwithstnnding his timid oontrivnnoer.

......

CHAPTER XXIX.

Tn! evening me: the tuneful. my young lady and [were sated
in’ the lilnry : nan musing mournfully—ane olus despairingly—
on our last. now venturing conjectures I! to the gloomy future.

We had just agreed the best datiny which could await
Cuherlne, would be I permision to continue resident at the
Gritty: at least, during Lintott’s life: he being allowed to join
her there. and I to terminus housekeeper. That seemed mther
unfavourable Inmgetnentto he hoped for; and yet! did
hope,nnd begun to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my
home end my employment, and, above all. my beloved young
hiatus: when amt—one ofthediscnrded om, notyet

154 WNG HEIGHIS.

hastily in. and mid “that devn Ha.th
coming through the court: should he fasten the door in
ll'wehndheenmndenoughwoxduthntproneqdin'
nottime. He made no oeremonyofknooking or am
his name: hewas master, and lulled himselfol‘ the
privilege to walk stnight in. without loyingn word. 1
of our informant} voioe directed him tothe library: he
and motioning him out, shut the door.

It was the some room into which he had been nshe
guest. eighteen years before: the same man shone tlu
window ; nnd the same uuturnn lnndscnpe lny outside
not yet lighted st candle, but all the npnrtment was visl
to the portraits on the wall: the splendid had of Mrs
nnd the graceful one of her husband. Heuthcliﬂ’ulvant
hearth. Time had little nlteredhis person either. The:
same man: his dark face rather allover and more or
his {mine a stone or two heavier. perhaps. and no oth
enee. Catherine had risen. with an impulse to dash a
she snw him.

“Stop l " he said, arresting her by the um. "1
running: amty I Where would you go? I’ll: come to
home; nnd I hope you'll he I dutiful daughter. and no
ngc my son to further disobedience. I was clubs-ruse
punish him when I discovered his put in the husina :
n cobweb. n pinch would annihilate him; but you'll 5
look that he has received his duel I brought him d
evening. the day before yesterday. and just set him in
and nevertouched him afterwards. I sent Hareton out
had the room to ourselves. In two hours, I mlled y
carry him up again; and since then my presence is as 5
hisnerva n52. ghost: and I {myheseesmeot’len, Lhm
not near. Hmton my: he wakes and shriek: in the nig
hour together. and calls you to pretax him from it
whether you like your precious male or not. you must co
your concern now; I yield all my interat in him to you

"Why not let Catherine continue here? " l pladed, "
Master Linton to her. As you hate than both. you‘d
them : they run only he ndaily plague to your unnatun

“ I‘m seeking a tenant {or the Gnnge," he nnswetet
I nut my children about me. to be sure. Bahia,
alum her services for her bread. I'm not going to

WVTHERING HEIGHTS 25$

hinhnlrynndidlznasnﬂer Linum hu gone. Make taste
trig-ready. now: and don't oblige me to oompel you.“

“lihall.” slid Cntherine. "Linton is Ill I lave to love in
ill-odd. Ind ﬂannel] ynuhave doncwhntynu could to make
hhntd‘ultomxndrne to him.yon mm makeushnte
cchmhet. And ldefyyun to hunhim whenlarnby,and
1der you to frighten me I "

“Younre a boastful champion." replied Heathdiﬁ‘; “but I
don't like you Well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full
hneﬁtofthe torment. as longasitlasts. Itisnot Iwhowill
mknhhhhelulbyou—it ishisownswcetspirit. He'su
bina- II gull a your death; Ind its consequentu: don‘t
ups: think: {or this noble devotion. I heard him draw a
phantpictnretollllnhofwhnthewoulddoifhewereu
Wu 1: the inclination is there. and his may wanna: will
Humps: his wit: to ﬁnd I nbstitute for arength."

“I know he has a. bad nature." said Cntha'ine: "he‘s your
Ion. nit I'm glad I've: better, to forgive it; and I know he
‘mes me. and for that man I love hinn Mr. Heathcllﬁ. you
uve nadndyto loveyan; and, however miserable you make us.
Ive Ihnll still hvethe revenge of thinking thnt your cruelty arias
'xom your grater winery. You are miaenble. are you not?
(Andy, like the devil. ad curious like him? Natal} loves you
M will cry forymnvhm youdie! I wouldn't beyonl"

Wm Wwith I. kind ofdmrylriumph: she seemed
Loinve nude mph: mind to cum into the spirit of her future
hinily. Ind draw plum from the grief: of her enemies.

" You shall he sorry in it yourself presently." said her father-
m-h', " li‘ you «and there mother minute. Begone, witch. and
a your thing: ! "

Sh scornfully withdrew. In her absence. I began to beg for
Ell-NI planet: the Highs. offering totesign mine to her; but
hemld sufferitounoamourm He bidmebesilent ; Indthen,
ﬁrth ﬁrst time. allowed himself: glance round theroomandn
Ink at a: piatum aning studied Mrs. Llnton's, he said—

“ l ulnllhnveunt home. Not hecnusel need it. but“— He
ﬁned-bawdy to the ﬁre. and continued. with what. for lack of
them: word. I must call n smile—“ I'll tell you what I did
MI I got the sexton. who was digging Linton's gnu,
Wuhan}: oﬂ‘her ooﬁn—lid, and I opened it I thought.
he, lwouldhnvestnyedthue: whenInwberfncengnin—lt

:56 wummmc HEIGHTS.

ilhetsyeti—hehadhardworktastirme; but hes:
change if the air blew on it, end so I struck one sidec
loose. nnd covered it up: not Lintou's side, damn hi1
he‘d been soldered in lead. And I bribed thelexta
away when I'm laid there. and slide mine out too;
made so: nnd then. by the time Lintun gets to us he‘l
which is which i"

" You were very wicked. Mr. Heathcliﬁ l " I
“ were you not ashnmed to disturb the dead?"

“ I disturbed nobody. Nelly." he replied: "end I
ease to myself. I shall he a grat deal more comfon
and you'll have a better chance of keeping me tut
when I get there. Disturbed her? No! she has dis
night and day, through eighteen years—incessantly
lady—till yesternight : Ind ysternight I was tranquil
I was sleeping the lust sleep by that sleeper, with my he
and my cheek frolen against hers."

"And if she had been dissolved into earth. or u
would you have dmmt ui' then?" I said.

“ Of dissolving with her. and being more happy
answered. “ Do you suppose I dread my change 0
I expected such a transformation on ruising the lit
better pleased that it should not commence till
Besides, unis; I had received a distinct impress
passionless features. thnt strange feeling would hudl)
mnoved. It began oddly. You know I was wild aft:
1nd eternally. from dawn to dnwn, praying her to rt
her spirit I I have a strong faith in ghosts: I have it
that they can, and do. exist among us! The day she
there came a {all of snow. In the evening I went tot
yard. It blew bleak as winter~all round was solitary
fur thnt her fool of a husband would wmdet- up the r‘
and no one else had business to bring them there. B
Ind conscious two yards of loose earth was the s
between us, I said to myself—‘ I'll have her in my m
Hshe be cold, I'll think it is this north wind that chili
if she be motionless, it is sleep.’ I got a spade iron
house. and began to delve with all my might—it 5
main; I fell to work with my hantk ; the wood c
melting about the screws: I was on the point of It
object, when it seemed that I heard usigh from some

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 237

It the edge of the grave, and bending down. '11’ I can
:et this oﬂ'.’ I muttered, ‘I wish they may shovel in the
over us both i ' and I wrenched at it more desperately still.
was another sigh. close at my ear. I appured to feel the
breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. I knew no
thing in ﬂesh and blood was by: but. as certainly as you
ve the approach to some substantial body in the dark.
hit cannot be discerned, so oertninlyl felt that Cathy was
not under me. but on the enrth. A sudden sense of relief
i from my heart through every limb. I relinquished my
.- of agony. and turned consoled at once: unspeakably
ed. Her presence was with me: it remained while I re-
in grave. and led me home. You may laugh. if you will;
wassurelshouldseeherthere. I was sure shewaswith
it! I could not help talking to her. Having reached the
ts. I rushed eagerly to the door. It was fastened; and,
rather. that accursed Enrnshaw and my wife opposed my
1“. I remember stopping to kick the breath out of him.
In hurrying upstairs. to my room and hers. I looked
impatiently—I felt her by me—I could aim! see her. and
mold null I ought to have sweat hlood then, from the
;h of my yearning—from the fervour of my supplications
e but one glimpse! I had not one. She showed herself,
oﬁen was in life. a devil to me! And. since then. some
more and sometima less, I‘ve been the sport of that in-
ole torture l Infernal l keeping my nerve atsueh a stretch.
it they had not resembled catgut. they would long ngo
dual to the feeblenes of Linton‘s. When I sat in the
with Hareton. it seemed that on going out. I should meet
nheu I walked on the moon I should meet hereoming in.
. I went from home. I hastened to return: she an! be
there at the Heights, I was certain l And when I slept in
lumber—I was beaten out of that. I cmaldn't lie there ; for
oment I closed my eya. she was either outside the window.
ling buck the panels. or entering the room, or even resting
trling had on the me pillow as she did when a child;
must open my lids to see. And so I opened and closed
a hundred times a night—to be always disappoinde It
1 me 1 I‘ve often groaned aloud. till that old rascal Joseph
nlbt believed that my conscience was playing the ﬁend
of me. Now, since I’ve seen her. I‘m paciﬁed—a little.
1

258 WUTHERING lime

It was a. strange way of killing! not by inches, but by {new
of hnirhreadths. to beguile me with the spectre of a. hop,
through eighteen years l "

Mr, Heathcliﬁ paused and wiped his forehead; his hid-z
to it, wet with perspiration; his eyes were ﬁxed m the red aha
of the ﬁre, the brows not contracted, but nised nextthecempk:
diminishing the grim aspect of his emit-immune. but imp-ﬂit:
a peculiar look of trouble. and a pninfnlappunneeof mill
tension towards one absorbing subject. He onlyhnlt'addrad
me. and I maintained silence. I didn't like to hear him talk!
Merashonperiod he resumed his Ineditationon thepimt.
track it dawn and lam it against the sofn to eontempkkhﬂ
better advantage; and while so occupied Cntherine mud.
announcing that she was ready, when he pony shall be
saddled.

“Send that over to—rnorraw," said Heathcllﬁ' to me; I!!!
turning to her. he added—"YO" may do without your pm,“
it is a ﬁne evening. and you'll need no ponies at W
Heights; for what journeys you take. your own feet vii saw:
you. Come nlong."

“Good-bye, Ellen l " whispered my den- little minus A!
she kised me, her lips felt like ice. "Came Ind see It.
Ellen : don't forget"

" Take care you do no such thing. Mrs Dem!“ sidhanel
father. “When 1 wish tospeak wyou I'lleonuhae. 11m!
none of your prying at my hon5e l‘"

He signed her to precede him ; Ind casting back a look thud
my heart, she obeyed. I watched them from the window. well
down the garden. Heatheliﬂ‘ ﬁxed Calherine's nrm unda- lit
though she disputed the act at ﬁrst evidently: and with mid
strides he hurried her into the alley. whose trees conceded that

CHAPTER XXX.

1 rum: paid :1 visit to the Heights. but I have nut seen her aim
she left: Joseph held the door in his hand when I miled to es!
after her, and wouldn‘t let me pass. He said Mrs Linton n
“ thrang," and the master wasnot in. Zillnh has told me some

VOTE-[BRING HEIGHTS. 259

thingofthewaytheygoon, otherwise I shanldbanilyhow'ho
VI: dead and who living. She thinks Catherine hum. Ind
does notlilreha. l mgueu byhermlk. Myymmg hdyuked
maid cf her when sheﬁm came; but Mr. Huthcliﬁtold hi:
hi {allow her own business. and let his daughtet-in-llw look after
herself; And Zillah willingly acqniaued. being n nmowminded
selﬁsh woman. Cuberine evinced a child's annoyance I! this
mt: rep-id i! with contempt. and ‘hus calmed my inform-m
among her enemies. as securely as if she had dune ha some
glut mg; I had Hung talk with 21m abanl sixweeh ago.
I little before youcnme, onedny when“ {oregzthezd oath:
ulnar: Ind this is what she 101d me.

“The in! rhing Mrs. Linton did." she aid. “on her arrivll
«the Heights, was torn: upauirs. without even wishing good
eveningto me and Joseph ; she shut heme]! inm Linwn’s mom.
and remained till morning. Then, while the master Ind Earn-
Ihtwweren hreaﬂut. sheentered thehanse.andasked win
equim int: doctor might be sent for? her cousin was very ilL

“ 'We know that l' answered Healhcliﬂ‘; ‘bu! hi: life is not
worth I farming. and I won't spend a farming on him.’

" ‘Bul I cannot tell how to do.’ shenid; ‘mdifnohodywill
help me. he‘ll die x'

" ‘ Walk out of the room,‘ cried the master. ‘ and lame never
hear award male about him ! None here we whm becomes
dhim; ifyondo. a: the nurse; ifyau dn 110:,th him up
and hove him.‘

"Then shebgan mbatherme. and I mid l'd had enough
Plague with the liresame thing ', we each had musksmndhers
n: to wait on Linton, Mr. Hmhcliﬂ‘ bid me lave lhn labour
when

"How they nun-zed togeiher. I can't tell. I fnncy he fretted
I m deal, and moaned hisgln nigh: and day ', Ind she‘hnd
Mlinle rem one and gas: by her while-[nee and hairy
'75. She Iometirns came into the kitchen all winged like,
Ind looked is if she would (sin beg assistance: but I was not
Bing to disobey the master: ‘1 never dare disobey him. Mrs.
Dean; 1nd, (haughI thought it wrong that Kenneth should not
heal for, it mno concern of mine either lo advise or complain,
III! I nlways refused to meddle. Once or twice. Iﬂer we had
9mm bed, I've happened to open my door again and seen her
ﬁtting crying on the stairs' top; Ind then I've shut myself in

353 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

to help him. ifhe would. and jolted at his confusion. He gin
mum, and began to swear.

I' Now, Mrs. Dean," Zillnh went on. seeing me not plead
by her mnnner, “ you happen think your young lady too ﬁne for
Mr. lbretou; and happen you're right: but I own I should
love well to bring her pride a peg lower. And what. will ell ha
laming and her dnintiness do for her. now? She's as poor I5
you or I: poorer I'll be hound: you're saving, and Phi ding
my little all that road."

Huston allowed Zilhth to give him heraid ; had she W
him into a good humour : so, when Catherine crime. halfw-
ting her former insults. he tried to make himself Mb]
the haulekeeper’s uncount. 

“Minis walked in." she said, "as chill as an icicle. and I5
high as a princes. [got up and offered her mymt inthr
arm-chair. No. she turned up her nose at my civility. Farr
shut rose. too. and bid he: come to the settle, Ind sit. dose by
the lire: he was sure she was starved.

“ ' I've been starved in month and mare,‘ she Ins-ad.
xuu'ng on the word as scornrul as she could.

" And she got a chair for herself. and placed it at a distant
rm both of us. Having snt till she was warm. she began Io
look round. and discovered a number of books in the draw:
.5: was instantly upon her feet ugnin. stretching to rack
them: but they were too high up. Her cousin. nfm watching
M endeavours a while, at last summoned courage to help he?)
3]” held her frock, and he ﬁlled it with the ﬁrst that camclo
mod.

n t was .1 great advance {hr the lad. She didn't ﬂank
m; still. he felt gratified that she had accepted his ausisunct.
udvcntured to stand behind as she examined them, and um
“loop and point out what struck his fancy in certain old pic.
"a which they contained; nor was he dnnnml by the saucy

in which she jerked the page from his ﬁnger : he maternal
wﬂwith going .1 bit further back, and looking at her-"mud
duh-ink. She continued reading, or seeking {or somah'w!
.ud, His attention became. by degrees, quite centred in
.‘ndy of her thick, silky curls 2 her face he couldn't see, and
*mldn‘t see him. And, perhaps, not quite awake tow)!”
.“ m attracted like a child to a candle, atlztst he [mactxtk‘l
.m; to touching; he put out his hand and stroked 00¢

wry-mums HEIGH'KS. 261

nu. let her be till after the (uneml ; end go up now and
) get her what is needl'ul; and, as soon as she seems
tell me.’ ”

y stayed upstairs a fortnight. nccnrding to Zillnh; who
her twice a day. and would have been rather more friendly,
:r attempts at increasing kindnss were proudly and
lly repelled.

thaliﬂ' went up once, to show her Linton's will. He had
.thed the whole of his. and what had been her, movable
ly to his mm: the poor creature was threatened. or
., into that not during her week's absence. when his uncle
The lands, being a minor, he could not meddle with.
er. Mr. Heathcliﬁ‘ has claimed and kept them in his wife’s
nd his Also: I suppose legally: at uny rate. Catherine,
re of cash nud friends. cannot disturb his posses.

:body." said Zillah. “ever approached her door, except
me. but I; and nobody asked unything about her. The
casion ofhereoming down into the house was on a Sunday
on. She had cried out. when I carried up her dinner,
e couldn't hear any longer being in the cold : and I told
: master was going to Thrushcross Grange. nud Earnshnw
needn’t hinder her ﬁ'om descending: so, us soon as she
Heathcliﬂ's horse trot off. she made her appearance
1 in blank. and her yellow curls combed buck behind her
plain as a Quaker: she couldn't comb them out.

seph Ind I generally go to chapel on Sundays : ” the kirk.
ow. has no minister now. explained Mrs. Dean ; and they
: Methodists' or Baptisls‘ place (1 can't say which it is). It
men. a chapel. " Joseph had gone,“ she continued. " but
ght proper to hide at home. Young folks are always the
{or an elder's over-looking; and Hareton, wiLh all his
lness. isn't 3 model of nice behaviour. I let him know
5 cousin would very likely sit with us. and she had been
usad In see the Sabbath mpecled; so he had nsgood
iis guns and hits of indoor work alone. while she stayed.
lowed up at the news, and cast his eyes over his hands
)lhes. The (min-oil and gunpowder were shoved out of
n a minute. I saw he meant lo give her his company:
gamed, by his way. he wanted to be presenuhle: so.
1:. as 1 durst not laugh when the mster is by. I offered

264 WTHEEING HEIGHTS.

nut-tet- himself,|nd as good Is dues himtothnshhurul
the more hurt she gets. the more vummons she grows”

At ﬁrst. on hearing this account from Zillnh. l dew-mined!
leave my situation. take a cottage. and 3a Cntherine to «I
and live with me: but Mr. Heatheliﬂ' would I: soon penn'nth
Is he would set up Hmton in an independent house; end It:
Icenoremedy. a: present, tunes she could mn-yagalnur
that scheme it does not come within my plowinoe to Image

Thus ended Mrs Dean‘s story. Notwithnandingthe am
prophecy. 1 nm rapidly recovering strength ; and thoughitbw
the second week in Jnnuary. I propose getting out on held!
in a day or two, nod riding over to Wuthering Hakim.
inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six months
London; and, ifhe libs, he my look out for anathema“
take the pheeaiter October. I would not pass anotha‘wil
here for much.

W...

CHAPTER xxix.

YESTERDAY was bright. calm, and frosty. I went to mild;
IS I proposed : myhnusekeeperentrentedmetohurnlittlel
from her to her young lady. and I did not refuse, (or the in
woman was not oonsdous of anything odd in her tequest. '
front door stood open. but the jalous gate was hated. u
my last visit: I knocked. and invoked Eamshnw from an
the garden beds ; he unchained it, andI entered. The kilo
as handsome a rustic as need be seen. I took particular no
0! him this time ; but then hedoes his bat, nppot-ently. tom
the last of his advantaga.

I asked if Mr. Heathclii‘f were I! home? He answered. I
but he would be in at dinner-time. It wns eleven o'clock,
I announced my intention of going in end waiting {or hit!
which he immediately ﬂung down his tools and nooompnnied
in the oﬂice of wntehdog, not as a substitute for the host.

We entered together ; Catherine was there, making It:
useful in preparing some vegetables for the approaching n
she looked more sulky and less spirited than when I had :
her ﬁrst. She hardly raised her eyes to notice me. Ind oontil
her employment with the same dbregnrd to common form

wvmmnc HEIGH’IS. 26s

anus as More : never returning rny bow and good-morning
re slighrst acknowledgment.
She dos not seem so amiable," I thought. "as Mrs. Dean
d persuade me to believe. She’sn beauty, ilistrue; but
tn angel."
unshaw surlin hid he! remove her things to the kitchen.
move them yourself." she said. pushing them from her as
as she had done; and retiring to a stool by the window,
eshebegantourveﬁgures ofbirdsaud beastsout of the
p paring: in her lap. I approached her, pretending to
e a view of the garden; and. u I fancied. adroitly dropped
Dean's note on to her knee, unnoticed by lineman—but
raked aloud- "wrm is um?" and chucked itoﬂ'.
\ letter from your old acquaintance. the housekeeper at the
‘39." I answered; annoyed at her exposing my kind deed.
farful lest it should be imagined I missiveot' rnywn. She
d gladly have gathered it up at this infatuation, but Hare-
)eat her; be seized and put it in his waistcoat. saying Mr.
:hcliﬂ‘ should look at it ﬁrst. Thereal. Catherine silently
5d her lane from us. and. very stealthily. drew out her pocket-
lkerchiefandapplied it to her eyes; and ha- wusin. after
ﬁling a while to keep down his soﬁer feelingsjpulled out
utter and ﬂung it on the ﬂoor beside her. as ungrachst as
ﬂuid. Catherine caught and perused it eagerly; then she
I few qmtions to me coneerning the inmates, rational and
on], other former home; and gazing toward: the hills.
nnred in soliloquy—
ishould like to be riding Minny down there i I should like
‘elirnbing up there! Oh] I'm tired—J'ni :Ialktl, Hareton l"
the leant ha pretty head back against the sill. with half a.
land halfasigh, and lapsed into an aspect of mad.
as: neither caring nor knowing whether we remarked her.
Vin. Heatheliﬁ." I said, alter sitting some time mute. " you
or aware that I am an acquaintance of yours? so intimate
lthlnlr it strange you won‘t come and speak to me. My
:keper never wearies of talking about and praising you:
he'll be grstly disappointed if 1 return with no news of or
you. except that you received her letter and said nothingl"
e appeared to wonder at this speech. and asked—
306 Ellen like you?"

lea, way well." I replied hesitalingly.
r a

266 WITHIERING amen-rs.

“You mm tell her," she continued, “that I we!“ all
her letter, but I have no materials {or with; : not an ll
from which I might seer a Inf.”

"No booksl" I exclaimed. “Howdo you contrive In
here without them? if I may take the liberty to inquitr. Th
pivvided with a large lﬁmiry, I'm frequently very M u
Grange : take my books away. and I she-11d be dispense?

“I was always tending, when I had than," said Can!
"and Mr. Heathcliﬁ‘never reads: so he look it into h‘shu
destmymybooh Ihavenathndaglimpseofonefnru
Only once, I arched through Joseph's stole ofmeology, D
great irrimion ; and once. Human, 1 came upon 2 seem:
in your room—some IAtin andGnedk, and umeadesnnd pal
all old friends. I brought the [urinate—ad you glibmrlﬂ
mamgpie gatherssilverspoom, forthemereloveofnd
Tbeynreofnousetoyou: oreiseymoomuledlheninm
spirit am is you mnnmcnjoy them nobody elseshall. Pa
yanremy counselled Mr. Henthcliﬂ'to rub me of my man
But I‘ve most of them written an my brlin and printed in
hurt. and yau cannot deprive me ofthose l“

Earnsth blushed crimson when his main nude this re
(ion of his prime litenry nocnmnlnions, and m
indignant denial of her accusations

"Mr. Hutton is desirous ofincrasing his amount of k
ledge,“ I said, coming to his rescue. " He i not m
enulmofywr atuinments. He’llbe ackverlcholar'll
yea-rs."

" And he wants me to sink into a dame. men-ﬁrm." mu
Catherine. “Yes. 1 bar him tryingto spd‘l and rail «thin
and prettyblnndmhemkesl I wish yonvotﬁdrepeatc
Chase as you did yesterdny: it n: extremely funny. I II
you; end I hard you turning over the dictionaryto led
the hard words, and then cursing because you couldn‘t
their explanations l "

The young man evidently llmug'ht it too bud that)“: M
laughed at for his ignorance, and then laughed It for tryil
remove it. I had a similar notion ; and. lumbering
Dan's anecdote of his ﬁrst attempt at enlightening the did
in which he had been reared, I observed—

" But, M rs. Heathciiﬂ'. we have each hadnwmmemement
each stumbled and tattered on the thrshold ; had our m

wuruurtmc anal-11$. 267
1 inslad of aiding us, we should iambic and m

l" she replied. “I don’t w‘sh to limit his winner“:
has no right to appropriate what is mine. and make it
w. to me with his vile mistaka und mispronuneiatiunsl
inch. hath proseand verse. areconseuzled touchyth
inns: and I hate to have them dehased and prohned
muthl Beidrs. of All. he has selected my famut‘ile
that I love the most «input.» if out of deliberate

ton‘s chest heaved in silence a. minute : he laboured under
2 sense of mortiﬁcation and wrath. which it was no easy
mppress. I rosemnd. from agenme ideaot'reliaing
an-assment, took up my station iuthcdmrlmy. surveying
rant prospect as I stood. He followd my exnmple, and

room; but uraently reappeared. baring hulan
i in his hands, which he threw into Cutherine's lap. ex-
3..

te them! Ineverwant to hear. or rad, qr think.“ them

on’t have them now," she answered. “ I shall connect
ith you, and hate them."

pened one that had obviously been often turned our, and
union in the drawling toneof n beginner ; then laughed,
aw it from her. "And listen." she mntiuued provokingly.
:cing a verse of an old balladin the same fashion.

:is self-love would endure no further torment: I heard.
altogether disapprovingly, a manqu check given to her
mgue. The little wretch had done her utmost to hurt her
; sensitive though uncultivated feelings. and a physics!
at was the nnly made he had of balancing the account,
oying ils eﬁ‘ects on the inﬂictor. He ulterwards gathered
ksnnd hurled them on theﬁre. I md in h'u countenance
igu‘sh it was to cﬁer that sacriﬁce to spleen. l fancied
theyconsumed, be mailed the pleasure theth already
d, and the triumph and ever-increasing plasure he had
ﬂed from them; and I fancied I gussed the incitement
:cret studia also. He had been content with daily labour
xgh animal cnjoyments. till Catherine crossed his path.
at her scorn, and hope of her approval, Wm his ﬁrst
ers to higher pursuits ; and, instead of guarding him from

268 WUTHERING HEIGHE.

one and winning him to the other, his endeavours to raise his:
self had produced just the contrary result. .

“Yes; that'sail thegoodthat suchahmtens youcanget in!
them I" cried Catherine. sucking herd-auger! lip. andvratehinl ,
the conﬁngration with indignant eyes.

"You'd brtter hold your tongue. now,” he answered ﬁercely-

And his agitation precluded further speech : he ndunml
hastily to the entrance. where I made my for him to pas. M
are he had crossed the door-stones. Mr. Heathcliﬂ', continual
the causeway, encountered him. and laying hold of his shmldd
asked—

“What's to do now. my lad?"

" Naught, naught." he said. and broke away to enjoy his [ti
and anger in solitude.

Heathclitt' gazed after him, and sighed.

“ It will be add it I thwart myself." he muttered. unconm
that I was behind him. “ But whm I look for his father inlb
face. I ﬁnd brewery day more! How the devil is heso llh?
1 can hardly but to see him." ‘

He bent his eyes to the ground. and walked moodin in. Till!
was a restless. anxious expression in his countenance I hadnzrl!
remarked there bei‘ore ; and he looked spurer in person. His
daughter-in-law. on perceiving him through the window. im‘
mediater escaped to the kitchen, so that I remained alone.

" I'm glad to see you out of doors again, Mr. Lockwood." ht
said. in reply to my greeting; "from selﬁsh motives pen-l1: 1
don't think I could readily supply your loss in this desolation-
I’ve wondered more than once what brought you here.“

" Au idle whim. I (m, sir," was my answer; " or else an id]!
whim is going to spirit me away. I shall Set out for landmi-
next week; and I must give you warning that I feel no dupes"
tion to retain Thrushcros: Grange beyond the twelve monthsl
agreed to rent it. I believe I shall not live there any more."

" 0h. indeed : you're tired or being banished from the world.
are you?" he said. " But if you be coming to plead oﬂ'pnyins
{or n place you won't occupy, your journey is useless: I never
relent in exacting my due from nny one)"

" l'm coming to plead of nothing about it." I exclaimed-
considembly irritated. " Should you wish it. I'll settle with 1°“
now," and l drew my note—hook from my pocket.

"No. no," he replied coolly; “you'll leave sufﬁcient behill‘I

WTHERING HEIGHTS. 269

0' cover your debts. if you {ail to return: I‘m not in such a
“any. Sit down and take your dinner with us; I gust that is
rate from repeating his visit our genaaily be made welcome.
Catherine. bring the things in: when: are you?"

Catherine reappeared. bearing a tray of knives and forks.

" You may get your dinner with Joseph,“ muttered Hathciiﬁ'
aside, “and remain in the kitchen till he is gone."

She obeyed his directions very punctually'. perhaps she had
no temptation to transgress. Living among clowns and mis-
nnthropists. she probably mnnot appreciate it better class of
people when she meets them.

With Mr. Heathcliﬁ', grim and saturnine, on the one hand,
and Hueton. absolutely dumb, on the other, I made a some-
what cheerless meal. and bade adieu early. I would have de-
parted hy the hack my, to get A last glimpse of Catherine and
annoy old Joseph; but Hareton received orders to lead up my
horse. and my host himself eacortcd me to the door. so I could
not fulﬁl my wish.

"How dreary life gets over in that housel" I reﬂected, while
riding down the road. "What a realisation of something more
romantic than a fairy tale it would have been for Mrs. Linton
Hathcliﬂ'. had the end I struck up an attachment, as her good
muse desired, end Inigmted together into the stirring atmos-
Phcrc dime town i “

...

CHAPTER XXX“.

IBM—This September I was invited to devastxte the moors of
Ifr'end in the north. and on my journey to his abode. I unex-
Medly came within Sheen miles of Gimmerton. The caller
It I medside public-house was holding a pail of water to refresh
layharses. when sunniverygreenoavs, newlyreaped. passed
by, and he reunited—

"Yon's {rough Gimme-non. nah l They're alias three wick
Iller other folk wt' that harvest."

"Gimmerton?" I repeated—my residence in that locality had
My grown dim and dreamy. "Ahl I know. How far is
II from thin T”

“ Happen thirteen mile o'er lh‘ hills; and a rough road," he
Maud. .

270 MERING HEIGHTS.

A sudden impulse seized me to visit 'I'hrmhemss Grunge. I
us scarcelynoon.nnd I conceived that I might aswell pl
the night under myown roofasinan inn; BuidesJeo-ﬂ
spare a day easily to mange matters with my landlord. Ill
thus slve myself the trouble of invading the ndghbmhlﬂ
again. Having rated a while. I directed my mt to tequ
the way to the village: end, with grant ﬁtigue m arr basis
we managed the distance in some three hours.

Ileft him thue. and proceeded down thequ TH
grey church looked greys. end the lonely churchyud bode.
I distinguished e moor sheep cropping the short turf on III
graves. It VIIS sweet. warm weather—too warm for tuning:
but the heat did not hinder me from enjoying the ddlgllﬂ
seer-my above and below: hard I seen it nearer AugustJ‘ms-t
It would have tempted me to waste a rnonthamong its adihttls
In winter nothing more dreary. in summer nothing more divil.
than thoseglensslmtin by hills, and thtlehluﬁ', holduellld
heath.

I reached the Grange before sunset. Ind knocked for m
m; hut the l‘ntnily had retested into the heck prumisnl
judged; by one thin. blue wrenth curling from the Hub
chimney, end they did not hear. I rode into the noan M
the porch. a girl of nine or ten sat knitting. end an old mull
reclined on the house-steps, smoking a meditative pipe,

" Is Mrs. Dean within?" I demanded of the dame.

" Mistras Dean? Nay I " she answered. " shoo doesn‘t hide
here: shoo‘s up It th‘ Heights."

"Are you the housekeeper, then ? " I continued.

" Eu. 21v keep th' house." she replied.

" Well. I’m Mr. Lockwood. the master. Are there my room
to lodge rm: in. I wonder ? I wish to stay ell night."

“1" mnisterl" she ctied in astonishment. “Whet. whim
blewth wur coming? Ynh sud hn’ send word. They‘s not“
northcr dry nor mensful ahaht t' place: nowt there isn'tl"

She threw down her pipe and hustled in, the girl followed
and I entered too; soon perceiving that her report was tn:
and. moreover. the: I had‘ almost upset her wits by my nnwel
come apparition. I had: her he composed. I would go out in
I walk; and. meantime. she must try to prepare in coma t
pslwng-room {or me to sup in. and a bedroom to sleep it
No sweeping and dusting, only good ﬁre and' dry sheets wet

WTHERING HEIGH'IS. 27!

sugary. She leaned willing to do her best; though she
rust them-brush into the grates in mistake for the poker,
rd mat-appropriated several other articls of her unit: but I
tired, conﬂding in her energy for a. rating-place against my
own. Wnlbering Heights was the goal of my proposed
tension. An alter-thought brought me back, when I ind
mind the court.

"All well It the Heights?" I inquired ofthe woman.

"Em, frowteelmawl" she answered. sknrryingamywirh
pen of hot Cinders.

I would hove ulred why Mrs. Dem had deserted theGnnge.
m it was impossible to delay her at such a crisis, so I turned
my end trade my exit. rambling leisurely along with the glow
f a sinking Inn behind, and the mild glory of I rising moon
I front—one fading. and the other brightening—as l quitlcd
he pork, and climbed the stony lay-road brunchng on“ to Mr.
iearhcliﬂ's dwelling. Before I arrived in sight of it, ll'l thst
engined of day was s beamless amber light dong the west :
ml qouldleeeverypebbleonthepath,nndeveryblndeof
:nss, by mu splendid moon. ! had neither to climb the glte
we tohnocI—it yiddnd to my hand. That is an improvement,

thought. Andl noticed another. bytheaidofruy nostrils:
thrmeeofmlsnndwnllﬂowers waned on theairfmm
tracing: the homely knit-m5.

Both doors and lattice: were open .- snd' yet. as is anally the
as: in neon! district, I line. red ﬁre illnmined the chimney : the
mm which the eye derives {m it renders the extra hast
ntdmhle But the house at Wuthering Heights is so large.
“In! the inmates hive plenty of space for withdrawing out of
its inﬂuence; and accordingly. what inmates there were hot]
Illlioned themselves not far from one of the windows. I could
both use them and hear them talk before I entered, and looked
and listened in consequenoe : being moved thereto by a mingled
same of curiosity and envy, that grew as I lingered

"Con-Inn)!" said a voice as sweet as a silver bell-"That
iortlte third time, you dance! I‘m not going to tell you again.
Recalled, or I'll pull your hair ! "

"Contrary. then." answered another, in deep but whened
tones. " And now. kiss me. for minding so well."

" No. read it over ﬁrst correctly, without a single mistake.” '

The mole speaker began to read: he was: young man. re-

272 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

spectnbiy dressed and seated at a table. having n hooku-
him. His handsome futures glowed with plasure, and H
eyes kept impatiently wandering from the page to a smell wﬂ
hnnd over his shoulder, which recalls! him by a smart slum
the cheek. whenever its owner detected such signs of hum
Its owner stood behind; her light. shining ringlets blendingn
intervals. with his brown looks. as she bent to superinth in
studies; and her face—it was luckyhe could not see her he."
he would never have been so steady. I could; and I hit mylip
in spite. at having thrown away the chance I might have halal
doing something bsides staring It its smiling beauty.

The task was done. not free from further blnudus: hat the
pupil claimed a reward. and received ll last ﬁve kiss: vim.
however, he generously returned. Then they came to the doll.
and from their conversation I judged they were about In is!
out and have a walk on the moors. I supposed I shouldht
condemned in Hnreton Famshaw‘s heart. if not by his mouth.
to the lowest pit in the infernal regions. if I showed my to-
fortunate person in his neighbourhood then; and feeling H7
mean Ind malignant, I sknlked round to seek refuge in the
kitchen. There was unobstructed ndmitlanne on thxt side III.
and at the door sat my old friend Nelly Dean, sewing and in“
a song; which was often interrupted from within by huth
of scorn and intolerance. uttered in far from musiml nouns

"l'd nyther, by th’ hauli'. hev ’em swearing i' my lugs {1011
mom to heeght. nor henrlten ye, hahsiverl" said the mould
the kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's. “It's:
blaring shame. that I cannot oppen t' blessed Book. but yells!l
up them glories to Sattan. And all t' ﬂnysonte wickednas tIni
iver were born into th’ warldi Ohl ye'er a night newt; :ux
shoo’s another: And that poor lad'll be lost ntweeh ye.
lad l " he added. with a groan; “ he's witched: I'm slninm'l
O Lord, judge ‘em. {or there's norther law not justice IM
\ver rullers ! “

” Nol or we should be sitting in ﬂuning ingots, I suppwf
retorted the singer. “ But wisht. old man. and read your Bibit
like a Christian. and never mind rue. This is ‘ Fairy Anni:5
Wedding'—a bonny lune—it goes to a dance."

Mrs. Dean was about to reocmruenee, when I ndvanoed: 1'“
recognising me directly. she jumped to her feet. crying—

. “Why. bless you, Mr. Lockwde How could you think“

WU‘I'HERING HEIGHTS. 27’;

returning in this way? All's shut up at Thrushnross Grange.
You should have given us notioe ! "

" I‘ve arranged to be accommodated there, for as long as I
dull stay." I answered. “ I depart again tomorrow. And how
are yon transplanted here. Mrs. Dean? tell me that."

“ Zineh lelt. and Mr. Hatheliﬁ‘ wished me to come. soon after
you went to London. and stay till you returned. But. step in,
prny I Have you walked from Gimmertnn this evening? "

“Front the Grange," I replied; "and while they make me
lodging room there. I want to ﬁnish my business with your
nuster: beanie I don't think of having another opportunity in
a hurry."

“What business. sir?" said Nelly, conducting me into the
house " He's gone out at present. and won't return soon."

“ About the rent,” I answered.

"Ohl then it is with Mrs. Heatth you must settle," she
observed; "ornther with me. She has not learnt to manage
her Mr: yet. and I act for her: there's nobody e ."

I looked surprised.

"All! you have not heard of Heathdiﬂ's dmth, I see." she
continued.

" Hmtheliﬁ dadl" I exclaimed, astonished. “How long
“a?”

"Three months since: hutm't downand let me take your hat,
Ind I'll lall you all about it. Stop, you have had nothing to can.
have you? "

"Iwant nothing: I have ordered supper at home. You sit
down too. I never dram-rt at' his dying! Let me hut how it
nine to pass. You say you don‘t expect them back for some
lime-the young people 2"

" No—l have to scold than everyevening for their late rambles:
but they don't care {or me. At least have a drink of our old
ale; it will do you good: you seem weary."

She hnstuied to fetch it before I could refuse. and I heard
Joseph asking whether " it won‘t it cryingscandal that she should
have followers at her time of life? And then, to get them jocks
on: o' t' m'mer‘s cellar] He fair shamed to 'blde still and
see it."

‘ She did not stay to retaliate. but roentered in a minute.
bearing a. reaming silver pint, whose contents I lauded with he-
eomlng earnestnss. And afterwards she furnished me with the

:74. wn'mnnmo HEIGHTS.
.

sequel of Heathelifi's history. He had a. "queer" end. as sin I

expressed it.

I was summoned to Wuthering Heights. within n fortnight of
your laying us, she said ; and I obeyed joyfully. for Catherine‘s
sake. My ﬁrst interview with her grieved and shocked me: sin
had altered so much since our separation. Mr. Hallmlid'did
not explain his reasons for taking a new mind about my coming
here; he only told me he wanted me. and he was tired of seeing
Catherine: I must make the little parlour rny sitting-room. and
keep he with me. It was enough if he were obliged to se he!
onmwtwieeadny. Sheseerned pleased at this arrangement;
and. by degrees. I smuggled over a great number of book. and
other articles, that had formed her amusement at the Grunge;
and ﬂattered myself we should get on in tolerable comfort. The
delusion did not last long. Catherine, contented I! ﬁrst, in a
brief space grew irritable and restless. For one thing, she was
forbidden to move out of the garden. Ind it fretted her sadly I»
be conﬁned to its narrow bounds as spring drew on ; for anothﬂ.
in following the house. I was forced to quit her frequently. and
she complained of loneliness : she preferred quarrelling with
Joseph in the kitchen to sitting at peace in her solitude. Id'xl
not mind their skirmishes : hut Hzreton was ofrm obliged toseek
me kitchen also, when the master wanted to have the house to
himself; and though in the beginning she eitha ld't it at his
approach, or quietly joined in my occupations. and shunnedre-
marking or addressing him—and though he was Always as sullm
and silent as possible-after a while she changed ha bah-vicar.
and became incapable of letting him alone : talking in him;
culminating on his stupidity and idleness ; exprasiug M
wonder how he could endure the life he lived—how he could sii
: whole evening staring into the ﬁre and don‘ng.

" He‘s just like a dog. is he not. Ellen?" she once charred.
"or a cart-horse? He does his work. eats his food. And sleeps
eternally ! What a blank. dreary mind he mIEt have! Do you
ever dream, Haremn? And. if you do. what is it about? But
you mn't speak to me i "

Then she looked at him ; but he would neither open his mouth
nor look again.

" He's, perhaps, dreaming now," she continued. " He tu'itchetl
his shoulder as Juno twitches hers. Ask him, Ellen.”

" Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you upstairs. ifyoﬂ

WUTHERING HEIGH'IS. 275

don't behave l" I said. He had not only twitched his shoulder
but clenched his ﬁst, as if tempted to use it.

" I know why Haretort never spanks. when I am in the kitchen,"
she exclaimed. on mother oecnsion. " He is afraid I shall laugh
at him. Ellen, what do you think He beg-m to teach himlf
to raid once; and beuuse I laughed. he burned his books, and
dropped it: was he not a fool?"

“ Wen not you naughty?" I said: ” answer me that.”

" Perhupe I was." shewent an; “ but 1 did not expect him to
bewilly. Human, if I gave you I. book, wouldyou “he it
m r m try I "

Sheplaced mesh: had been perusing on hi1 hand; he hung
itoﬁndmmmnd, iflhe did not give aver. hemld break her
neck.

“Well. I shall. put it here," she said. "in the table dnwer;
and I'm going to bed." V

Then she whiepered me to watch whether be melted it, nnd
depend. But he would not come near it ; and so I informed
her in the morning, to her great disappointment. I saw strewn:
scrry for his partnering sulkiness and indolenne : her canscienee
reproved her for frightening him 011‘ improving himself: the had
done it my. But her ingenuity was at wcrk toremaiy the
injury: while I imed, or pursued other such stationary employ-
ment: as]. amid not well do in the parlour. she would bring some
plunnt volume and read it nlmrd to me When Hareton wns
there. she genenlly paused in an interesting part, and let} the
booklying about: that she did repeatedly: but he was axohstinute
u a mule, and. instead of snatching at her bait, in wet weather
he took to smoking with Joseph ; mind they at like automatons,
one on sch side of the ﬁle, the elder happily too deaf to under-
:tnnd Im- wiclted nonsense, as he would have called it. the younger-

doing his best to seem to disregnrd it. On ﬁne evening: the
latter followed his thanking expeditions. and Catherine yawned
and sighed. and. tensed me to talk to her. and ran of into the
mini-tor Mn, the moment I began; and. as a last resource.
cried. and said she was tired of living: her life we! useless.

Mr. Huthcliﬂ’, who grew more and more disinclined to society,
had almost wished Eamshaw ham his apartment. Owing to
an accident at the commencement of March, he became for some
days n ﬁxture in the kitchen. His gun bunt while out on the
hilhbyhimnlf; aspliutzrcuthis arm, andhelost a gooddeal

276 WUTKERING HEIGHTS.

ot‘ blood before he could reach home. The conanenoewns tlat.
perforce. he was condemned to the ﬁreside 1nd tranquillity. n11
he made it up again. It suited Catherine to have him there: It
any rate. it made her hate her room upstuirs more tlnn ever:
and she would compel me to ﬁnd out businss below, that she
might accompany rm:

0n Easter Monday. Joseph went to Gimmerton fair with some
cattle: Ind. in the altemoon. I was busy getting up linen in the
kitchen. Eamshow sat. momse as usual. It the chimney-corner,
and my little mistm was beguiling an idle hour with din-int
pictures on the window panes; varying her ointment by
smothered bursts of songs. and whispered ejoenlntlons, nndqnick
glances of annoyance and impatience in the direction of M
cousin. who steadfastly smoked. and looked into the grate. At
a notice that I could do with her no longer intercepting mylighl.
she removed to the hearthstone. I bestowed little uttention on
her proceedings, but. presently, I hand her begin—-

" I've found out. Harmon. that I wont-that I'm glad-M
Ishouldlikeyoutcbemycousinnow, ifyouhodnotgruwnso
cross to me. and so rough."

Hueton returned no nnswer.

" Hnreton. Hareton. Haretoni do you hear?" she continued.

" Get oﬂ'wi' ye ! " he growled. with uncompromisinggmm

" Let me take that pipe," she said. cautiously minnan her
hand nod abstracting it from his mouth.

Before he wuld attempt to recover it. it was broken. Ind
behind the ﬁre. He swore nt her and seized another.

"Stop," she cried, " you must listen to me ﬁrst ; and I un‘l
speak while those clouds are ﬂoating in my face."

" Will you go to the devil l " he exclaimed ferociously. "ant
let me be I"

" No,“ she persisted, “ I won't: I can't tell what to do It
make you talk to me; and you are determined not to under
stand. When [call you stupid. I don't mean nnything: I don'
man that I despise you. Come. you shall take notice of me
Haremn I you are my cousin, and you shall own me."

‘ ‘ I shall have naught to do wi' you and your mucky pride, on-
your damned mocking tricks I " he answered. “ I'll go to hel‘
body and soul, before I look sideways after you ugnin. Side cc
0' t' gate, now; this minute l "

Catherine frowned. and retreated to the window-scat chewin

WUTHERING HEIGH'IS. 277

her no, and enduvonr-ing. by humming an eccentric tune. to
conceal a growing tendency to sob.

" You should be friends with your cousin. Mr. Harem." I
inter-tumult “since she repent: of her sundries. It would do
yau I greet dml ofgood: itwonld makeyouanother manta
hove her for I companion."

"A cornpenionl" he cried; “when shehntesrne. uddos
not think me it to tripe her shoonl Nay! if it made me: king.
I'd not be scorned for seeking her good-will any more."

“ltisnot Iwhohateyou,itisyouwhohatemel"wept
Cathy. no longer disguising her trouble. “ You hate me as
much as Mr. Huthdiﬂ' dos, and more."

" Youfre Idemned liar," began Earnshaw: " why have I made
him angry. by taking your part. then. a hundred rims? and
that when you sue-nod I! end despised rne, and—Ga on plaguing
me. Ind I'llstepinyonder.md sayyouwon'ied rneoutoi’rhe
kitchen I ”

" I didn't know you took my part," she answered, drying her
eyes; "and I mmiserableand bitter ateveryhody; humor/I
thank you. and beg you to forgive me: what can I do besids?"

She returned to the hearth, and frsnkly extended her hand.
He blackened and scawled like a thundercloud. and kept his
ﬁsts resolutely clenched. end his gm ﬁxed on the ground.
Catherine. by instinct, must have divined it was ohdurnte per-
versity, end not dislike. that prompted this dogged conduct ; for.
aft: remnining an instdnt undecided. she stooped Ind impl'ﬁed
on his cheek a game his: The little rogue thought 1 had not
seen her. and. dnwing back. she took her former station by the
window. quite denurel'y. I shook my head mprovingly, end.
then she blushed end whispered—

" Well i whet should 1 have done, Ellen ? He wouldn‘t shake
hands. end he wouldn't look: I must show him some way that
Hike him—that I want to be friends."

Whether the kiss convinced Hareton, I cannot tell: hewas
very careful. for some minutes, that his face should not be seen.
and when he did raise it. he was sadly puzzled where to turn his
Eyes.

Catha-ine ernplnryed herle in wrapping a handsome book
ﬂatly in white paper. and having tied it with a hit of ribbon. and
“Erased it to " Mr. Hinton Esmshnw,“ she desired metoheher
3mm. and convey the present to its destined recipient,

278 wu-rmuunc Itme

" And tell him. if he'll like it I'll some and tend: him to I'd
it right." she said; “and. if he refuse it. I'll go captain. end
never tease him again."

1 carried it, and repeated the mange; vuuximsly VII-m by
my employer. Hureton would not open h‘u Sagas, so I hid it
on his knee. He did not strike it oﬁ‘. either. ! returned may
work. Catherine leaned her head and Irms on the able. till she
heard the slight rustle of the covering being removed: that she
stole away, Ind quietly seated herself beside her cousin He
trembled. and his {we glowed : all his rudende Ill hisﬂuiy
harshnss had deserted him: he could not summon camp. It
ﬁrst, to utter a syllable in reply to her quutiming look, an“!
murmured petition. .

"Say you forgive me, Eamon, do? Y!!! can make me In
huppy by speaking that little w ."

He muttered something inaudible.

“ And you'll be my friend?" added Catherine interroglti‘ely.

“Nay. you‘ll be ashamed of me every dny of your life." be
answered: "end the more ashamed. the move-you lmow «It:
and i cannot hide it."

" So you won't be my friend?" she said, smiling a sweet 6
honey. and creeping close up.

I overheard no further distinguishable hilt. but, on lookiﬂl
round nguin, I perceived two such radiant oountenm but
over the page of the accepted hook. that I did not doubt lbg
treaty bud been ratiﬁed on both sides: and the enemies m.
thenceforth. sworn allies.

The work they studied was full of costly pimuu', and than
and their position had chum enough to keep them unmoved till
Joseph came home. He, poor man. was perfectly rights: I! ll):
spectacle of Catherine seated on the same bench with Hareton
Earnshaw. leaning her hand on his shoulder; and confounded
at his favourite's endurance of her proximity: it affected hint/Jo
deeply to Allow In observation on the subject that night. His
emotion was only revealed by the immense sighs he drew. a he
solemnly spread his large Bible on the tnblc. and overluid it with
dirty tank-notes from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's
transactions. At length. he summoned Hmton from his seat.

“Tak‘ these in to t' maistcr. ind." he said. " and hide thee.
1‘: gang up to my own nhru. This hoile‘s neither mensful not
seemiy {or us: we mun side out and seearch “other.”

mmNG HEIGHTS. 279

"Conic. Cnhaine." I said. “we must 'side out' .too: I've
done my ironing. anyou melth go?"

“ 11 is not eight o'clock l " she annexed. rising nmvillirely.
" m I'll leave this hook upon the chimney-piece. and I'll
bring some more to-rnorww." 

" Ony books that ynh lave. I shall tak' into th‘ hahse." said
Joseph, "And ifllbemiteh iiynhﬁnd an agent: sea. yd: may
plase yeneln l"

Cnthy dammed that his library should pay for hen; and.
smiling u the med Hm. went singing upltniru lighten)!
hurt. I venue to say. than mnhehndbeeuunderthatronl
before: mt, perhaps, during her earliest visis to Linton.

The intimacy thus commenced. grew npidly: though it en-
countered uponry intmnptions. Farrah-w was not to be
civilised with I wish. Ind my young hay .vu no philosopher.
and no paragon of patience ; but both tha‘rminds tending to the
same point—one loving and desiring to esteem, and the atlas
loving and desiring to be cleaned—they eontxived in the end
to tench it.

You see. Mr. Lockwood. it was my «rough to win Mrs.
Huthdiﬂ‘s heart. But now, I’m glad you did not try. The
mdnﬂmyvisheswiﬂ bethe union ofthoee two. Ilhnll
any no one at their wedding-tiny: there wcn’t he I happier
won-n than inny in Enghndl

r—n—

CHAPTER XXXIII.

ON the marrow of that Monday, Earnshaw being still tumble to
follow his ordinary employmu, Ind therefore rennining about
the house. ! Ipeedﬂy found it would be impmeticeble to retain
my charge beside me. n: heretofore. She got downhill: before
the. mid out into the garden. where :he hid seen her cumin
parlor-nix; lame any work ; end when I went to bid them come
to hrezktan. I saw she had persuaded him to clean large space
of ground from current end gooseberry bushes, and they were
buy pinning together In importation of piznu from the Grange

I m terriﬁed at the devastation which had he locomplished
in n brief hathour; the black eurnnt trees were the npple of
imph’s eye. and she Ind jun ﬁled her choice of a ﬂown-bed
in the midxt of them.

:80 wrrmnnmc HEIGH'IS.

"There! That will beallshown Ioth'e'master,” Inelairned,
" the minute it is discovaed. And wlnt excuse have you to oh
for taking such liberties with the garden? We shall have a ﬁne
explosion on the head of it: see if we don't! Mr. 111mm,!
wonder you should have no more wit. than togo and mnhetht
mess at her bidding ! "

“ I'd forgotten they were Joseph's," answered Parrish“, miter
puzzled; " but I'll tell him I did iL" .

We always ate our meals with Mr. Heatheliﬁ‘. I held the
mistress 5 post in making tea and carving; so I was lmiisperslhlr
at table. Catherine usually sat by me. but to-dny she stole
nearer to Hareton ; and l presently saw she would hove no mu!
discretion in her friendship than she had in he: hostility.

" Now. mind you don't talk with and notice your cousin to)
much." were my whispered instructions as we entered them
" It will certainly annoy Mr. Heathcliﬂ'. Ind he'll be mad at
you hot "

" I'm not going to," she answa’ed. .

The minute after, she had sidled to him. and was stickinl
pﬁmm in his plate of porridge.

Hedarednot spakto herthere: he daredhnrdlyloolt; still
yet she went on teasing. till he was twice on the point of hem
provoked to laugh. I frowned, and that she glanced tonld
the master: whose mind was occupied on other subjects than his
company. as his countenance evinced; and she grewseriuus bf
an instant, scrutinising him with deep gravity. Anerwsrds she
turned. and recommenced her nonsense ; at lust. Hareton uttaed
n smothered laugh. Mr. Heathciiﬂ' started ; his eye npidly
surveyed our {noes Catherine met it with her ancustomed look
of nmotmness and yet deﬁance, which he obhorred.

" It is well you are out of my reach," he exdnimed. " Whit
ﬁend possases you to stare back at me. continually, with those
iota-on! eyes? Down with them I and don't remind me of your
gisteuce again. I thought I had cured you of laughing."

“ It was me." muttered Haretou.

"What do you say?" demanded the master.

Human looked at his plate. and did not repeat the contain
Kr. Heathcliﬁ looked at him a bit. and then silently resumed
ha witth and his interrupted musing. We had nearly
ﬂed, and the two young people prudently shined wider

“r, so I anticipated no further distuzhnnm during that

wu‘msnmc HEIGHTS. 281

ﬁtting: when Jweph append at the door, maling by his
mining lip and furious eyu, that the outrage committed on
hisprecious shrubs was detected. He must have seen Cathy
lad is: omzsin about the spot before he examined it, for while
his jaws worked like those of a cow chewing its cud. and
Indeed his speech difﬁcult to understand, he began—

" I mun hey my wage. and I mun goal I lied aimed to dee.
when: I'd nrved fur sixty year; and I thawt I'd lug my books
Ipinto t‘ glrret. and all my bits 0’ stuﬂ‘. and theysud her t'
kitchen to theirseln: [or t’ sake o' quietuss. Itwur hard to
[ienp my own hearthstun. but I thowt I can“ do that] But.
uh. shoo's taut my garden fro' me. and by th' heart. maister,
Iannot md itl Yah may bend to th' yoalr, and yewill—I
Minuet! to 't, and an old man doan‘t sooin get used to new
banhens. I'd myther an: my bite an' my sup wi' I hammer in
lh’ road I "

"Now. now, idiot!" interrupted Heathcliﬂ'. “cut it shortl
Wint's your grievance? I'll interfere in no quarrels between
no end Nelly. She may thrust you into the coal-hole for any-
thing I out"

" It's noun Nelly!" answered Joseph. "I sudn't shiﬁ for
Nelly—nasty ill new: as shoe is. Thank God I .rlwa cannot stale

t‘ ml 0' nob'dyl Shoo wer niver so: hanmme. but what a
body mud look at her “bout winking. It's yon ﬂeysome. grace-
Iess queen. thnt‘x witnhed our land. wi' her bold een and her
fin-run! nys—till—Nayl it lair brusu my hart! He’s (or-
gotten all I've done for him, and made on him. and gen and
river: up ewhole m o‘ t‘ grandest cumin: trees. i' t' garden I"
And haehe matted outright; unmanned by: sense of his bitter
iujnria. Ind Earnshnw's ingrutitude and dangerous condition.

"I: the fool dmnk? " asked Mr. Heathcliﬁ. " Hamlon, is
it you he‘s ﬁnding fault with?"

" I've pulled up two or three bushes," replied the young
man , "but I‘m going to set ‘ern again."

“ And why have you pulled them up?" said the master.

Catherine wisely put in her tongue.

" We wanted to plant some ﬂowers there." she cried. “ I‘m
the only person to blame. for I wished him to do it."

“And who the devil gaveyou lave to touch it stick about the
place?" demanded her fatherAin-law. much surprised. "And
whoorderedm wobeyher?" headded. turning to Harem

232 wry-mun“: 11qu

The latter was speechles; his cousin replied-—

' “You shouldn't grudge n few yards of arth for new
ornament. when you have taken Ill my land | "

“Your land, insolent slut I You never had any." said Hath-
cliﬁ'.

“ And my money." she continued; ramming his In" glam
and meantime bitingn piece ol crust, the manna)me

"Silence!" he unlaimed. "Get done. and hum!"

"And Harewn's lnnd. nnd his money." pursued the runs
thing “Hanan and I ire friends now; and. I shall tellllil
nll nbont you I "

Themuter seemed confoundednmoment: hemp-lend
rose up. eyeing hernll thewhile. with an expresliunoflnomlhlkv

“If you strike me. Hareton will strike you." she slid: "D
ymr my a: well sit down."

“ If Hinton does not turn you out of the room. I'll strikeh‘l
to hell," thundered Heathclili "Dnmnnhle wilehl due yﬂ
pretend to romehim agninstme? Oﬁ‘with ha'l Do yaulur?
Fling her into the kitchen! I'll kill her, Ellen Dun. Kym 1‘
her come into my sight again !"

Hareton tried. under h‘u breath. to persuade her to y.

“ Dug her nwayl" he cried savagely. "Ax: you anyth
talk?” And he approached to execute his own command.

" He'll not obey you. wicked man. any more." snidcuhldlll
"and he'll soon detest you as much $1 do."

“ Wishtl wisht l " muttered theyoun‘ nun WI“,- “1
will not hear you speak so to him. Have done."

" But you won't let him strike me? " she cried.

"Come. then," he whispered earnestly.

It was too lam: Heathcliﬁ' had caught hold of her.

" Now, you go 1 " he slid to I’amslmw. “Accused view
this time she has provoked me when I could not hear it : M
Y“ mnke her repent it {or ever ! "

He had his hand in her hair ; Harmon attempted to rdensehﬂ
locks, annealing him not to hurt her that once. Heathcliﬂ'i
black eyes ﬂashed ; he seemed mdy to heuCat-herine in pieces.
and I was just worked up to risk coming to the m, when 0‘
a sudden his ﬁnger: relaxed ', be shifted his grasp from her held
to her arm. and gazed intently in her face. Then he drew his
hand averher eyes. stood a moment to collect himselfnppnnmlli.
and turning anew to Catherine, said with asnmed onlmnusr—

WUTKERING HEIGHTS. 28;

"You must lam to avoid putting me in a. passion. or I shall
lullymurvder yousome time! Go with Mrs. Dean, and keep
with her; and conﬁne your insolence to her ears. As to
Hareton Farrishaw, ii I see him listen to you, I'll send him
:eeln‘ng his bread where he can get it] Your love will nuke
him an cutters: and nbeggar. Nelly, take her; and law: me,
allofyoul Leave mel"

Iled nyyonnglndyoot: she was tooglad ofher umpeto
rise; theth Enliawed. and Mr. Hamliﬁ'had the room to
himself till. dinne: I had counselled Catherine to dine upstairs ;
huhnsaonnashepemeived hex-vacant sent. he senuneto call
her. He spoke tome ofus, ale very little. andwent out directly
We. indenting that he should. nomeulrn before evening.

The two new friends umblished themselm in the house during
his absence: when I herd Harem stele check his cousin. on
he Mg a revelation of her father-inJaw’s conduct to his
tether. He mid he wouldn‘t suit award. to be uttered in his
dispurngement: if he wee the devil, it didn't signify: he would
sand by him; andhe'drather she would abusehimself. as she
In! to, then begin on Mr. Hmthcliﬂ‘. Catherine was waxing
man-his; but he found means to' make he: hold her tongue.
hyuiinahow shewould like kin to spa]; illnl'hafather?
The: the comprehended that Famshaw took the masta’s reputa-
tion hone mhimself; and was attached by ties stronger than
moonlit lrnakr—chnins. forged by habit. which it would he
crueltonumpuoloosen. She showedagood hart. thaweionh.
in avoiding both complaints and expressions of antipathy com
caning WE : end confused to me her sorrow thauhe bad
endeavoured to take a. bad spirit between him and Harmon:
indeed. I. don‘t believe she has ever breathed a. syllohle. in the
We hearin‘. again: her oppressor since.

When this slight disagreement was over, they were friends
ngnin. Ind on busy as possible in their sevual occupations of
pupil nodteacher. I can: in no sit with them. after I had done
my val; and I felt so soothed and comforts! to weld: them.
that i did not notice how time got on. You know, they both
apparel in 1 meme my children: I had long been proud of
one; and m, I was sure, the other would he a source ofequal
His honest. warm. and intelligent nature shook oﬁ‘
layidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it had
been bred : and. Catherine's sincere commendations acted as a

284 WTHERING HEIGHTS.

spur to his industry. His brightening mind brightened his
femurs, and added spirit Ind nobility to their aspect: I could
hardly fancy it the some individual I had beheld on the dayl
discovered my little lady at Wuthering Heights. after her ex-
pedition to the Crags. While I admired and they laboured, dust
drew on, and with it returned the master. He came upon us
quite unexpectedly, entering by the from way, and had a full
view of the whole three. ere we eould raise our heads to glue:
at him. Well. I reﬂected, therewas never: plmsante. urinal
harmless sight: and it will be a. burning shame to scold than.
The red ﬁreﬁght glowed on their two bonny heads. and revelld
their faces animated with the eager interest of children; 6!.
though he was twentydhroe and she eighteen. each had so mud:
of novelty to feel and learn. that neither experienced nor evinced
the sentiments of sober disenchanted mnturity.

They lifted their eyes together, to encounter Mr. Heathcliﬂ‘:
pahaps you have never remarked that their eyes are preddy
similar. and they are those of Catherine Eernshnw. The pres!
Catherine has no other likeness to her. except I breadth of in
head. and a certain arch of the nostril that makes he eppur
rather haughty. whether she will or not. With Hereton lit
memblnnoe is carried farther: it is singular at all Lima. that it
was particularly striking ; because his senses were alert. 1nd ll'l
mental faculties wukened to unwantd activity. I mppose Illiﬁ
resemblance disarrned Mr. Heatheliﬂ' : he walked to the M
in evident agitation ; but it quickly subsided is he looked It the
young man: or, I should say, altered its character; for it we
there yet. He took the book from his hand, and gllnced nuke
open page. then returned it without any observation; merely
signing Catherine away: her companion lingered very little
behind her. and I was about to depart also. but he hid me sit
still.

I" “ It is a poor conclusion, is it not?" he observed. hnving
,' hrooded a while on the scene he had just witnessed : " on absurd
termination to my violent exertions? 1 get levers and matth
to demolish the two houses. and train mySelf to be capehleof

i working like Hercules. and when everything is mdy and in my
I . I ﬁnd the will to lift a slate oﬂ’ either roof has vanished!
‘ ﬂy old enemies have not beaten me; now would he the precise
\. time to revenge myself on their representatives : I could do it:

'\ “d none could hinder me. But where is the use? ! don't care
\

WUTHERING HEIGH’IS. 285

‘kstrikiug: I can‘t hire the trouble to raise myhandl That
sounds us if I had been labouring the whole time only to exlu'hit
nine trait of magnnnimity. It is far from being the case: I
lave Ion the faculty of enjoying their destruction. and I am too

3 idle to destroy {or nothing.

" Nelly, there is a strange change approaching: I'm in its
Man a: present. I an so little interest in my daily life, [but
I hardly remember to eat and drink. Those two who have left
the room are the only objects which retain n distinct material
nppannne to me ; and that appeamuoe muss me pain,
muting to Igony. About liar I won't speak; and I don't
dare to think; but I earnestly wish she were invisible: her
prsenee invokes only maddening sensations. [It moves me
diﬂuuitly: and yet if I could do it without seeming insane. I'd
never see him again. You’ll perhaps think me rather inclined
to become so." he udded, making an eﬂ'art to smile, “ ii I try to
rhscribe the thonnud forms of past asociations uud ideas he
taken: or anbodia. But you'll not talk of what I tell you:
end my mind is so eternally secluded in itself. it is tempting nt
hit to turn it out to another.

“Five minutes ago, Hareton seemed a. personiﬁcation of my
youth, not a human being: I felt to him in such a variety of
nyl. that it would have been impossible to have neoosted him
ntionnlly. In the ﬁn: place. his startling likenss to Catherine
«named him fenﬂully with her. That. however. which you
mylnppole theth potent to nrlest my imagination. is mually
tin Inn: for what is not connected with her to me? and what
the: not recall her? I mnnnt look down to this ﬂoor. but her
ileum-reth in the ﬂags! In everycloud.in every tree
—ﬂlin( the nir at night, and taught by glimpses in every object
by thy—I urn surrounded with her image 1 The most ordinary
fans of ma: and women—my own features—mock me with u
turbine. The entire world is a dreadful collection of
mink that she did exist, and that I have lost her! Well,
I‘Iuetnn's aspect was the ghost of my immortal love; of my
wild endeavours to hold my right; my degradation, my pride,
my hyphen. and my anguish—-

" But it is frenzy to repent these thanth to you : only it will
let you know why. with n reluctance to he always alone. his
society is no beneﬁt; rather an aggravation of the constant
tumult I suﬂ'er: And it partly contributes to render me regurd-

:86 wu’mnmc smears.

less howheandhiscousiu go untogether. Ian givethmu
attention. any more."

N But what doyon mean hyndange. M: Hntheliﬂ'?" laid.
alarmed at his manner: thaugh hem neitha in dangerpfldn
his senses, nor dying. according to my judgmm : he we: qﬂ
strong and halthy; 2nd. us to his ranch, {mm childhood!!!
had I delight in dwelling on duk things, and eaten-hinged!
fancies. He might have had nmanmnlnhnu tbnbjuad‘ﬁ
departed idol ; but on every other point his win m and
as mine.

“ I shall nut know that till it comes." he said, " I'm onlyﬂ
conscious of it now."

" You have no feeling ofilhim, Me ynn?" I will.

" No. Nelly. I have not." he named.

“ Then yauare not afraid of death P " I parsed.

“Afraid? No l" he replied. “I hive nether-a far It“
prescntiment. nor a hope of dnth. Why should I? 'With It
hard constitution and tempemte mode of living. nnd ‘unpu'ib'
occuputions. I ought to. mid prclnhly shall. ramin chm
ground till there is somer a black hairm my head. And ll!
I cannot continue in this condition 1 l heveto tenn‘ud ulde
blame—almost to mind my heart to but] And it 5 lie
bending bunk a stiff spring: it is by compliment” I doth
slightat set not prompted by one thought; and by enmpdlia
that I notice mything nlive or dead. which isnot undated-ﬂ
one universal idea. I huve a single with. end my Mahdi
and faculties are yurning to attain it They have yaned b
wards it so long. and so unwaveringly, that I'm convince! i‘
will he reached—and mun—because it he: devoured my ﬂi'
ence: I an: swallowed up in the anticipation of its fulﬂmﬂl
My emissions have not relieved me ; but they my WW
some otherm'se unaccountable phases of humour whidl I shot.
0 God! It is a long ﬁght, I wish it were oval"

He began to pace the roan. muttering terﬁhleﬂingl tn bin?
self. till I was inclined to believe, as he aid Joseph did. M
conscience had turned his heart to an an.th hell. I wondeﬂd
greatly how it would end. Though he seldom More hld 19'
vealed this state of mind. even by looks, it was his hnbiuinl mood-
I had no doubt: he asserted it himself : but not asoul. from “5
general beating, would have conjectured the fact. You did 210‘
when you saw him, Mr. Lockwood: and I! the period of which

WUTHERXNG HEIGHTS. :87

pe‘k he was just the same as then; only fonder of continued
itude, and palm: still more laconic in company.

——»-

CHAPTER XXXIV.

ﬁt some days after that evening. Mr. Heathcliﬁ' shunned
eeting us It meals; yet he would not consent formally to an.
ode Kenton and Cathy. He bud an aversion to yielding so
Impletely to his feelings. choosing rather to absent himself;
ad sting once in twenty-four hours seemed aﬁcieut susten-
noe for him.

One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him go down.
n'rs. Ind out at tlz front door. I did not but him re—enter.
ad in the morning I lound he was still away. We wave in April
)en: the weather was sweet and warm, the ﬁrm or green as
bows and sun owld melt: it. and the two dwarf npploLtrees
eu- the southern wall in full bloom. After breakfast, Catherine
M on my bringing A chair and sitting with my work under
bent-trees at the end ofthe house ; and she beguiled Hareton.
Ibohnd patently mowed from his accident. to dig Ind arr-urge
a litle sullen. which wasth to that corner by theinﬂuenoe
{Joseph‘s complaints. I wa comfortably revelling in the spring
We trawl. end the'bsutiful salt blue curbed, when my
one: lld'ypwhoh-d run down neur thegntetn procurerorne
u'imrose roots for a border. returned only half laden. und in-
haled |I that Mr. Hemhcliﬂ was coming in. " And bespoke
a me."lbe sddod. with I. perplexed cauntemoe.

"What did bony?" asked Hinton.

"He told me to bgone as fast I; I could." she answered.
"BI! heloohtl‘ro diﬂ‘erent from his usual look that I stopped
slunem to sure at him"

" How 7 " be inquired.

“Why, almost bright and cheerfuL No. aha-or! nothing—
”: and excited, and wild and glad I" she replied.

"N'uht—wnlking Imus: him. then." I remarked. uﬂ‘eoting a

m: in reality In surprised as shewas. Ind anxious

"min the truth of her statement; for to see the master
Wu; glad would not be an every-day speoucle. l framed In
atvlsetogoiu. Huthcliﬁ'madauheopendoor; hempalc.

:88 wu’maxma HEIGHTS.

and he trembled: yet. certainly. he had a strange joyful glitter
in his eyes. that altered the aspect of his whole face.

"Will you have some breakfast?" I said. "You. must he
hungry, rambling about all night I "- I wanted to d‘wcover what.-
he had been. but I did not like to ask directly.

“ No. I'm not hungry," he answered. averting his held. Ind
speaking rather contemptuously, as if he guessed I Ins trying
to divine the ocusion of his good-humour.

I felt perplexed : I didn't know whether it were not n my:
opportunity to oﬂ'er a bit of admonition.

" I don't think it right to wander out of doors.” I observed.
"instead of being in bed: it is not wise. at my rate, this main
season. I dare say you‘ll catch a bad cold, or a fem“: you
have something the matter with you now I "

" Nothing but what Icnn hear,“ hercplied; “and with the
gmtest pleasure. provided you'll leave me alone: get in. and
don't annoy me."

I obeyed : and, in pains. I noticed be brushed Is fest us:
at.

"Ya!" I reﬂected to myself, "weshnll have-ﬁt of illnes.
I cannot conceive what he has been doing."

That noon he sat dawn to dinna' with I15. and received I
heaped-up plate from my hands. m if he intended to Ind:
amends for previous fasting.

" I‘ve neither cold nor fever, Nelly," he mind. in Illusion
to my morning's speech: “and I'm rady to do justice to the
food you give me"

Hetook his knife and fork, and was going lo commence win.
when the inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct. He
laid them on the table, looked eagerly towards the window. then
rose and went out. We saw him wulking to and fro in the
garden while we concluded our meal, nud Enmshnw said he’d go
and ask why he would not dine: he thought we bod grieved
him some way.

“ Well, is he coming?" cried Catherine. when hu- cousin
returned.

“ Nay," he answered ; " but he's not angry: hesoemed larer
pleased indeed; only I made him impatient by speaking to him
twice; and then he bid me heoﬂ'loyou: hewondemd [[0111
could want the company of anybody elder"

I set his pine to keep warm on the fender: and after an hour-

mumqu HEIGHTS. 289

‘twohere-entered.whentheroomwasclear. innodegree
diner: the same unnatural—it wns unnatural—appearance of
5' under his hlnelr brows ; the same hloodlas hue. and his teeth
slhle, m and men, in a kind of smile ; his {rune shivering, not
mnenhivers with chill or wenkneﬁ. but as a tight‘stretched cord
huts—I strong thn’lliug, rather than trembling.

I will uh What Is the matter. I thought ; or who should? And
achirned-

" Have you heard any good news, Mr. Henlhcllﬂ'? You look
ammouly animated,"

" Wheresheuld good news somefrom to me?" he said. " I'm
nimnted wlth hunger; and. seaningly. I must not en."

" Your dinner is here." I returned ; “ why won't you get it i’"

“ 1 don‘t want it now," he muttered hastily; " I'll wait till
upper. And. Nelly, once for ell, let me beg you to warn
{won end the other may from me. I wish to be troubled by
ohody: I with to have this plwe to myselfl"

“Is there some new man for thls banishment?" l inquired.
' Tell me why you are so queer. Mr. Henhclitf? Where were
‘on last night? I'm not putting the question through idle
\xrloeity. but “—

“You are putting the question through very idle curiosity."
be interrupted. with a laugh. “ Yet I‘ll Answer it Last night
- was on the threshold of hell. To-day, [ an: within sight of my
haven. lhnve rnyeyuon it: hurdlythreefeet tosever me!
\nd now you‘d better gal You'll neitha- see nor hear mythlng
b frighten you. if you refrain from prying."

Hlving swept the harth and wiped the table. I departed;
Me perplexed than ever.

3 Hedid not quit thehouse again that aftemoon. and no one
“ended on his solitude: till, at eight o'clock. I deemed it
m. though unsummoned. to carry a mndle and his supper
lAllin. He was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice.
ht not looking out: hi! lime was turned to the interior gloom.
The ﬁre had shouldered to ﬁshes: the room wu ﬁlled with the
“up, mild air of thech evening : and so still. that not only
'39 murmur of the heck down Gimmerton was distinguishable.
hill-i ripples and lts gurgling over the pebblu, or through the

“I: Kong which it could not cover. I uttered an ejaculation

ﬂ discontent at seeing the dismal grate. and commenced shut-

“hnhe easements. one may mother. till I cime to his.
K

290 WUTHERING moms.

  
    
   
   
  

"Mist IcloSethis?" I asked. in older lair-Ebb; i“
would not stir.

Thelight ﬂashedonhisfeaturuu I lpoitl. Oh. III.
wood, Imnnotexpruswhntatariuesun I goththe
tnxyvizwl These deep black eyes! unlinked
paleness! It appeared to me. not Mr. Heuthdiﬂ butaﬂ
and, tntnyterror. Ilettheundlehendmthenlnl
left me in darkne$

“Yes. close it." he replied. in his inmililr voice. "
that is pure awkwardness! Why did you hold the
horizontally P De quick. and bring anothu'."

I hurried out in a foolish state of dread. and lid to]

"The master wishsyou to ukehim Ilightlndm
ﬁre." For I dare not go in mysdfngain just that. ;

Joseph rattled some ﬁre into the shovel. and vent: h!
brought it back immediately. with the sumac-tn, in his ‘
hand. explaining that Mr. Heethcliﬂ'was going to bed, db
wanted nothing to eat till morning. We heard him "lit
shindireclly; he did not prootzeduahistxdjnnrydnﬂnﬂ.n
turned intn that with the panelled bed: he window, I: I D
tinned before. is wide enough for anybody to set w: d
it struck me that he plotted another midnight m. of!“
he had mther we had no suspicion.

" Is he a ghoul or a vampire?" I mlsed. I Indrade
hideous incarnate demons. And that I let myself to
I had tended him in incancy. and wetchedhimgm onmh.‘
followed him almost thmgh his whole Nurse : and whet M
nonsense it was to yield to that sense of horror. " ht Inn!‘
he come from, the little dark thing, harboured hyaxoodmtui
bane? ” muttered Superstition, u I dated into mean '

And I began, halfdmming. to weary mysellwilh imagining!-
ﬁt parentage {or him ; and, repeating my WIHDIW
tracked his existence over again, with grim "rim: It hi
picturing his death and funeral : ofwhich, all I can menisci!
bdng exceedingly vexed at having the task of dict-tin. In il
scriplion for his monument, and consulting the man Mi
and, as he had no Iurname, and we could not tell hi ml
were obliged to content ourselm with the single word. " Huh
cliﬁ'.” Thattmne tme : we were. If you rents the kirkylrd. r!“
md on his headstone. only that. and the due of his doth-

, Dawn restored me to common sense. I rose. And wentth

WTHERING HEiGH‘IS. 291

guden, as soon as I could see. to ascertain if there were any foot-
nurhunder his window. Timewere none. “ Hehasstnyed at
home," I thought, "and he'll benll right to—clxy.“ I prepued
lustful for the hotaehold. as m my usual custom. but told
“mandCuherine to get their: a: the master came down,
hr he by lute. They preicned taking it out nl' dams. underthe
nee. nnd I set a little table to uncommadlte them.

On my Nuance. I found Mr. Heathele belowt He and
[mph rue conversing about some farming business; he gave
:lar, minute direction concerning the matter diseased. but he
ypoke npidly. nnd turned his head continually aside. and hmhe
nine united exprusion. even mote exaggerated. When Joseph
pitted the Min he took his sent in the place he generally chose,
Ind I pm c Min (1fo before him. He drew it nmrer, and
Demented his lens on the table, and looked at theoppositewall.
as I supposed. surveying one pattieulur portion, up and down.
with glittering. miss eyes, and with such ager interest tint
be skipped brushing during hall“ a minute together.

"Come now," 1 exclaimed. pushing some braid Igninst his
bad, “at and drink that, while it is hot : it has been waiting
nor An hour."

He didn‘t notice the, and yet he smiled. I'd rather have seen
hingmshhlsteeth thansmileso.

“Mr. Hathcliﬂ'l master!" I cried, “don't. for God's sake,
me u if you saw an unearthly vision." ‘

"Don't. ierod's sake. shout so land." he leplicd. "Turn
mud, and tell me. are we by aunelves?"

“Of course." was my answer: " of course we are."

Still, I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I was not quite sure.
With-sweepofhishend he cleaned nvacant speech frvnt
mg the breakfm things. Ind lean! forward to gaze more at
hit me

Now. I perceived he was not looking at the wall; for when l
resided him alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed at something
within two yards' distance. And whatever it was. it eommunh
med, may, both pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes :
a lean themgnished, yet ruptured, exprusion of his countenance
W that idea. The fancied object was not ﬁxed: either
1i: 3,: gunned it with unwearied diligence. and, even in speak-
ng tone. were never weaned away. I vainly reminded him ofhk
meted abstinence from food : ifhe stirred to touch anything

   
     
  
  
   

392 WUTHERING HEIGHTS.

in complianu: with my entreaties, if he stretched his hand on
get 3 piece of bread, his ﬁngers clenched before they retain!
and remained on the tnhle. forgetful of their ulm.

I sat, a modech patience. trying to attract his Iheorhed lb
tlon from its engrossing speculation ; till he grew irritable.
got up, asking why I would not allow him to have hisoIn
in taking his meals? and saying that on the nut ouch
needn‘t wait : I might set the thing: down and go.
uttered these words he left the house. sluwly watered
the garden path. Ind disappeared through the gut;

The hours crept anxiously by: another evening and I
not retire to rm till late. and when I did. I could not sleep.
returned after midnight. and. instead of going to bed. shut
self into the room beneath. I listened. and toned nhoutAd.
ﬁnally, dressed and descended. It was too irksome toll: I‘I'u
harassing my basin with a hundred idle misgivings.

I distinguished Mr. Heathclifs step. restlssly mensnringh
ﬂoor, and he frequently broke the silence by a. deep impinh
resembling n groan. He muttered detached words I'M-H .
only one I could catch was the name at Cltherine. coupkdiii
some wild term of endearment or suﬂering: Ind spoken nﬂ
would speak toa person present: low and WESLMW
from the depth of his soul. I had not com-age to walk Sini-
into the apartment ; but I desired to divert him from his rank.
Ind therefore fell foul of the kitchen ﬁre. stirred it. and heglnlo
scrape the cinders. It drew him forth sooner than I expend-
He opened the door immediately, and said—

” Nelly, come here—is it morning? Come in with your light'

" It is striking four." I answered. "You went it alka
trike upstairs: you might have lit one it th's ﬁre"

“ No, I don't wish to go upstairs," he said. “ Come in. Ind
kindle me I ﬁre. and do anything there is to do about the
room.“

“I must blow the coals red ﬁrst, before I can carry my.”
replied. getting a chair and the bellows.

He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state apple-thin!
distraction ; his heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick 5
to leave no space for common breathing between.

" When day breaks I‘ll send for Green." he snid: " I wish “7
make same legnl inquiries of him while I can ham 1 W
on those matters, and while I can act calmly. I have not with!

' wry-mums HEIGHTS. :9;-

ywmyet; undhowtoleevemypropertylunnntdetermine.
nigh I could nnnihilate it from the face of the earth."
“ I would not talk so, Mr. Hadwliﬂ'." I interposed. "lat
urvlll he I while: you‘ll be spared to repent of your many
Mm yet. I never expected that your nerves would be dis-
dered : they nre. At present. marvellouely so, however ; and
nest entime through your own tnult. The way you've passed
He the last day: might had: upn'l‘itan. Douhesame
3d. and some repose. You need only look at yourself in I
ll tosee how you require both. Your eheels are hollow, end
or eyabloodlhot, like 1 person starving with hunger and
in: blind with loan ofsleep."
" It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest." he replied.
I name you it is through no settled duig'ns. I‘ll do both.
soon as I possibly can. But you might as well bid a nun
unling in the water rest within arm's length of the shore] 1
mmhitﬁrst, and then I'll rest. Well. nevermind Mr. Green:
torepentingof my injustice, I‘ve done no injusticeand I repent
nothing. I'm too happy; and yet I‘m not happy enough.
y soul's bus kill: my body, but does not satisfy itself."
" H-ppy. matter?” I cried. " Strange happinessl If you
old liar me without being angry. I might oﬂ'er some advice
ll would make you happier.“
"What is thnt?" he asked. “Give it."
"You ere-ware. Mr. Heathcliﬂ'." I said, “ that from the time
n we thirteen yam old, you have lived a selﬁsh. unchristinn
=; and prohubly, hardly had I Bible in your hands during all
It period. You must hnve forgotten the contents of the book,
d you may not have space to search it now. Could it he hurtful
send for some one-earn: minister of any denomination. it
on not matter which—to explain it, and show you how very far
olleveened fromitspreeepts; and howunlityouwillbelor
haven, unless a. change takes place before you die ?"
"I'm rather obliged than nngry. Nelly." he said. “for you
mind me of the manner in which I desire to be buried. It is
be mied to the churchyard in the evening. You and Hnreton
1]. if you please. accompany me: and mind. particularly, to
lice that the sexton obeys my directions concerning the two
in!!! No minister need come; nor need anything be said
Mme—I tell you I hue nurly attained my heaven; and that
lather: is altogether “valued and uncoveled by me."

M WVTHERING 1'1me

ifyouaskthern. wouldsweartntheBiblethnthewlLr: that
uethosewhospakwhavingmethimnnrtheMMG
(he moor, and even within this house. Idle his. yu'ﬂ I].
andsosay 1. Yet that old mnbythe kitchenﬁrenﬁnntk
has seen two on ’em, looking out of his chamber window!!!
every miuy night since his death z—ond in odd thing haw
tome aboutamomhtgo. Imgoing retiree-urgent
evening—a dark evening. threatening thunder—and, just at tht
turn of the Heights. I encountered a little boy with e sheepud
two lmbs before him; he was crying terribly; and I and
the lambs were skittish. and would not be guided.

“Whutisthematter.mylittlem?”luked. ’

"There's Heathcliﬂ' and v. woman. yonder. under t' nob”!
bluhbered, “un' I darnut pass 'em."

I saw nothing ; but neitha the sheep not hewould go on; x
I hid him take the road lower down. He probably nhed tll
phantoms from thinking. as he traversed the moors done, on thl
nonsense he had heard his parents and compnnions repnt. YE.
still. I don't like being out in the dark new: end I don't lit
being left by myselfin this grim home: l annot helpit; Isl!“
be glad when they lave it. and shift to the Grunge.

"They Ire going to the Grange, then?" I said.

"Yes," answered Mrs. Dean, "as soon as rheyure amid.
and that will be on New Year's duy."

“ And who will live here then?"

“Why, Joseph will take care of the house. and, perhaps!
lad to keep him company. They will live in the ldtnhen. and
the rest will be shut up."

"For the useot' such ghosts as choose to inhabit it," 1 ob
served.

"No. Mr. Lockwood." said Nelly, shaking her head. "l
believe the dead are at peace: but it is not right to sped”
them with levity."

A: that moment the garden gate swung to; the ramblersz
returning.

" They are afraid of nothing." I grumbled. wntehing the
approach through the window. “ Together. they would hmV
Satan and all his legions."

As they stepped on to the door-stones, and halted to tab!
last look at the moon—or. more correctly. at each other by
light—I felt irresistibly impelled to scape them Iglin: I“

WUTHERING HEIGHTS. 297

pressing a remembmnoe into the hand of Mrs. Dan. and dis-
regarding her expostulations at my rudeness. I vanished through
the kitchen as they opened the housevdoor: and so should have
conﬁrmed Joseph in his opinion of his fellow-servant's gay indis«
muons, had he not fortunately recognised me for a rapecuble
character by the sweet ring of a sovereign n: his feet.

My nail: home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction
of the kirk. When beneath its walls. I paoeived decay had
made progress, even in seven months: many a window showed
black gaps deprived of glass; and slates jutted of. here and
there, beyond the right line of the roof, to be gradually worked
03' in coming autumn storms.

I sought. and soon discovered, the three head‘stones on the
slope next the moor: the middle one grey. and half buried in
heath; Edgar Linton‘s only harmonised by the turf and moss
creeping up it: foot : Heathcliﬂ's still here.

Ilingeled round them, under that benign xky: watched the
moths ﬂuttering unong the heath and hmbeils. listened to the
son wind breathing thmugh the gas. and wondered how any
one could ever imagine unquiet slumbexs for the sleepers in that

uiet earth.

END OF "WIRING ﬁltle”

 

 

 

AGNES GREY.

.N

CHAPTER I.
THE PARSONAGB.

true histories contain instmction ; though. in some, the
rusure may be hard to ﬁnd. and when found, so trivial
tity. that the dry, shrivelled kernel smrcely compensate:
trouble of cracking the nut. Whether this be the case
' history or not. I am hardly competent to judge. 1 50m
link it might prove useful to some. and entertaining to
but the world any judge for itself. Shielded by my own
zy. and by the lnpse of years. and a few ﬁctitious names,
I fear to venture; and will candidly lay before the public
would not disclose to the most intimate friend. .
tther was a clergyman of the north of England, who was
dly respected by all who knew him : and, in his younger
ved pretty comiombly on the joint income of ssmnll in-
lay and a snug little propertyol‘ his own. My mother.
,rried him sgninst the wishes of her friends. was s squire‘s
:r, and a woman of spirit. In vain it was represented to
.t if she became the poor person’s wife, she must relinquish
'n'age and her lady's-maid, and all the luxuries and
es of aﬂuence; which to her were little less than the
ries of life. A carriage and a lady's-maid were great con-
es; but. thank Heaven. she had feet to carry her, and
a minister to her own necessities An elegant house and
s grounds werenot to be despised ; but she would rather
a cotmge with Richard Grey than in a. palace with any
tan in the world.

ing uguments of no avail, her father, at length, told the
they might marry if they pleased; but. in so doing, his
er would forfeit every imtion of her fortune. Hc ex-

3)!

3°: AGNES GREY.

pected thiswould eooltheardour ofboth; but hemmistnlre
My father knew too well my mother‘s superior worth not to l
sensible that she was a valuable fortune in herself: and if II
would but consent to embellish his humble harth. he shouldl
happy to take her on any terms: while she. on her put. wan
rather labour with hr own'hnnds than bedtvidnd ion the Ii
she loved. whose happiness it would'be herjay on male, and dl
was alrady one with her in heart and soul. So her fortune“
to swell the purse of a wiser sister. who had married a rich nnho
and she, to the wonder and compassionate regret of all who hit
her, went to bury herself in the homely village parsonage am
the hills ol——-. And yet. in spite of all this. and in spite of:
mother‘s high spirit and my father's whims, I believe you mi;
mohuﬂﬂnglandthmlshandfnilto ﬁndnhnppiumuph

“hem.mysiner Mary.“ mysdfwele the only!
of infancy and candy childhood. X. In'
they-rage:- hrfwe-orsixynrs. mnlwaysreprdedut
ail-rid Ihepuolthefamily: Ethanmuhe.“ sister.
mhined. to spoiime—nothyfaolish-lndulgewe,hrudar
fractions Ind: nimble. but by useless Hndnslﬂo run
the unhelplm and depadum—rou-unﬁt- ﬁt Mimi-gun“
calls and tmeﬂsot‘ life.

Mary and I “brought up in the- sﬁctat Man. I
mother. he's: a! are: higny mplishe‘l. well informed. I
find of employment. took the whole charge of our eduutim
herself. with the eruption of Mch‘my father madam:
to mach us—sa that we never ever went to school ; and. a th
m nosodety in theneighbowhood. ourme intercom: with!
world consisted in a sulely ten-puny, new and then. with!
principll farmelsand mdspeople of the vicinity (just to Iv:
being :13th as too- proud to count with car neighbour
and In annual visit to. our paternal gmdfnthe‘s ; when hi1
self. our kind grandmamlna, n maiden aunt, and two or m
dd°thdlesmd gunmen. were the only pawn we ever ﬂ
Scrum ourmotha' would nrnuse In with stoﬁesand once-101
of her younger days, which, while they entertained in may
frequentlymin m. at least—o secret wish to sea I lit:
more of the world.

I thought she must have been very happy: but she In
seemed to regret past time; My'Father, hunter. when”,
was neither mqrﬂ nor cheerful by name. dun unduly val

mass can. so;

Wﬁmtﬁnlﬁqdhmﬁmhﬂmmmmtn
him: Indth h‘u hadrithmlving endl Juliane: {at
damnation ofhk little formula! her she and can. In
whiny mothammd hinduvuqnitcsutisﬁnd;md iflx
waldbuthyhyalittlefuthenhildxu.weshouldallhnw
plenty.hod:tuttlmepmentnd to come: hmnvinz want
my inhu’sfane. ﬂew-hi notmin debt (at least. my maths
toohgoodanheshnldnot).hutwhihhnhadmunzyhemusl
spud it: he liked tom hishouseoomfomble, and hiswil'ennd
hughmwdldmm wellnttendmd; and raids.th
nhaxitably disposed. Ind liked to give to the poor, according to
his mans :' at. as same might think. beyond them.

Atlmgth.homu,lldndfxiendsuggmedmhimnmumof
doubling his prime my at one snake; and further: in-
uudug it. haunts; to-nn untold. amount. This friend. was a
manhunt. n m of altaprising spirit and undoubted talent.
who us somewhat switched in his rim-cum: puma: for
want of capital; but generously pmposed to give my {uh-:- I
hit shared“: Foﬁls. ifhe would only entrust him with what
he could spat: ud he thanght he might safely promllc that
whim sundae 1m:- chose to put into his htuds, it shnuld
hinghim hunt. perm: The mllputl'imonywvupeedily
sold, Ind hihole afitspricm-sdnpositedintheh-nds althe
friendly manhunt; whaupmmptly Md toship his largo.
andptepueforhisvoyug:

My {atlas was delighted, so wm'we all. with our bighmniim
m Forlhepzmt..itism,wewuetedmedtothe
minnow: otthecunq; but my father seemed lathin
thus val no acuity for scrupulously nsuictinl. our expendi-
lumto lint; livid: I standing billet Mr. Jackson's. mathsu
Smith's, Ind Lthird at Robson's, we got dang even more com—
imahly'than w: thuth my mother nﬁlrmed we had better
mmhmmrmmu aimlth wrebnt pro»
mum-n; nuiit‘nyfnthu would odytmtwerything
win-W, ligshouklnzvaful himself stimuli: bathe.
ham, mlncwriyhl'a

tht hm hamMary ad I have paw, while. sitting at
our watt by: the 52.x wandering on the hath-clad hills.or
Hills; MI dulap'mg birch (the only considmble trecin the
hula. dﬂqoi tutu: happiness to ourselves and an! 92mm.
ﬁvhnwevulddo. nd'mand pm; with no Anna

904 nouns our.

foundation {or our goodly superstructure. than the rich: that
wereexpeetedtoﬂowinuponusiromthesueoessofthewonhy
merchant's speculations. Our {other was narly as had u out-
selva: only that he niIeoted not to he so much in earns:
exprssing his bright hopes and sanguine expectations. in jest
and playful sallies. that alwlys struck me as being exceedingly
witty and plmsant. Our mother laughed with delight to :3
him so hopeful and happy: but still she feared he was setting
his heart too much upon the matter: and once I hand ll!
whisper as she let) the room, " God grant he be not disappoian
I know not how he would hear it."

Disappointed he was; and bloody. too. It came like I
thunder-clap on us all. that the vessel which contained our forum
had been wrecked, and gone to the bottom with all it: starts.
together with several of the crew, and the unfortunate manhunt
himself. Iwasgrieved forhim; lwasgrievedforthe overthrow
of all our air-built mstles: but, with the elasticity at youth. I
soon recovered the shock.

Though riches had charms. poverty had no two for In
inexperienced girl like me. Indeed. to say the truth, the was
something exhilarating in the idea of being driven to smith-Id
thrown upon our own mourns. I only wished papa. mm
and Mary. were all of the same mind as myself; and then. install
of lamenting past mlamities, we might all cheerfully set to work
to remedy them; and the greater the ditﬁculties, the hurder our
present privations, the greater should be our cheerfulnes to
endure the latter. and our vigour to contend against the fauna.

Mary did not lament, but she brooded continually over the
misfortune, and sank into a state of dejection from which no
dfort of mine could rouse hen I could not possibly bring her to
regard the matter on its bright side as 1 did: and indeed 1 VII
so {grind of being charged with childish frivolity, or stupid in-
sensibility, that l carefully ltept most of my bright ideas and chea-
ing notions to myself; well knowing they could not beappreeiated-

My mother thought only of consoling my father, and plyinl
our debts nnd retrenching our expenditure by every availabll
means: but my father was completely overwhelmed by the
mlamity: health. strength, and spirits sank beneath the blot;
and he never wholly recovered them. In vain my mother W
to cheer him. by appealing to his piety. to his courage. '9
his affection for herself and us. That very aﬂ'cctian was IIIs

AGNES GREY. 305

icnt : it was for our sakes he had so ardently longed
his fortune—it was our interest that had lent such
a his hopes. and that imparted such bitterness to
distress. He now tormented himself with remorse
:glected my mother's advice; which would at last
him from the additional burden of debt—he vainly
himself {or having brought her from the dignity,
IC luxury of her former station to tail with him
* cares and toils o! poverty. It was gall and
0 his soul to see that splendid, highly accomplished
: so courted and admired. transformed into an active
susewife. with hands and head mtinually occupied
told labours nnd household economy. The very
~ilh which she performed these dutis. the cheerful-
tich she bore her reverses. and the kindnus which
' from imputing the smallest blame to him, were all
' this ingenious self-tormentor. into further aggrava-
suﬂ'en'ngs. And thus the mind preyed upon the
isordered the system of the news. and they in turn
e troubles of the mind. tillhy action and reaction his
eriously impaired : and not one of us could convince
: aspect 0! our admits was not half so gloomy. so
less. as his morbid imagination represented it to be.
ll pony pheeton was sold, together with the stout
iy—the old tuvourite that we had fully determined
ts day; in pence. and never pass from our hands : the
muse and stable were let; the servant bay. and the
t(heing the moreapemive) of the two maid-servant:
led. Our clothes were mended, turned, and darned
.t verge of decency : our food. always plain. was now
a an unprecedented degree—qut my father'l
hes: our coal; and candleswete paintmly eeonomiaed
If candles reduced to one. and that most sparingly
oels carefully husbanded in the hull-empty gate:
hen my father was out on his parish dutie. or con-
l through illness—then we sat with our feet on the
ring the perishing embers together from time to time.
nally adding a slight scattering of the dust end
fecal. just to keep them alive. As for our tarpett,
were worn threadbare, and patched end darned even
extent than our garments. To save the expense of.

we

gardener, Mu-yand I unda’took to keep the gardeninmla:
anlnlltlncnoldngandbcuseholdwork thumldnctuiyh
managed hyone serum girl. undone bymymolhermﬂa,
wiihalinlcouminmlhdpﬁamnw: only: “tugboaan
awoman in myown esiimaxiun, I “SSH” achiﬂ intimian
mymotherJilamos active,mnnagingwom.mnmgibd
with veryactive daughters: {armamenth being ndﬁa’
uddiligem herself. shewasmianpted mm ha- aﬂsh
adePuU. but on the country. was willing to m and will!!!
othas :swell as fornumbexona; and whalevurwsthebﬂm
inhnnd. shewasapuathinkthatnoone coulddoizaondlu
basalt: sothaxwhmevu-Ioﬁaedtoaaistha. Ireoeivaindl
an answer as—"No, love. you cannot indeed—there's whiz
haeyoumndo. Goandhdpyaursislamr get herbﬂ:
wnlkwilh yon—tell hex-she must notsit so much, and my!)
washmlyinthehwse umdm-shmywnllloakthhud
dejected."

"Mary. mamma says I’m to help you: or sawhoth
wall: with m: : she says you my well look thin and dejend, if
you sit so commﬂy in the haunt."

"Helpmeyoumnnm. Ashe: and I annugoontwithyu
—-I luv: far too much to do."

"Then let me help you."

“ You cannm, ind-ad. dau- child. 60 and pants: yaw
music, or play with. the khan."

Thunwas almysplentyafsewingon hind: but 1mm
ban taught to all out a. single garment. and men plain
haunting and seaming. than was link I could do, m it ill!
line; ﬂurtheybodxmthnkwasfarmierwdumwwk
theudvs than to pupae it for m: and. baking, they“
museum Mtingnysmdies. wamusingmpelf—itm
(in: enough form: to sit bending over nay-work. lih: ugnu
mum, wbm my hmuxitelinlepusym became undyddm
End: such circumstances. although I was not manydggms mule
usnful than the kitten. my idle-us was not enlitdy times-me.

Through all our troubles. 1 never but once held my mail!!!
complain of our want of money. As summerwas maxing on,
slum In Maryand me, "Wham dainble thing it would
be ﬁt your pop- to spend as {aw week: at a inning—prune. ! am
conﬁned the sat-air and the clung: of scene would‘he ﬂin-
cdcnlable swine to him. But then, you see. there’s no my,‘

AGNES GREY.

mum GREY. 307

, with a sigh. We both wished encodineg that the
:12: be done, and lamented greatly that it could not.
till" said she. "it's no use complaining. Possibly
; might be done to further the groin! aha Ill. Mary,
beautiful drawer. What do you my to doing slew
urea in your best style, and getting them framed, with
coloured clawing; you have already done. and. trying
: of them to me liberal picture-deale. who has the
ismn their malts P "

m1 should bedclighted it you. think theymld be
I for anything worth while."

ml: while trying. however. my dear: do you procure
ngs. and I‘ll. endmvour to ﬁnd a purchaser."

1 I could do something." said 1.

Agnes! well. who knows? You draw pretty well. too:
nose some simple piece for your subject. I dare say
tabletoproducesomethingwesballall bcproud to

v have another scheme in my head. mm, and have
only I did not like to mention it."

dl pray tell us what n is."

11d like to be avgovernus.”

the: uttered In mluuution of surprise, and laughed.
dropped her work in astonishment, examining, " You
55. Agnul Whatmuyoubedmmingoi’l"

l 1 don't see anything so my)! extraordinary in it. I
etend to be able to instruu great girls: but surely, I
:11 little onu: and I should like it ram: 1 am so
iildmL Do let me. mamma l ”

uy love, you hove not learned to take care of yum?
young children. require more judgment and experience
e than tickr ones."

Mama. I an above eighteen. and. quite able to take
mi. and others too. You do not know half the wisdom
mu I poems. because I have new bum tried."
think.“ said Mary. "what would you do in a horse
rogers, without me or marnm to speak and act for you
parcel of children. besides yourself. to attend to ; and
‘look to for :dvice? You would not even know what
put on." x
link. because I always do as you bid me. I luv: no

303 AGNES cm.

judgment nt'nlyown: batonlyttynie—thal is all I:
you shall see what I an do."

At that moment my father entered. Ind the ski:
discussion was explained to him.

"Wint, mylittleAgmsagovernus I” cried he. and.
of his dejection, he laughed at the idea.

“ Yes. papa. don'tm say anything against it: 1 sh
it :0 much; and I am sure I could mug: delightfully.

"But. my darling. we could not spam yon.” An-
glistened in his eye as he added—" No. no! aﬂicted u
surely we are not brought to that pass yet."

“Oh.na!"said my mmha. "There is no m
ever for such a step; it is merely n whim of her own.
must hold your tongue. you nougth girl ; for. though y
ready to lave an, you know very well we cannot pnrt we

[was silenced for that day, and for many sueoeedin
but still I did not wholly relinquish my darling scheme
got her drawing materials. and smdily set to work. I I
too; but while I drew, I thought of other things. How
ful it would he to be a governs! To go out into tin
to enter upon a new life; to not for myself: to em
unused faculties; to try my unknown powers; to earn
maintenance, and something to comfort and help in;
mother, and sister, besides atonemting them from the t
of my food and clothing; to show papa what his littl
could do; to convince mums. and Mary that I was n
the helplw, thoughtless being they supposed. And tt
charming to be entrusted with the care and education ol'c
Whatever others said, I felt Iwas fully competent to t
the clear rememblanoc of my own thoughts in early cl
would be a sum guide than the instructions of the most
adviser. I had but to turn from my little pupils to n
their age, and I should know, at once. how to win th
ﬁdenoc and affections : how to woken the contrition of tht
how to emboldzn the timid. and console the :tﬂiicted;
make Virtue practicable, Instruction dmimhle, and
lovely and comprehensible.

“ —Delightful task l
To teach the young idea how to shoot I”

To train the tender plants. and watch their buds unfoh
by day l ' ' '

AGNES GREY. 3C9

Inﬂuenced hyso many inducements. I determined still to per-
:vere ; though the {ear of displasing my mother. or distrssing
iy father's feelings, prevented me from resuming the subject for
trend days At length, again. I mentioned it to my mother in
livate; and. with some difﬁculty. got her to promise to assist
re with her endeavours. My father’s reluctant consent was next
trained. and then. though Mary still sighed her disapproval.
ny dm, hind mother begun to look out for a. situation ior me.
She wrote to my father’s relntians. and consulted the newspaper
Idvertisements—her own relations she had long dropped all
mmunimtion with: n formnl interchange of occasional letters
was I)! she had ever had since her marriage. and she would not
any time have applied to them in a cue of this nature. But
soloing and so entire had been my parents' seclusion from the
Int-Id. that many weeks elapsed before a suitable situation could
be procured. At last. to my great joy. it was decreed thit i
Shouldtake charge of the young family of a certain Mrs. Bloom—
ﬁdd: whom my kind. prim aunt Grey had ltnown in her youth.
Ind asserted to be u very nice woman. Her husband was a
retired undesman. who had realised I verycomfortable fortune ;
but wild not be prevailed upon to give a greater salary than
twenty-ﬁve pounds to the instruetress of his children. 1, how—
ever. was glad to accept this. rather than refuse the situation—
!lhich my parents were inclined to think the better plan.

But some weeks more were yet to be devoted to preparation.
How long. how tedious those weeks append to me I Yet they
Iuehappy ona in the mnin—Tull of bright hupa and ardent
"notations. With what peculiar pleasure I assisted at the
hiring of my new cloths. and, subsequently, the packing of
my trunks I But there was a feeling of bitterness mingling with
thinner occupation too; and when it was done—when all was
lady [or my departure on the marrow, and the last night at
home approached—n sudden anguish seemed to swell my heart.
My dmr {rids looked so sad, and spoke so very kindly. that I
weld mreely keep my eyes from ovaﬂowing: but I still alliected
in be gay. I hnd taken my last ramble with Mary on the moors.
“Has! walk in the garden, and round the house; I had fed,
Vrith her, our per pigeons {or the list time—the pretty creature-s
“tamarind tamed to peek their food from otrr hands: Ihad
inmafarewell stroke to all their sillty banks as they crowded
"I my lap. I had tenderly kissed my own peculiar lavourites,

310 Am GRIN.

the pit of haw-white Emails; I bid phyd nyhstn-
tbeddtumiliatpihm. udnngrnylntsong to pp: m
Ian, Ihoped. humhe last for. what lppuled burn-nu]!
time Md.pahnp,whu I did thaeth'ngs mink-n
hewith diﬁermt feelings: ciruunhnosmightbed-ncd.‘
thishmselnightneverbemynﬂedhomelglh L!de5
friend. thekinen. wuldemaiuybedmged: shew-Ill
growingaﬁneat; Ind-ha: [return-l. tank alt-wt
atChristmi. would, mostllitely. mmM-hi
unleadhermerrypnnks. lhndmpedwiﬁhsﬁ'
lunime; and whmlnmhedha'nﬁlriynﬁlr. whﬁdn
purringhasdfoo sleephmyhp, itvuvithnfdingofnll
Iwuldnotasllydisguise. mnmmld
with Maryann-quiet little dunks. whaeahudynydn:
weteclearedont and myshnre ofthehwhnzmqnpy—a
where. weaker. shewould haveto sleq: lime. indrarysd'.
as sheexptessed h—myheutsankmuethlnevu: in: IS
hadbeeuselﬁshmdwrongtnperu‘stinhvingher; Inclth
knelt once more bside onrliltle bed. Imyd hilt-‘9:
hamdonmypmtsmehventlythneulhdd
before. To annual rnyelnmim. I WHY” inmth
andtheywzreprescntlyhnthedintean Xpeluived.mrii
that she had been crying too: butneithaofusspnke; an
silence we betook ourselva to our repose. creep‘mg mare do!
together from the conscious-n that we we to inn I) sat:

But the morning brcught a renewal of hope Ind spirit:
was to depm early; that the conveyance which Mine (I.
hired from ’Mr. Smith. the diaper. w. Ind ta-duh of
village) might mum the sure day. I magma. its
swallowed a hasty bruld‘ast, received the fund an” of
father. mother. and sister, kissed the muttuhe gum and:
Sally. (he maid—shook hands with her. mounted the gig, ti
rny veil over my fame. and then, but not till 1h, min
ﬂood oftears. The gig rolled on: I Inked huh; myd
mother and sister were still standing It the clear. hating:
me, and waving their adieu. I returned their subtle. and pin;
God tobless them from rug/hart: wcdacended thehillan
could lee thern no mare.

“ It's I coldish mornin' for you, Miss Ans." obs
Smith; “and a d-rksome un too; but we's. hm. gﬂ
yon” spot afore there come much min to signify."

AGES GREY.

“Ya. Ihopeso."replied I. asmlmlyaslemld.

" «sweat-goal! sup last ﬁght too."

“'6...

" Bi ﬁlls-aide wills-ppm. keephol‘.’

"Pahpkwﬂ‘ ‘

“Hm aided-Bur colloquy. 'We «and manna, and‘begm
mmhomitehﬂl. hmmtoﬂingupJW
bank nglin: thenmthevillagespimndtheoldgley pr.
m beyond it. haslu'ng in ail-Ming hum of sunshinric
m m l sickly my, but the villnge Ind swimming hills wee
I“, inmhnahnag-and 1 hailed the wandering ham :51
Women to myhome. With clasped hands, I fervently
haw nucﬁngm its inhabitnms. and innilytumed away;
“Tl-vasesmnhincwns departing: and I carefully avaidd
m Mark-.91 shouldsee it in gloomy shadow, like'lh:
mdthehndsupe.

31:

.—u——

CHAPTER II.
EXIST LESSONS in THE ART OF msnvcnou.

As-ve more along. my spirits revived again. and I turned, with
plane. tn the contemplation of the new Iii: upon which I
“lensing. But though it was not far past the middle of
Septnba, the havy Glands and strong north-usme wind
unlined to under the day extremely cold and dreary; and
the junney named a veryloug one, for. :3 Smith observed. the
nut wee “vary heavyﬂ'and mainlynhis horse was my
Mum: haw/12de the hills, and wept down then. Ind
onlymdneendedmshakeiu sidcsinatmwhacthcmd
wuatadendkvdarnmygenﬂe slape, which wunxelythc
cue‘in thinningng regions; so that itwns neurly one o’clock
hdnn View die plweof atn' dutination. Yet, mu an,
whn v: attend the lofty iron gateway, when we dme softly
up ﬁt: M, well-rolled carriage and, with me gnu: lawn
on och sidc. Med with young trees, and nprptouched the
new but stately nation of Wellvrocd, rising above its mush-
Ioom poplar-3mm. my heart ﬁiled me. and I vrisheditvere
Inﬂammh-theroﬁ. Forth: ﬁrst tin: in my life, I must
Ind-lunathaewnsmteuuting now. Immenkrthat
home, and intmduce myself among its strange inhabitants.

312 AGNES GREY.

But how was it to be done? True. X was hm nineteen ht.
thanks to my retired life and the protecting are of my mom
Ind sister. I well knew that many I. girl of ﬁfteen, or ands.“
(med with a more womanly address, and greater use and ad!"
possession, than I was. Yet. if Mrs. Bloomﬁeld we a Flat"
motherly woman, i might do very well. am all; sad the
children. of course, I should soon be at use with them—anti
Mr. Bloomﬁeld, I hoped. I should have but little to do with.

“Be calm. be calm, whatever happens." I said within my”:
and truly I kept this resolution so well. and was so fullyooulﬁi
in steadying my nerves and stilling the rebellious ﬂutterd II!
ham. that when I was admitted into the hall. and “shield km
the presence of Mrs. Bloomﬁeld, I almost forgot to answerhtt
polite sanitation; and it afterwuds struck me. that the link
I did say was spoken in the tone of one half-dead or Illi-
asleep. The lady, too. was somewhat chilly in hu- manna.
as I discovered when I had time to RM She wns I till.
spare. stately woman, with thick black hair. cold grey eyesmﬁ
extremely sallow complexion.

With due politeness, however. she showed me my bedroom
and let! me there to take a little refruhmenL I was somewhat
dismayed at my appearance on looking in the glass: the a“
wind had swelled and reddened my hands, nncurled Ind en-
tangled my hair. and dyed my face of n pale purple; add to
this my collar \va horridly crumpled, my [rock splashed with
mud, my feet clad in stout new boots. and IS the tnmksm
not brought up. there was no remedy: so having smoothed my
hair as well as I could, and repeatedly twitched my obdunu
collar, I proceeded to clamp down the two ﬂights of shit!-
philosophislng as I went; and with some diﬁculty found my
way into the room where Mrsl Bloomﬁeld awaited me.

She led me into the dining-room. where the family luncheon
had been laid out. Some beefstealts and half-cold potatoesweﬂ!
set before me: and while I dined upon these, she sat opposite.
watching me (as I thought) and endeavouring to swim 50M
thing like a conversation—consisting chieﬂy of a suoessivn 0‘
commonplace remarks. expressed with {rigid formality: lulth
might be more my fault than hers, for I really could not com!!!
In fact, my attention was almost wholly Absorbed in my diam:
not from ravenous appetite, but from distress at the toughnai 9'
the beefsteaks, and the numbness of my hands. almost palsibd W

AGNES GREY. 3r 3

eir ﬁve hours’ exposure to the bitter wind. I would glIdly have
ten the potatoes and let the mat alone, but having got a large
ece olthe latter on to my plate. I could not he soirnpolite as

lave it; so. after many Awkward and unsuccessful attempts
cut it with the knife. or tar it with the fork. or pull it asunder
:tween them, sensible that the awful lady was a spectator to the
sole transaction. I It last despernely grasped the ltnile and fork
my ﬁsts. like a child of two yer: old. and fell to work with all
e little mnzth l possased. But this nwded some apology—
lth I. feeble Attempt at a laugh, I said. "My hands are so
numbed withtheeold that I canscamelyhnndlemyltnile
Ad fork."

" I due say you would ﬁnd it cold," replied she. with a cool.
nmnuble gravity that did not serve to re-nssure me.

When the ceremony was concluded she led me into the sitting-
wm again. where she rang and sent for the children.

“You will ﬁnd them not very far advanced in their nttain-
ments." snid she. “ for I have had so little time to attend to their
education myself. 1nd we have thought them too young for a
governess till now ; but I think they are clever children, and very
Ipt to learn. especially the little boy: he is. I think, the ﬂower
of the dock—s generous. noblespirited boy. one to be led. but
not driven. and remarkable for always spulting the truth. He
was to scout deception" (this was good news). " His sister
M117 Ann will require watching." continued she. “ but she is a
my good girl upon the whole : though I wish her to be kept out
“the nurseryns much as possible, as she is now almost six yarn
dd. and might acquire bad habits from the nurses. I have
“dad he crib to he placed in your room. and if you will beso
kind as to overlook her washing and timing. and take charge
of her clothes, she need have nothing further to do with the
nursery-maid."

I replied I wuquite willing to do so ; and at that moment my
Mm: pupils entered the apartment. with their two younger
listen Master Torn Bloomﬁeld was a well-grown boy of seven.
Villt asamewhat wiry frame. ﬂnxen hair. blue eyes, small turned—
“? use. and fair complexion. Mary Ann was a tall girl too.
What dark like her mother. but with it round full face and:
5'61 colour in her checks. The second sister wss Fanny. a very
My little girl: Mrs. Bloomﬁeld usured me she was I re-
thly gentle child, sud required encouragement: she had

314 AGKES GREY.

notlenrnedanythingyet; but in I Sewdxys she w
yearsoldJndthenshemightuhherﬁmlasminth
nudbepwmotdlothelchoolmm The remuhir
Harriet, alinlehroud. fat, merry. playfulthingdm
Imemdmethanaﬂthem—hmwithhalhmw

lulkedwmylituepupilsuwellu IcouldAndu-it
myselflgranble: butwhhlltﬂemslfear, forth:
presume kept me under an nplmnm main. 1
ever, mmhhlyfree from shynsk Theyue:
liver chilchen. and I hoped I should soon he on {rig
with them—the little boy especially. of whom I had
a. ("curable character from his mmmm In Mary
was I certain aﬁected simper, and a mving far nmine‘
sorrytoobsrrve. But he- hrother chimed all my:
himself; hestnocl bolt uprighthetween mend the ﬁ
hands behind his back, talking my like an mm
interrupting his discourse with a thuprepmuﬂo h‘s s
they made too much noise

"0 Tom. what a darling you ml" uﬂaimed h
“ Come and kiss dear mm; and then won't ymt
Grey your schoolmat. Ind your nice new books?"

"Iwon‘t Wynn-lamina; but I WISE]th
xchoolnom, md my new book.“

"And my schoolroom. and my new book, Tom.”
Ami. “ They’re mine too."

"They're nine," replied he decisively. " Come:
Grey—I'll econ you.”

When the room and books had been shown.
bickering: wween the brother and sister that Idid
to appease or mitigate, MAJ-y Ann brought me he
began ID be very loqmious on the subject ol‘ its ﬁne
bed. its chest of drawers. and other appurtenances:
told her to hold her clamour. that MisGrey might see 1:
bone. which. with a most important bustle. hedragged
its corner into the middle of the room, loudly calling
attend to it. Then, ordering his sister to hold tht
mounted. and made the stand for ten minuta. wut
manfully he used his whip and spurs. Meantime,
admired Mary Ann’s pretty doll, and all its posses:
then told Mr. Tom he was : capital rider, but I hope-t
not use his whip and spun so much when he rode :t r

AGNES GREY. 31;

“Oh. yes. I will " said he, laying on with redwbled "dour.
"I'llcut into him like smulwl Bah! my'ordl but he shall
sweat for it." ‘

Thlswasveryshocking: but I hoped in timetobeahleta
work I reformation.

“Now you must put on your bonnet and shawl." said the
little hero, '- and Hi show you my garden."

"And ﬁbre." aid Mary Ann.

Tom Medhls ﬁst with a menacing galore ; shenth aloud,
shrill scream. ran to the other side of me. and tendon face at him.

"Surely. Tom, yonwould not strikeer sister! I hope I
shall never see you do that."

"You will sometimes: I'm obliged to do it now and then to
lreep her in radar."

“ But it is not your business to keep her in order, you know—s
that is for”—

"Well, now go and put on your bonnet."

" I don‘t know~it is so very cloudy and cold. it seen: lith
to min :—and you know I have her! a long drive."

"No mutter—you aunt come: I shall allow at mucosa,"
replied the conseqan little gentleman. And as it was the
list day of our acquaintance, I thought I might as well indulge
h'nn. lures too cold for Mary Ann to venture. sash: stayed
whhhamamm; lo thegreat relief of her brother, wholiked
to have me all to himself.

The gardenusa lxrgeone. and tastefully laid out; bald:
several splendid dahlins, there were some other line How still
in bloom : but my companion would not give me time to examine
112ml must go with him. nomadic wet grass.to a remote
sequestered corner. the most important place in the groom,
beau: it oontsined It} garden. There were two round beds.
stocked with a. vnrietyol plants. In one there was a petty little
we tree. I paused to admire its lovely blossoms.

“01!, never mind that!" snid he conmnptumsly. "That‘s
only Mary Aun'r garden ; look, 11-115 is mine."

After I had observed every ﬂower. and listened to: disquisition
onevay phat. I m permitted to depart: but ﬁrst. with great
pomp, be plwclred n polyuthus and presented it to me, I: one
conferring a pedigin favour. I observed. on the grass about
h'u gudcn, certain lppunrnsot' sticks and cord. and asked that
they were.

316 AGNES GREY.

" Traps for birds.”

" Why do you ouch them?"

' "Puposzystheydohnrm."

“ And what do you do with them when you catch them?"

" Diﬂ‘erent things. Sometimes I give them to the out; soon-
times I cut them in pieces with my penknife; but them.)
mean to roost alive."

" And why do you mu to do snob a horrible thing?"

“For two reasons: ﬁrst. to see how long it will live—end
then, to see who! it will taste like."

" But don‘t you know it is extremely wicked to dosuch things.
Remember. the birds can feel aswell as you; and think. how
would you like it yourself."

"Oh. that's nothing! I‘m not a bird. and I ain't fed thtI
do to them."

" But you will have to feel it some time. Tom : you have heard
where widted people go to when they die ; and if you don't leer:
oﬁ' torturing innocent birds. remember. you will hare to go there,
and suﬁer just what you have made them suﬁer."

"Oh. pooh! I shnn’t. Papaknowshowltnat them. nndhe
neverhlnmes meforit: hesnysit isjust whnthused todowhrll
luwasaboy. last summer. he gave Inc a nest full ol'young
sparrows. and he saw me pulling oﬂ' their legs and wings, and
heads, and neversaid anything; uoept that Mywmmsty
things.and I must not let them soil my trams: and Uncle
Robmnwnstheretoomndhe laughedmndsaid lwunlineboy."

” But what would your mammasay?"

"0h, she doesn't care) she says it‘s a pity to kill the pretty sing-
ing birch, but the naughty sparrows. and miceand rats, I maydo
what I like with. So now. Miss Grey. you seeit is not wicked."

“ I still think it is. Tom : Ind pahaps your pope and marina
would think so too if they thought much about iL—Howeva',"
I internally added. "they may say wlnt they please, but I am
determined you shall do nothing of the kind. as long as I have
power to prevent it."

He next took rue across the lawn to see his mole-mp5. and
then into the stack-yard to see his weasel-traps : one of which, to
his great joy. contained a dead weasel ; and then into the stable
to see, not the ﬁne carriage homes. but 1 little rough colt. which
he informed me had been bred on purpose {or him. and he was
to ride it as soon as it was properly ininui. I tried to amuse

AGNES GREY. 317

the little fell”. and listened to all his chatter as complacently as
I could; for I thought if he had any aﬂ'ections at all, Iwnnlcl
eadeevunr to win them; and then, in time, I might be able to
shawhim the error ofhisways: but I looked invainfor thut'
schema. noble spirit his mother talked of; though I could see
been not without a certain degree of quickness and penetra-
tion, when he chose to exert it.

What we re-entered the house it was nearly tel-time. Master
Tomtoldmethat.upnpowasfromhmne. hennd l and Mary
Amvere to have tea with mamma,for a nut; for,on mob
cautions. she always dined I! luncheon time with them. instead
of at six o‘clock. Soon after ten. Mary Ann went to bed. but
Tom favoured us with his company and conversation till eighL
Alter hem gone, Mrs. Broomﬁeld further enlightened me on
the subject of her children's and anquirements. and
on what they were to ham. and how they were to be managed.
and national me to mention their defect to no one but herself.
My mother hadwarned me before to mention them as little as
posihle to let. for people did not like to he told of their children's
faults. :ndso I concluded I was to keepsilenneon them altogether.
About Elf-post nine, Mrs. Bloomﬁeld invited me to partake of
efrugll supperot‘eold nieatnndhread. Iwasghdwhenthat
mm.andshetookherbedmom unde end retired to
res; for though Iwishedtobepleasedwith her, hercompony
in extremely irluome to me; and I could not help feeling that
the was cold. Sﬂve. and forbidding—the very opposite of the
kind. mrmrhelrted matron my hopes had depiued her to be.

.~

CHAPTER III.
A FEW MORE LESSONS.

I lose next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration. in
spite of the disappointments already uperienoed; but I found
the dzming of Mary Ann was no light matter, as her abundant
hair n: robe smeared with pomade. plaited in three long mils,
and tied with bow: of ribbon: a task my mtomed lingers
found great diﬁculty in performing. She told me her nurse
could do it in half the time, nnd, by keeping up a mutant ﬁdget
of impedenee. eonuived to render me still longer. When all

318 AGNES Gnu.

was done, we wast into the schoolzootn. when I met myotlﬂ
Wpilmnddnaedviththe two till it us time to go amt
brakl'nsL Tint mal being wueluded. Ind n few dviltlulh
having been exdnnged with Mrs. Blownﬁeld. werepaindbth
admirnom ngain. and command the bulbs: of the thy. I
found my pupils vey buckwurd. indeed; but Tun. M
averse to every species of mental exeﬂinn, us not um
MeryAnn could scarcely rad unwind-Inn
macs Ind in-ttentive that I could hudly get on will: lull
all. However, by dint org-at labour and patience, I M
togetsotnethingdonein memofthe nominanndw
accompanied my young charge out into the garden and ndjpal
grounds, for A little recreation before dinner. The: we [bl
along Rolanny together. except that I found they Ind no notim
of goingwiﬂ: m: I mun: go wimﬂamtlnynbosel
ladnle. I mustrun,vnlk.ormnd,malyn itnitedthe‘l
fancy. This. I thought, mmenhgthe wanking” at
I found it doubly disagree-hie. u on this a well Is all-equ
oomsinns. they seated no pref-2th: dinist plus-ml the”
dismal occupations. But thaewu no randy; eizha I In!
follow them. or keep entirely input from then. In! at: W
neglncll'nl at my charge. Today, they manifested n pedals!
atmdunent In a. well at the bottom of the lawn. when t!)qu
sine! in dubbling with sticks and pdabls for lbw: lull-sum
I was in constant fear that their mutha would see than from Ch
window. Ind blame me (ox mowing them llms to duggle tlli
cloths and wet their tea and hands. mind of m
but no arguments, commands, or entrutia could draw then
away. 1fo14 did not see them, some one else did—a gentlelml
on hmsehack had entered the gate nnd was proceeding up llu
road: at the distance of a few pans from us he penned, am
calling to the children in a waspish penetrating tone. bade then
" Keep out of that water." “ Miss Grey.’ said he. " (I suppw
itiIMiquey.) I am surprised that you shtmldallovthsnu
dirty their clothes in that numncrl Don't ym see how If:
Bloomﬁeld has soiled her frock? and tlnt Mata Blonmﬁeld’!
socks are quite wet? and bath of them without gloves? Dar
dearl Let me mam! lhxt in future you will knep than deal
at least l " so saying. he Inmed away. nnd continued his lid: I:
to the house. This was Mr. Bloomﬁeld. l was suspend th
he should nominate his children Master and Miss Bloomﬁeld

AGm-zs GREY. 319

and still more so, that he should speak to uncivilly to nae. their
governess, and v. perfect stranger to himself. Presently the hell
ﬂag to summon us in. I dined with the childm at one. while
he end his lady took their luncheon at the same table. His
undue! thetadid not greatly raise ln‘rn in my utimnﬁon. He
was a man of onﬁnuy stature—rather below that above—and
nther thin thnu stem. nppermtly between thirty and forty years
of age: he had a large mouth. pale. dingy complexion. milky
blueeyes;nndh.ltthecolouret'n hanpencoti Thaewas a.
malegotmutton beforehlnt: hehelped Mn. Bloomﬁeld. the
children, and me, desiring tee to cut up the children's meat:
then, m twisting nbeut the mnttoninvnﬁnu dinning. and
eyeing it from different points. be pronounced it not ﬁt to he
Hm, end ﬁlled {or the cold beef.

“Whit the mtterwith the mutton, mydar?" asked his
mall:

" It is quite outdone. Don't you taste, Mus. Bloomﬁeld.
met-lithe goodnmlsmstedmttofit? Andan't yanlee
tint m that nlee, red gnvy in completer dried any?“

"Well I thinkthe Mum mltyou."

11m heefvns set Mole him. end he begun to me. but with
the moat nefnl amnion: of discontent.

“Whnt is thematter with thelazf, Mr. Bloomﬁeld? I‘m sure
I thought inns very nice."

"Andsoituuvaynice. Anicetjohtteanldnotbe; Inuit
is 98“! spoiled." replied be doletnlly.

" How so?"

“Bowie! Why. don'tmseelwwitient? Dear—dear!
a is quite shocking 1"

"They man have out it mug in the kitchen that. for I'm
me I carved it quite ptopeﬂy here yesterday."

“No don't they cut it wrong in the kitchen—the Isuzu!
Dar—dart mam uyoneseemch aﬁnepieeeofhodso
campktely mined 7 But remembe- that. in future. when ldecent
m lave: this table. they shall not but]: it in the Hidlen.
whet ﬁat, Mn. Bloomﬁeld l "

Notwithstanding the ruinous state d the beef. the gutth
nun-led to cut himself some deliute slices, part ofwhich he ate
in deuce When he next spoke. it was, in a lessqnenﬂons tone,
last that mete WIS for dinner.

“ Turkey Ind grease." VII: the concise reply.

320 AGNES GREY.

" And whit besides?"

.. Fish...

" What kind ofﬁsh?"

" I don't know."

“ Yzm don‘t know!" cried he. looking solanﬂyup trunk
plate. and suspending his knife and fork in astonisth

“ Nu. ltold themok togetsomeﬁsh—I
whet.”

“Well, that hats everything! A lady profs: on to»
house, and doan't even know what ﬁsh is for dinner I proﬁts:
to order ﬁsh. and doau‘t specify what i"

“ Perhaps. Mr. Bloomﬁeld. you will order dinnu yourself in
future."

Nothing mmwusaid; and Ivan very glnd to getoutnltb
room with my pupils ; for I neva felt so ashamed and uncomfcﬁ
able in my life for anything that was not my own huh.

In the aha-noon we applied to lessons again: then went on!
again; then had tea in the schoolrooni; then I dressed Mn!
Ann {ordeserﬂ Indy/hen shelnd hahrotherhadgonedon
to the dining-room. I took the opportunity of beginning a let!
to my dear friends nt home : but the childm came up bd’tlel
had halfwmpleted it. At seven I had toput Mary Annto M:
then I played with Tom till eight. when he. too, went: anal
ﬁnished my letter and unpacked my clothes. which I had hithem
found no opportunity for doing, and, ﬁnally. went to bed myself-

But this is a very invaluable specimen of a day’s pruned
mgs.

My task of instruction and surveillance. instead of heuomint
easier as my charga and I got better accustomed to nah uthu'.
became more arduous as their chamten unfolded. The non!
of governess. I soon found. mamaemookeryas appliedu
me: my pupils hud no more notion of obedience than 3 wild
unbroken colt. The habitual fearof their father's peev‘uh taps
and the dread of the punishments he was wont to inﬂict who
irritated. kept than generally within hounds in his immeth
presence. The gin—k, too, had some fearof their-mother’s any:
and the hay might occasionally be bribed to do as she bid hin
bythe hope of reward: but I had norewards tooﬁer; and:
{or punishments. I was given to understand. the parents m
that privilege to ihemselva; and yet they expected me to he
my pupils in order. Other children might be guided by th

    

 

i

 

" “it u

s

1‘
3

  

AGNES GREY. 3:!

far of Inga, end the hire of approbation: but neither the
ﬁne nor the other had any eﬁect upon these.

Mum Torn, not content with refusing to be ruled. must
heed: set up as n ruler. and manifested n determination to keep.
totally his sisters, but his gum in order. by violent manual
and pean nppliutions ; and, us he was a tall. strong boy of his
-)Pais. this occasioned no triﬂing inconvenience. A few sound

has on the nor. on such oomions, might have settled the
Inna-asin enough: but as, in that case. he might make up
mum-y to his mother, which she would he sure to believe,
u the had such unshaken faith in his veracity—though I had
Ilrudy discovered it to be by no mans unimpaehahle—I
mined to refrain from striking him. even in self-defame:
Ind. in his most violent moods. my only resource we: to throw
limmhisbuck. nudhoidhishamhand feet till the frenzywos
Mmhnt abated. To the difﬁculty of preventing him from
doing what he ought not, wns added that of forcing him to do
Vhlt he ought. Often he would positively refuse to learn. or to
repent his lessons, oreven to look at his book. Here, again. I
padhireh rod might have been serviceable ; but. as my powers

Unresolirnited. I mustrnakethebst useofwhnt I had
As there were no settled hours {or study and play, I resolved
to give my pupils n oertuin task, which. with moderate attention.
they could perform in nshort time; and till this was done, how-
evervreery I Ins. or however perm-3e they might be, nothing
that of parental interference should induw me to suﬁer them
it) leave the nehoolroorn; even if I should sit with my chair
Iﬂhﬁ the door to keep them in. Patience. Firmnesr, and
humane. were my only weapons; and these I resolved to
he to the utmost. 1 determined always strictly to fulﬁl the
that: and promises I nude; and, to that end. I must be
with: to threeten and promise nothing that I could not per.
‘0!!!- Then. I would carefully refrain from all uselas irritability
Ind indulgutoeot'rny own ill-temper: when they behaved toler-
IblyJ “tube-skinde ohligingasitwnsin my power to he.
in older to make the widat p0$ible distinction between good
Ind Ind outdoor. I would reason with them. too. in the sim-
ple: and man motive matter. When I reprovcd them. or
Infused to gntify their wishes, alter a glaring fault, it should be
more in sorrow than in Inger: their little hymns and -prayels I
would nuke phln and clear to their understanding; when they
I-

  
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 

322 AGNES GREY.

aid their payers It night. and naked pardon for M
I would remind them of the sins of the pat dly. salami].
in perfect kindnss, to avoid mixing a spirit of oppodtiu;
lential hymns should he said by the naughty; druid”
the oampruntively good : and every kind of institution]
convey to them. as much as posiblc, by a:an '
ﬂpparently with no other object than thu'r M
In View.

By these mans I hoped. in time, both to hmeﬁt the
and to grin the approbation of their parents; and also I)
Vince my friends I! home thnt I we: not sownnting in H
prudence as they supposed. I knew the diﬁcnltiu I U
contend with were great; but I knew (at last I believed)
mitting patience and perseverance could overcome them;
night and morning I implored Divine existence to this
But either the children were so incorrigible. the pen“
unreasonable, or myself so mistaken in my views. or no
to carry them ant, that my best intentions and most
eﬂ‘ortsseemed productiveofno manhunan
the children. dissatisfaction to their mum. and w.
myself.

The task of instruction was us Irduons for the body 30
mind I had to run after my pupils to mtch them. to all!“
drag them to the table, and often forciblyto hold them Mei
the lesson was done. 'Tom I frequently put into a comer, -
ing myself before him in a chnir. with a book which mallill
the little task that must he said or read. before he wns relate
in my hand. He was not strong enough to push both men
the chair away, so he would stud twisting his body and fa
into the most grotesque and singular mummth
no doubt. to an unoonoerned spectntor. but not to nae-4|
uttering loud ydls and doleful criteria. intended to lupin!
weeping. but wholly without the accompaniment of tears
knew this was done solely [or the purpose of annoyingme; It
therefore, however I might inwardly tremble with imp-ti:
and imitation. Imanfully strove to suppress all visible signs
molestation, and affected to sit with ﬁlm indiﬂhenoe. weiti
till it should please him to cease this pastime. Incl prepue In
run in the garden, by casting his eye on the book end Iudi
or repmting the few words he wss required to say. 8min
he was determined to do his writing badly; and I lad to ht

AGNES GREY. 323

: prevent him from purposely blotting or disﬁguring
Frequently I threatened thnt. if he did not do better,
have another line : then he would stubbornlyrdnse to
in; and Lto savemyword.hnd Snellymmonto
:nt 0! holding his ﬁngers upvn the pen. and forcibly
is hand up and down. till. in spite of his minnow,
\S in some sort completed.
n was by no means the most magnhle of my
metimes, to my grat joy. he would hue the sense to
swisstpclieywnstoﬁnishhistnslts. nndgumltund
selftilllnndhissistersumetojainhim; whiehfra
snotnullJnrMnryAnnseldom follawedhlsenmple
tieulnr: she apparently prefared railing on the ﬂoor
er amusement: down she would drop like a leaded
nd when I. with great difﬁculty. hnd succeeded in
3 thence. I had still to hold her up with one Inn. while
ther I held the book from which she was to rad or
ssun. As the dead weight of the big girl of six became
(orone arm tohear. I transferred it totheother; or,
e weary of the burden, I arried her into learner, and
e might come out when she should ﬁnd the use of her
rand up: but she genetally preferred lying there like
inner or tea time. when. as I could not deprive her of
she must be liberated, Ind would come crawling out
of triumph on her round, red face. Often the would
refuse to pronounce some particular word in her
dnowl regret theloet labour I havehndinstriving
her obstinncy. If I hnd pnsed it ovens n nutter of
rence. it would have been better for both penis. thnn
ring ta overearne it as I did; but I thought it my
ity to crush this View tendency in the bud: and so
could hnve done it : and, Md my power: been la
night have enforced obedience ; but. In it wns. it was
trength between her nnd me, in which she genenlly
intorions : and every victory served to encourage end
her for a future contst. In vein 1 ugued, med.
threatened. scolded; in vain I kept her in from plny.
:d to take her aut. refused to play with her. or to speak
have nnything to do with her; in vain I tried to set
the :dventnges of dining as she was bid. end being
kindly treated in consequence. and the disadvantage

   
   
   
    
  
    

324 A0575 GREY.

dperisﬁng in had-and m. Subsets

wouldnkmetndosomhingi‘orhs. [unless-u—
"Ya. IwﬂLMuyAnanyunrmoﬂysayt’atwud.

you‘dhettersay itatonoeﬂudhvenometxuﬁkahli

“Then. dame, I undo nothinghryu"

With me, at her age. a tank. negleaanrl mu
mt drudfulofpunishmaits: hot on bathe] “(kt-1'
sion. Sometima, exasperated“) them phat. Ital!
her violently bythe shoulder, or pull in: long Inseam:
them; lorwhieh she pnn'shed mewith “shrill. ‘
terms. that went through my had like: knife. Sh
hated this, and when she had shriﬂed her m In“
intn my face with an air of vindictive Wm. ' ‘
"NM, then! IMHoryml" Andthenshriﬁapinnd
tlll lwas forced untopmyars. Oftentwedrudlulab
bring Mrs. Bloomﬁeld up to inquire wht was the ulna? -'

" Mary Ann is a naughty girl, nu’aln."

" But what are these shocking screams?"

“ She is screaming in a passion."

"I never heard such a dmdl'ul noise! Yul might hem
her. Why is she not out with her brother "

" i cannot get her to ﬁnish her lessons."

"Bu: Mary Ann mus: beugwd girl, nndﬁnish herbs:
This was blandly spoken to the child. “ And I hnpe I sh
mzr hear such Ierriblc aria again ! "

And ﬁxing her cold. stany eyes upon me with a look thatcui
not be mistaken. she would shut the door, and walk away. Sum
times i would try to take the little obstinate (nature by MB
and casually ask her the word while she was thinking ofsometllil
else; frequently she would begin to say it, and then ﬁnd”
check horse". with I provoking look that seemed to say, "N
I‘m too sharp for you; you shan't trick it out of me. either."

On another occasion. I pretended to forget the whole 8-H
and talked and played with her as usuai. till night. when I P
hLT to bed ; than bending over her, while she lay all smila II
good-humour. just before departing, I said, as cheerfully n
kindly as before—

" Now. Mary Ann. just tell me that word before I kiss y
good-night: you are a good girl now, and, of course, you V
my it."

 

AGNES GREY. 3:;

u. I won't."
hen I m't his you.“
fell. I don’t care"
min I expressed my sorrow; in vain I lingered for some
cm of contrition ; she really "didn't care," Ind I lett her
and in darkness. wondering most of ell at this last proof
we stubbornnes. In my childhood I could net imagine
e eﬁictive punishment. than for my mother to refuse to
te at night: the p idea was terrible. More than the
I never felt, for, appily. I never committed a hult that
eemed worthy ofsuch a penalty : but one: I remember. for
transgression of my sister‘s. our mother thought proper to
it upon her: what rte felt. I «not tell; but my sym.
tic tears and suﬂ'er'ing {or her site, I shall not soon forget.
)ther troublesome trait in Mary Ann. was her incorrigible
nsity to keep running into the nursery, to play with her
:istets and the nurse. This was natural enough. but. as
against her mother‘s express desire. I, of course. forbade
- do so, And did my utmost to keep her with me; but that
named her relish for the nursery, and the more I strove
.1) her out of it. the oftener she went. end the longer she
I: to the great disat'sfactiou of Mrs. Bloomﬁeld. who.
i knew. would impute all the him of the mutter tn me.
net of my trial! wa the dressing in the morning : at one
she would not be washed: at another she would not be
:d, unless she might wear some particular frock, that I
her mother would not like her tn have; at nether she
l scream and run away if I attempted to touch her hair.
it. frequently, when. after much trouble and toll. I had. at
l. succeeded in bringing her down, the hmkfast was nearly
wet; and black looks from "mamma." and testy obser-
ls from “papa,” spoken at me. if not to me. were sure to
y meed: for few things irritated the latter so much as
of punctuality nt meal times. Then, among the minor
:nces, was my inability to satist Mn. Bloomﬁeld with
Iughter‘s dress ; and the child‘s hair " was never ﬁt to he
Sometimes, as n pvwerl‘ul reproach to me. the would
m the ofﬁce of tire-woman herself. and then complain
y of the trouble it gave her.
en little Funny came into the schoalroom, I hoped she
be mild and inoﬂ'ensive. at least; but a few days. if not

3:6 AGNES cm}.

 
    
 
  
 

a few hours. sutﬁeed to destroy the illusion: I foundin “5
chievous. intractable little creature. given up to Md ‘
deception. young as she was. and Ilarmingly fond of emit *-
hu two l'nvonrite wapousol uﬂ'enoe and ddenuzthti “
spitting in the {sea of those who incurred he d’upleuned
bellowing like a hull when her unreasonable deshsmi 
gratiﬁed. As she. generally. we: pretty quit in her pd F‘
practice. and they were impraned with the notion of hall“
a remarkably gentle child. her hlsehoods nere rudily heliﬂd.
and herlouduproarsled themtosuspecthnnhnnd injudiciﬂ
treatment on my part : nnd when, at length. her bed
became manifest even to their prejudiced ﬂat 1 id: thtth
whole was nttributcxl to me.

"What u naughty girl Funny is getting!" Mrs. W
would say to her spouse. “ Don't you observe. ury dur. bu
she is altered since she entered the sohoolroorn? She will I:
be Is ind as the other two: and, lam sorry tony, they'll
quite deteriorated of late."

“ You may say that." was the Inner. "I've hear lhink'ﬂ
that same myself. I thought when we got them I m
they'd improve 1 but, instead of that, they get worse and m:
I don't know how it is with their lmhg; but their habits!
know. nuke no sort of improvement: they get rougher. Ind
dirtier. and more unseemly. every day."

I knew this was all pointed at me; and thee. end all similar
innuendoes, nﬂ'ected me lar more deeply than my open new
sations would have done ; {or against the latter I should hive
been roused to speak in my own defence: now I judged it my
wisest plan to subdue every resentful impuke. supprus ell!
sensitive shrinking. end so on perseveringly, doing my hat:
for, irksame IS my situation was, I urnestly wished to retnin
it. I thought. if I could struggle on with unwitting ﬁnn-
ness and integrity. the children would in time become more |
humnised: every month would contribute to mnke them son»
little wiser, stud, consequently. more manngeehle; for n. child
0! nine or ten as frantic and ungovernnble as these at six-nil
seven would be a maniac.

I ﬂattered myself I was beneﬁting my parents and sister hymy
continuance here : for small as the salary was, I still In: with;
something. and with strict enanomyl could easily manage tohlve
somethingtospare for them, if theywouldfavournrehyuﬂu

AGNES GREY. 327

Thenitvnsbymyownwill thnt I had got the place: Ihad
:hullthis tritnlztion on myself, and Iwnsdeterminedta
it; uy.mme than that. I did not even regret thestep!
nken. I boxed to show my friends that. even now. I was
latent to underle the charge, and able to acquit myself
mbly to the end; nnd Hm I felt it degrading to submit
liedy. or intolaable to toil no wmundy. I would turn
d: my home, Ind say within myself—
“Theymyauh,ht¢heydnllnotmhdneml
Tu of thee that I think. not of th."
out Christmas I was allowed to visit home ; but my holiday
nlyol‘ afortuight's duration: "for." said Mrs. Bloomﬁeld,
mght. a: you had seen your friends so lately, you would
in for a longer stay." I let? her to think so still: but she
knew how long, how wear’umn: those fourteen weeks of
ce had been to me; how intensely I had longed for my
nys, how greatly I was disappointed At their curtailment.
he was not to blame in this: I had never told ha my
gs. and she could not he expected to divinethem; I had
:enwithherafullterm, andshewasjustiﬂedinnotullW¢
,e a full vacation.
...

CHAPTER IV.
THE GRANDMAMKA.

any reader: the account of my delight on wining home.
upping: while there—enjoying n brief space of rest and
y in that denr, familiar place, among the loving and the
«and my sorrow an hang obliged to bid them. once more,
:ediar.

:turncd. however. with unabated vigour to my work—a
udunus task then my one an imagine, who has not felt
hing like the misery otheing chargedwith the mind
ion of a set of mischievous turbulent rebels. whom his
:t exertions mnnot bind to their duty; while. at the same
he in responsible {or their conduct to a higher power. who
a from him what cannot be Ichieved without the nld of the
nr'l mare potent authority: which. either from indolenoe.
hrothecoming unpopulnrwith the said rebellious saga.

3:8 AGNES cm.

the latter refuses to give, l mu conceive {a situatimsnur
harassing than that wherein. however you my long ﬁx an:
huwcver you may- labour to fulﬁl your duty. your Jars art
bafﬂed and set at naught by those bmeath you. and unjuﬂy
censured und misjudged by those above.

I have not enumerated half the variations prupeuitia ol ray
pupils, or half the troubles resulting from my heavy responsi—
hilitiu, {or far of trspassing too much upon the ruda's
patience; as. perhaps. I have already done: hut my dsip.
in writing the few last pugs, was not to amuse, but to had:
those whom it might concern: he that has no intern iuuai
runners will doubtless have shipped them 07!! with I an“!
(lance, and, perhaps, a malediction against the prolixityoftht
writer: but if: parent has. therefrom. gathered unyudul hint.
or an unfortunate governess received thereby theslixhtathaeﬂ.
I am well rewarded for my pains.

To avoid trouble and confusion, I have taken my pupﬂsut
by one, and discussed their various qualities: but this an give
no adequate idea of being worried by the whole three together:
when. as was often the case, all were determined to “ be handily.
and to team Miss Grey, and put her in a passion.”

Sometintts. on such ocusions. the thought hurl manly
occurred to rue—"II thy could see me now!" matting, 11
course, my friends at home; and the idur. of hm! they vould
pity me has made me pity myself—so pally that I luv: had
the utmost diﬁiculty to restrain rny tours: but I have mind
them. till my little tormentors were gone to dmert, «cleared
oﬂ' to bet] (my only prospects of deliverance), and that. in all
the bliss of solitude, I have given myself up to the luxury d’ an
unrestricted burst of weeping. But this Win a we.an I did
not often indulge: my employment: were too numerous, my
leisure moments too precious. to admit of much time being given
to fruitless lamentutions.

l particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon, soon aha
my return in Junuury ; the children had all come up from dinner.
loudly declnring that they meant " to be naughty ; " and they had
well kept their resolution. though I had talked myself house. and
wenried every muscle in my throat. in the vain attempt to rasou
them out of in I had got Tom pinned up in a corner, whuroe.
I told him. he should not esmpe till he had done his appointed
task. Meantime. Fanny had possessed herself of my work-beg.

AGNES GREY. 319

ind was riding its contents—and spitting into it besides. I told
in to let it alone. but to no purpose, of course. " Burn it.
Funny I" cried Tom : and Mir command she hastened to obey.
[ sprang to snatch it from the ﬁre, and Tom darted to the door.
” Mary Ann, throw her desk out of the window I " criedhe: and
my precious desk, containing my letters and papers, my small
amount ofcash. and all my valuables, was about tobe precipitated
from the three-storey window. I ﬂew to rescue it. Meanwhile
Tom had left the mom. and wasrushing down the stairs. followed
by Fanny. Having secured my dak, I ran to catch them, and
Mary Ann came scamperiug after. All three escaped me. and
ran out of the house into the garden. where they plunged about
in the snow, shouting and sot-aiming in erultznt glee.

What must I do? If I followed them, I should probably be
unable to mpture one. and only drive them farther away : if I did
not, how wzs I to get them in? and what would their parents
think of me, if they saw or heard the children rioting, hatla.
honnetles, glovelss, and bootless, in the deep, soil snow?
While I stood in this perplexity. just without the door. trying.
by grim looks and angry words. to awe them into subjection. I
heard a voice behind me. in harshly piercing tons exclaiming~

" Miss Grey l Is it possible? What, in the devil's name, an
you be thinking about 7 "

" I can't get them in. sir," said I, turning round. and behold-
iug Mr. Bloomﬁeld, with his hair on end, and his pale blue eya
bolting from their sockets.

" But I INSIST upon their being got in l " cried he, approach-
ing nearer. and looking perfectly tendons.

" Then. sir, you must call them yourself. if you please. for
they won't listen to me." I replied, stepping back

"Come in with you. you ﬁlthy brats; or I'll horsewhlp you
every one I " roared he; and the children instantly obeyed.
" There, you see l they come at the ﬁrst word I "

"Yes. whenyau speak."

" And it's very strange. that when you've the are of 'em.
you've no better control over them than that l—Now, there they
are—goneupstahs with their nasty snowy feet I Do go after'em
and see them made decent, for Hmven's sake I "

That gentleman's mother was then staying in the house: and,
ts I ascended the stairs and passed the drawing-room door, I had

:he satisfuetion of hearing the old lady declaimiug aloud to her
I. a

330 AGNES GREY.

daughter-in-law to this died (for I could only Wk hill:
most emphatic wordsl—

"Gracious Havens l—-—never in all my life—I —¢‘ 1%
their dath as sure as—i Do you think, my day, she's: -r—
pnferpemn f Tnke my word for it "—

I hard no more : but that snﬂ'toed.

The senior Mrs. Bloomﬁeld had been very ntentive end (ill
to me; and till now. I had thought he! I nine, kind-m- v
ehattyold body. She would often come tome-ml talking:- ’J
ﬁdential strain ; nodding and stinking her had. Ind gum .
withhmdsnndcyes, asacenainnlnssofoldlndism'utu
do: though I never knew one that mrﬁedthcpeculhrltyton
great an extent She would even sympathise with me for It:
trouble I had with the children. Ind exprss It tints, by Hi
sentences. interspersed with nods and knowing winks, her seat
of the lnjudicinus conduct of their munm in to ratricting '1
power, and neglecting to support me with her nuthority. Sch
n mode of testifying disapprobation wns not much to my tale;
and I generally refused to take it in. or understand anythix
more then was openly spoken; at least. I never went W
than an implied nelmowledgment tint. if maneuver: cumin:
ordered, my task would be 3 less diﬁmtll one. Ind I should he
better able to guide and instruct my charge: but now! mush:
doubly tautiaus. Hitherto. though I saw the old lady had It:
defects (of which one was a pronenss to preclnimber perfectlons).
I had always been wishful lo excuse thern, [Id to give bandit
for all the virtuts she professed, and even imagimotbeaya nn‘
told. Kindness. which had been the food of my life through so
runny years. had lately been so entirely denied me. that I Inl-
corncd with grateful joy the slightest semhlnnce of lt. No wonder.
then. that my heart warmed to the old lady. and tiny: glad-
dened nt her approach and regretted her depnum

But now, the few words luckily or unludtily heard in pad»:
had wholly revolutionised my ideas respecting her: new I looked
upon her Is hypocritical and insincere, n ﬂatten. Ind ospy upon
my words and deeds. Doubtlrss it would hove been my intuut
still to meet her with the same cheerful smile Ind toneof respectful
cordiality as before ; but I could not. if I would: my will“
nlteted with my feelings, and became so cold and shy that sh
could not fail to notice it. She soon did notice it, end in
manner altered too: the familiar nod was changed to n stiﬁ but.

 
  
   
  
   

l
l

AGNES GREY. 33:

themdmmﬂepveplneetonglamofmlaocity; her
Vivarium loquseity was entirely transferred from me to "the
darling boys and girls." whom she based and indulgecLuaol'e
ahmrdly than evatheir motherhaddone.

I eonhslwussomewhst troubledatth'sohnnge: Ifatedtbe
eonsequenoesofherdlspleasure, and even mademmeeﬂ'ormto
reeova the ground I had lost—and with better apparent success
thnn I could huvenntiulpated. At one time, I, merely in eomnm
civility. asked Alter her cough : immediately her long visage re-
laxed into I smile. end she {nmred me withn particulnr history
ofthnundhsother inﬁrmities. followed bynnneoount 0th
pious Islgnation, delivered in the usual emphatic, dednrnatory
style. which no writing can portray.

" But there's one remedy for ﬁll, my dur. and that's “signa-
tiauf' (a ton of the head), "reignation to thewill of Heaven l"
(n upliﬁing of the hands and eyes). “ It hasnlways supported
me through all my trials. and always will do” (a succession of
nods). “ Butthen, it isn't everybody that can say that " (a shah
oftheheud); "but I'm one of the pious m5. M'ssGmyl” (a.
va-y signiﬁmnt nod and toss). “ And. thank Heaven, I always
wes" (mother nod). "and I glory in it i" (“emphatic duping
ofthehnndslnd shakingol the had). Andwithseverallem
of Scripture, misquoted or misappl'md. and religions exclamation:
so redolmt of the ludicrous in the style of delivery and manner
of bringing in, it‘ not in the exprssions themselves. that I decline
repenting them. she withdrew ; tossing her large head in high
good-humonn—with herself at lest—and left me hoping that,
on: I“. she wns rather weak than wicked.

Atheroertvisit toWellwood Home, I wentsefarastony
In: glad to see her looking sowell. Theﬁect ofthiswas
magical : the words, intended as I rnnrlr of civility, were received
I: n ﬂutterng compliment ; her countenance brightened up, And
{romthltmomentshebecamens gracious and benignnshurt
could w'Bh—in outward semblance It least. From what I now
saw other, nnd what I heard from Ihechildren, I knew that, in
order to grin her cordial friendship, I had but mutter I word of
ﬂattery at each eonvmient opportunity: but this was against my
principles ; and for lack of this, the capricious old dame soon
deprived me of her favour again, 1nd I believe did me much
secret injury.

Sheooukl not greatly inﬂth Wm—in-hwngnimtme.

3 32 AGNES cnzv.

because. between thntladyand herself, there mammalia-
lllte—chieﬂy shown by her in secret dmntions and chub
rims; by the other. in u emol‘frigid formalityinll
demeanour: and no (awning ﬂattery of the dds could til!
away the wall afiee which theyounger inteepmed humilia-
But with her son. the old lady had better- sneuess : hewonldhsl
tonllshe hadto say. pmvidedsheomild soothehisﬁnfnlm
and retrain from irritating him by her own ups-ides ; Ind 1U
rason to believe that she considerably strengthened his prejui!
against me. She would tell him that I shameﬁrlly negleaedli
children. and even his wiﬁe did mama to than n; sheath:
and that he must look after than himself. or theywouldllll
to rum
Thus urged. he would frequently give himself the trnnlk‘
watching them from the windows during their play i ﬂ till-5. 3
would follow them through the grounds. and too often 1:!
suddenly upon them while they were dabbling in the W
well. talking to the concth in the stables. or revelling in ll!
ﬁlth of the farm-ynrd—nnd I. mmnwhile. wearily standing by.
having previuusly exhhusted my energy in vain attempts to gt
them away. Often, too. he would unexpectedly pop h's H
into the schooler while the young people were at trials. Ii
ﬁnd them spilling their milk over the tnhle and themselva
plunging their ﬁngers into their own or each other's mngwl
quarrelling over their victunls like a set of tiger's cubs. I! l Ill
quiet at the moment. I was conniving at their disorderly conduct
if (its was frequently the case) I happened to he culling In:
voice to enforce order. I was using undue violence. and swim
the girls: bad examplebysuch ungentlenes cf tonede
I remember one nftemoon in spring when, owing to the till!
they could not go out: but. by some amazing good fortune
they had all ﬁnished their lessons. and yet abstained {inn
running down to tease their parents-a. trick that annoyed 0*
greatly. but which. on rainy days, I seldom could prevent lluii
doing; because, below. they found novelty and amusement’
especially when visitors were in the house: and their mother.
though she bid me keep them in the schoolroom. woulan
chide them for leaving it, or trouble herself to send then: M
But this day they appeared satisﬁed with their present abode-
:tnd what is more wonderful still. seemed disposed to play W‘
‘(cthcr without depending on me for amusement. end uithw‘

AGNES GREY: 333’

quandling with each other. Their occupation was I somewhat
wading one : they were all squatted together on the ﬂoor by the
window. over a heap of brokm toys and a quantity of birds' eggs
—or nlher eggshells. for the contents had luckily been abstracted.
These shells they had broken up and were pounding into small
fngmenis, towhnt end! couldnot imagine; but solongasthey
were quiet and not in positive mischief. I did not care ; and. with
a feelingof unusual repose. I sat by the ﬁre. putting the ﬁnishing
stitch: in a frock for Mary Ann's doll; intending. when that
was done, to begin a letter to my mother. Suddenly. the door
openai. and the dingy head of Mr. Bloomﬁeld looked in.

"All very quiet here i What myou doing?" said he. " No
harm M], at last," thought I. But he was of a diﬂ‘erent
opinion. Advancing to thewindow. and seeing the childmn‘s
oncnpnxions, he testily exclaimed—"What in the world are you
about?" .

" We're grinding eggshells. papa l " cried Tom.

“ How dun: you make such a w. you little devils? Don't
you see what confounded work you're making of the carpet?"
(the carpet was a plain, brown dmgget). " Mis Grey. did you
know what they wae doing? "

“Yes, sir."

" You knew it?"

(I Yes“

‘ " You knew it! and you actually sat there and permitted
them to go on. without l word of reproof i "

" I didn‘t think they were doing any harm."

“ Anyhan'nl Why. look there! Justloolt at that carpet, and
nee—4n: there ever anything like it in a Christian house before?
No wonder your room is not ﬁt for a pigsty—no wonder you:
pupils are worse than a littu' of pigs l—no wonder—Ohl 1 de-
clare. it puts me quite post my patience I " and he deported, shutv
ting the door aﬂﬂhim with a bang, that made the children laugh.

" It puts are quite post my patience too I " muttered I. getting
up; and, Seinng the poker. 1 dashed it repeatedly into the
Cinders, and stirred them up with unwanted energy ; thlu easing
my irritation. under pretence of mending the ﬁre

'Aﬁer this. Mr. Bloomﬁeld was contintu looking in to see it
the schoolmom was in order; and, as the children were continu-
ally littering the ﬂoor with fragments of toys. sticks, stones,
stubble. leaves, and other rubbish, which I could not prevent

334 AGNES Gm.

their bringing. or oblige them to gnthgr up. and which Ill
mantstefusedlo"clmnnﬂgrthun,"l had to WI“
:lderable portion of my valuable leim moment: a my ha
upon the ﬂoor, in painfullyreducing things to aids. Oncl
told them that they should not taste tha'r suppe till they“
picked up everything from the urpet; ﬁnny night hull!
when she had taken up a cumin quality. Mary Ann what in
had gathered twine is many, nod Tom was to clau- lhytlnlﬂ-
Wonderful to state. the girls did their put : but Tom m innﬁ
a (any that he ﬂew upon the table. uttered the bread mi in!
about the ﬂoor. struck his sisters, kicked the coals out of tin
coolvpan. ntternpled to overthrow the table Ind chairs) Ill
seemed inclined to make: Douala-larder of the whole “In
oﬂheroom: but I seizeduponhim, 1nd. sendingqu!
all he: mamma. held him. in spite of kicks. blows. ydlﬁll‘
executions, till Mrs. Bloomﬁeld made het- Ipmnn

“ What is the matter with my boy?" said she.

And when the nutter was expluined to her. ell she did new
send for the nursery-maid to put the mom in attic. and iii:
Muster Bloomﬁeld his supper.

” There now," cried Tom Iriumphlntly, looking up tom 3
viands with his mouth almost too full {or speech. " Then: M.
Mix Grey: you see I have got my supper in sﬂteot’yon: III
I haven't picked up a single thing i"

The only person in the house who had any real sympathy it
me was the nulse; {or she had suﬂ'ered like Iﬂllct'ions. though
in a smaller degree; as she had not the task of Inching. not
was she so mponsible for the conduct of he! charge.

"Oh. Miss Greyl" she would say, "you hove some mil!
with them childcr I"

"I have indeed, Betty: and I dare say you know what it h"

"Ay, I do sol But I don't vex myself o'er 'em a: you do.
And then, you see. I hit ‘em n slap sometimes: and thunlittle
uno—I gives ‘cm a good whipping now and then : there's notth
else will do for 'em. as what they say. Ham. I've lostnly
place for it."

" Have you. Betty? I hard you were going to lama."

“ Eh. bless you. yes i Missis gave me warning I thka sin'.
She told me aim-e Christmas how it mud be, if I hit 'un min:
but I couldn’t hold my hand oﬂ'em it nothing. I kuovnothof

you do.for Miss Mary Ann's worse by the hnlf norher sisters!"

mm can. 335

CHAPTER V.
THE UNCLE.

Sinus the old lady. there We: mother relative of the totally.
nosevisiswuengreat unnoynnoetome—thism"Umlc
abson.” Mrs. Bloomﬁeld: brother; a tall, self-euﬁcient fellow.
‘th dark heir and allow complexion like his sister, I nose that
eured to disdain theearth, and little grey eyes. frequently helf
used, with a mixture of real stupidity nnd nﬁ'ected contempt at
l surrounding objects. He was at thick-set. strongly-hull m,
It he had («and some means of comprssing his waist into I.
mhblysmllcnmpnss; nut! that. logetherwiih the unnatural
ilfnes of his form, showed that the lofty-minded. manly Mr.
obsou, themofthe female sex. was not above the foppery
'stays He seldom deigned to notice me: end. when he did.
was with n dentin supercilimu insolence of tone and manner
at convinced me he was no gentlemen : though‘it was intended
have u contnry Alien. But it was not for that l disliked his
lrning. :0 much as for the harm he did the children—encour-
:ing All their evil propendties, and undoing. in a few minutes.
elittlegoodithadtakenmemouthsofhbourtoodﬁeve.
Funny and little Harriet heseldom ooncbuended to notice; but
nry Ann us something of u fumrrite. He was continually
com-aging ha tendency to nﬂectnticn (which I had done my
mostto crush). mikingabout herpretty I'm. nndﬁlling ltd-had
th all manna of conceited notions concerning hu- pelsonol up-
annoﬁwhlnh 1 hnd instructed her to regard us dust in the
lance computed with the cultivation of her mind and mum) ;
.d I never sewn child so susoemible of ﬂattery us the ma.
'hntever in! wrong. in either her or her brother. he would
.cournge hwy lanfhing It. it' not by actually praising: people
tIe know the injury they do to children by laughing at their
ults. end uniting n pleasant jest of what their true friends have
Ideavouted to teach them to hold in grave ebharrence.
Though not 1 positive drunkard.-Mr. Robson habitually swol-
wed great quantities of wine, and took with relish nn occulonal
as: of handy and water. He taught his nephew to imitate him
. this to the utmost of his ability. end to believe that the more
inc and spirits he could take. nncl the better he liked them. the
ore he mifested his bold and manly spirit. and rose superior to
s sisters. Mr. Bloomﬁeld had not much to Sly ngulut it, foth

336 AGNES GREY.

favourime gin and water : of which he tookaoons‘dt
table portion every day. by dint of constant sipping—and to IN
I chieﬂy attributed his dingy complexion and wasth taupe.

Mr. Robson likewise encoungod Tom's propensilyto pa!
cute the lower creation, both by precept and example. Ashein
quentlyume to course or shootth hmther-in-lnw': grounds
he would bring his favourite dagsvlith him; und he treated tin
sobrutallythnt, poornsl ms, Iwould have given our“
any duy to see one ofthem bite him. provided the animaloml
have done it with impunity. Sometimes. when in a very all
pltoent mood, he would go a bird-nesting with the children:x
thing that irritated and annoyed me exeeedingly : as, by hequ
utd persevering attempts. I ﬂuttered myself I hnd partly shot
them the evil of this pastime, end hoped. in time. to bring the
to some general sense oi'justiee and humanity ; butten minute
bird-hating with Uncle Robson, or even I laugh from hint
some relation of their tamer barium-i6. was suﬁcient It out
to destroy the eﬁ'eet of my whole elohaute course of tannin
and pexsuasiom Happily. however. during thlt spring, tht
never. but once, got anything but empty use. or eggs—heng
impatient to lave them till the birth were hatched; that on
Tom, who had been with his uncle into the neighbouring plant
tion, came running in high glee into the garden. with a. brood
little callow nestlings in his hands. Mary An end Funny, who
I wasjust bringing out. an tondmire hisspoils. and tobq at
n bird for themselvs. “ No, not one I " cried Tom. " They'
all mine: Uncle Robson gave them to went. two. three. fat
ﬁve—you shan’t touch one of them i no. not one. for your lives
continued he exultingly; laying the nest on the ground, a:
standing over it with his legs wide apart. his hands thrust in
his hreeches-pockets, his body bent forward. and his {see twist
into all manner of contoninns in the ecstacy of his delight.

" But you shall see me fettle 'em all. My word. but! In
wallop ’eml See if I don‘t now. By guml but there's :1
sport for me in that nest.”

" But. Tom," said I. " I shul] not allow you to torture tho
birth. They must either bekilled at once or carried hanktoti
place you took them from, that the old birth my continue
feed them."

" But you don't know where that is. madam: it's only me u
Uncle Robson that knows than"

AGNES GREY. 337

” anifyondon'ttellme. Xshallkill themmyself—nmchasl
hue it."

- “ You dnrm't. Yen daren't touch them for your life! because
ycuknow pupa and manna, and Uncle Robson. would beangry.
Ha. ha! I've caught yau than. miﬁ l"

" I shall do what I thinkright in a use of this sort without
consulting any one. Ifyaur papa and mm don't happen to
approve of it. I shall be sorry to oh‘end them; but your Uncle
Robin's opinions. of course. are nothing to me"

So saying—urged hyasehse of duty—at the risk of both mak-
ing myself rid: and incurring the wrath of my employers—I got
alargeﬂnt stone. that had been reared up {or a mouse-th by
the gardener, th, having one: more vainly endeavoured on p6- ’
madelhelittle tyrant tolet the birds be atrial back, I asked
what he intended to do with them. With ﬁendish glee be com—
tnenoed a list of tenants: and while he was busied in the rela-
tion, I dropped the stone upon his intended victims and crushed
them ﬂat henath it. Laud were the outcrla, terrible the cream-
tions. consequent upon this during outrage; Uncle Robson had
been coming up the walk with his gun. and was just then paus-
ing to kid his dog. Torn ﬂew towards him, vowing he would
nah: him kick me instead of Juno. Mr. Robson leant upon his
gun. Ind laughed ueessively at the violence of his nephew's
pension. and the bitter maledictinns and opprobrious epithets
heheapeduponme. "Well. youarz a good‘un!" exclaimed
be, It lugth, tilting up he weapon and proceeding towards the
house. " Dannie. but the lad has some spunk in him, too.
Curie lne. il' ever I saw: nobler little scoundrel than thnL He‘s
beyond petticoat government almdy: by God l he deﬁes mother.
gmuy. governs; and all! Ha, ha, ha! Never mind, Tom.
[11 get you another brood to—rnotrow.”

" “you do, Mr. Robson. I shell kill them too." said L

“ Humph l " replied he, and having honoured me with a broad
stare—which, contrary to his expectations. I sustained without
ﬂinching—he med awny with an air of supreme contempt, and
stalked into the house. Tom next went to tell his mamma. It
was not her way to say much on any subject; hut. when she
next snv the, her aspect and demeanour were doubly dark and
chill. After some casual remark about the weather. she ob-
served—

" I am sorry. Miss Grey. you should think it neessary to in-

338 AGNES our. .

terfere with Master Bloomﬁeld's amusements; he was 1217 until
distressed about your destroying the birds."

‘ ' When Master Bloomﬁeld’s amusementsconsistininjmingsen.
tient creatures." I answered, "I think it my duty to intake" ,

" You seemed to have forgotten." said she ably, “ tht It
mtures were all created for our convenience."

I thought that doctrine admitted some doubt. but maelyrb

lied—-
F “If they were, we have no right in torment than {it ar
amusement."

" I think.” said she, " a child's attainment is my to be
,weighed against the welfare of a. soulless brute." '

" But. for the child's own sake. it ought not to beenoomagerl
to have such amusements," answered I, as meekly u I could, to
make up for such unusual pertinacity. " ‘ Biased are the mud.
ful. for they shall obtain mercy.’ ”

" 0h! ot'course; but that mfetsto ourconduct towardsudt
other."

" ‘ The merciful man show: mercy to his best,” I mound
to add.

" I think you have not shown much mercy." replied the with
a short. bitter laugh; "killing the poor birds by whduk in
that shocking manner, and putting the den- boy to such mix]
{or a mere whim."

Ijndged it prudent to say no more. This m the nerd
approach to u quarrel I ever had with Mn. Bloomﬁeld: I: well
as the greats! number of words I ever exchanged with hu- at
one time, since the day of my ﬁrst arrival.

But Mr. Robson and old Mrs. Bloomﬁeld was not II: ally
guests whose coming to Wellwood Hauseannoyedme: everyvisi-
tor disturbed me more orlcss: not so much beumtheyueglentod
me (though I did feel their conduct stringent! disagreeable in
that respect) as because I found it lmpnsihla to keep my pupils
away from them. as lwasrepentedly desired to do: Tom mus
talk to them. and Mary Ann must be noticed by than. Neither
the one nar the other knew what it was to feel any deg-reed
shame-faccdncss, or even common modesty. They would in«
decently and clamorously interrupt the conversation ot‘ their
elders. tense them with the most impeninent questions. roughly
collar the gentlemen, climb their knea uninvited, bang lbw!
their shoulders or riﬂe their packets. pull the ladies' gowns

i

l

AGNES our. 3 39

dlsorder their halt. rumhle their collars, and impormnetely beg
fa their trinkets.

Mrs Blmmﬁeldlndthesensetoheshockedandnnnoyedat
all this, hutshehndnotsmseto preventit: sheexpecxcdrneto
prevent it. But how could I—when the guests, with theirﬁne
dukes and newlinesmontinuallyﬁattered and indulged them, out
d‘ mphlsnee to their parents—how could I, with my homely
gumum. eterydny (we. and honest words, draw th away?
I strelnedevery nerve to do so: bystrivingtoamnsethem, I
admvonled to attract them to myside: bythemrtion oisnch
mthorltyallponeseed. andhysuchseverltyasldzxedtonse,
Itriedm deter themﬁmn tormenting the guests; and by re-
proeehing their nnmnnnerly condlm. to make them ashamed to
repeat it. But they knew no shame; they scorned authority
whlchhndnntemtobnck It: nnrl as furkindness andaﬁ‘eo-
tlon,elthertheyhndnohearts,or such astheyhad were so
strongly guarded, and so well concealed, that I, with nll my
Jone, hd not yet discovered how to reach them.

But soon myth): in thisqumercametoaclose—mnerthnn
Idthaexpectednrdeslred; {ornnesweet evening towards the
close of May, as I was rejoicing in the near npprondr of the holi-
days, and congratulating myself upon having made some progress
with my pupils (as far as their learning went at last. {or I had
instilled melting into their heads. end I had at length brought
them to be a little—n very little—more rational about getting
thu'r lssons done in time to lave some space {or recreation,
inllmd of warranting themselves and me all day long to no
Wynne), MI: Bloomﬁeld sent for me, and onlme told me thnt
an: Mldmmmu-mysa'vioswould he nolongm'razuired. She
ensured the that my character and general conduct were un-
seeptlonnhle; but the children had made so little impravunent
m my nrrlvnl. that Mr. Haemﬁeld and she felt it their duty
tome other mode of instruction. Though superiorto most
chﬂdral of their yarn in abilities. they were decidedly behind
thanin attainments 2 their manners were uncultivated, and their
unpen unruly. And this she attributed to a mm d nﬁclent
humans. and dlllgtnl, persevering are on my part.

Unnhnken ﬁrmness, devoted diligence. unwearied persevu'anoe,
meaning care. were the very qualiﬁcations an which I ha
naeﬂy prided myself ; and by which 1 bed hoped in timeto
Wall diﬁcnlties. and obtain access at last. I wished tn

\

38 noses cm;

\\ smhinginmymjutiﬁnﬁmﬂnnln nuanpdngh
\\\AK list my voice falter; and inhuman mlify any cumin
‘R Wmmtoovaﬂmv thatwaenlradygatheﬁnginw
«xx | chose to keepsilence, and heard! like-selfva
«m

PM: was I and xhus laugh! my home. Alex!
‘3“ would they think of rue? unable. nl'ter all my basil“.
N \Vnp my place, even for a single yur, as governs: to that
wall children. whose mother wasasserted by my own nun: D
k‘ a “very nice woman." Having been thus weighed in ill
Milne: nnd found warning, I need not hopetheywould he'll
htwlxymeagain. And thiswuanunwelcomethoughli kl
WIN]. harassed. disappointed I: I had been, Ind greatly Isl
Md lmrned to love and value my home. I In: not yet wenryd
hivenlure, nor willing to relax my efforts. I knew tln! all petals
we not like Mr. And Mrs. Bloomﬁeld. and l was oeruindl
children were not like theirs. Thenen family must he dim
Ind any change must be {or lhebetter. I had been seasonede
adversity. and tutored by experience, and l longed to radon
my Inst honour ln the eya of those whose opinion was month
that of nll the world to me.

—~—

CHAPTER VI.
THE PARSONAGE AGAlN.

FOR a few months ! remained My at home. in the quiet
“laymen: of liberty Ind rest, and genuine friendship, from IN
Of which I had fasted so long; and in the earnest prosecutiaunl
my studies, to recover what I had lost during my stay at Well-
wood House. and to lay in new stores for future use. My W5
health was still very inﬁrm. but not materially worse than when
I last sawhim; Ind lwas glad I had it inmypower cached
him by my return, and to amuse him with singing his hmlritz
longs.

No one triumphed over my failure. or said I had better have
lnken his or her advice. and quietly stayed at home. All we!
glad to have me back again, and lavished more kindness this
ever upon me. to make up for the suﬁ'erings I had undergone:
but not one would touch a. shilling or what I had so chedluﬂy
“mud and so carefully saved, in the hope of sharing it willI

norms GREY. 34:

Lhern. By dint of pinching hem, and scraping there, our debts
were already nearly paid. Mary had had good suaees with her
drawings ; but our lather had insisted upon her likewise keeping
all the produce of her industry to heme“. All we could spore from
the supply of our humble wardrobe and our little casual expenses.
he directed us to put into the savings' bank; saying. we knew
not how soon we might be dependent on that alone for support :
fol-he felt he had not long to be with IE. and what would become
of our mother and us when he was gone. God only knew 1

Dear pole if he had troubled himself less about the Ifﬂiction's
tint threatened us in case of his death. I nm convinced that
dreaded event would not have taken place so soon My mother
would we suﬂer him to ponder on the subject if she could
help it.

" Oh. Richard l “ exclaimed she. on one ocusion. " if you
would but dismiss such gloomy subject: from your mind. you
would livens long as any of us ; at last you would live to see
the girls married. nnd yourself a happy gnudl'alher. with a
canty old dame for your companion."

Myrnother laughed, and so did my father: but his laugh soon
perished in a drsry sigh.

" The)! married—poor penniless things I " said he. " who will
take them, I wonder l "

" Why. nobody shall that isn't thankful for them. Wasn‘t I
pennilese when you took me? and you frvknded, At least. to be
vastly pissed with your ncquisition. But it's no matter whether
lheygetmarriedornot: weoandeviseathousandhonestwnys
of making a livelihood. And I wonder, Richard. you can think
ol'botha'ingymrrheadabout ourpovtrtyincoseofyourdnth:
u if M would beauything compared with the-calamity of losing
yon—on aﬂiction that you we“ know would swallow up all
other]. and which you ought to do your utmost to pruerve us
from: and there is nothing like I cheerful mind {of keeping the
hody in heal "

" I know. Alice, it is wrong to keep repining as I do. but
I unnot help it: you must bear with me."

“ I won't heal-with you. if I can alter you." replied my mother:
but the harshna of her words was undone by the earnest nll'ec-
tion of her tone and pleasant smile. that made my tether smile
again. In: sadly and la transiently than was his wont.

“ Momma." said I. as soon as I could ﬁnd an opportunity 0!

342 AGNES GREY.

Ipenking with her alone. " my money is but little. now
lost long; if I could increase it. itwould lean pup-’nui
on onesubject at last. I cannot dnwlike Mary, undsothel
thing I could do would he to look out for another rimntion.‘

"And so you would mutually u'y Ignin. Azna?"

" Docidedly. I would."

" Why. my dour. I should have thought you. had hell on
of it."

"I know." said I, "everybody is not like Mr. and l
Bloomﬁeld "——

 " Some no worse," interrupted my mother.

" But not many. I think," repliai I, “ and I’m surelllchi
urenot like theirs: {or land Murywereuot: Ieulwnysdi
you bid us, didn't we?”

"Generally: but then. I did not rpoil you: and you
not perfectuugelsnl’terull: Muyhldufundofquietolstir
and you were somewhat faulty in regard to tpu; but
were very good children on the whole."

“I know I was sulky something, Ind I shmld hureheu
to see these children sulky sometimestoo; it! then 1 salad
understand them: but they never were. {or they mil in
oﬂ‘ended, nor hurt. nor ashamed: they could not be unit
in any way. except when they were in o passion."

“ Well. if they muld not. it was not their fault: you I:
expect stone to he as pliable as clay."

” No, but still it is very unplmunt to live with such It
pressihle incomprehensible creaturu. You cannot love tl
and it you could. your love would be utterly thrown away:
could neither return it. nor value, nor understand it But,
ever. even if I should stumble on web u family nguin. whi
quite unlikely. I have all this uperimoe to begin with. u
should manage better mother time; Ind the end end Ii
this preamble is. let me try ugain."

“ Well, my girl, you are not msily discouraged. I see:
glad of that. But. let me tell you. you ure 3 good dot!
and thinner than when you ﬁrst left home; and we cannot
you undermining your health to hoard up money, dthe
yourself or others."

"Marytells me Iumchnnged too: Ind I dou'tmuohn
at it, for I wus in u constant state of ugimiou and anxiety ul
long: but next time I am determined to take thing: coolly.

AGNES GREY. 54;

After some further discussion, my mother promised once more
Io assist me. provided I would wait and be patient; and ! left
her to bro-eh the mntter to my father, when and how she
deem it most advisable: never doubting her ability to obtain
his consent. Mantime. I searched. with get interest, the 1d.
vertising oolumns of the newspapers. and wrote enswers to every
“Wde a Governan." that appeared at all eligible; but all
my letters. I: well no the replies. when I got any. were dutifully
shown to my mother: end she, to my chagrin, made me reject
the situation: one liter another: thud were low people, these
use too enacting in their demands. and these too niggardly in
their remuneration.

"er ulents are not such as every poor clergyman's
daughter pom. Agnes," she would my. "and you mint
not throw them nvny. Remember. you promised to be patient:
the isno needofhurry: you have plenty oftirne helm you.
nod may hove my chances yet."

At length, she advised me to put an advertisement. myself,
in the pupa. stating my quliﬁcations. &c.

“ Music. singing. drawing. French, Latin, and German."
aid the. 'are no mean assemblage: many will be glad to
hove Io much in one instructor; and this time, you shall try
your fortune in n somewhat higher family—in that of some
genuine. thorough-bred gentleman ; for such are far more likely
to that you with proper respect and consideration. than those
pulse-proud undupeople and arrogant upstarts I have known
several among the higher mks who treated their govemsses
quite as oneal the bully ; though some. I allow, are I: insolent
Indentainguenyoneelsemn heziortheremhudand
good in all closes."

The “vehement was quickly written nod despotehed. Of
the two prties who answered it, but one would consent to give
meﬁfty pounds. the sum my mother bade me name as the salary
I should require; and here. I hsitnted About engaging myself.
I: I feared the children would be too old, and their parents
would require Iome one more showy. or [more experienced. if
not maesommpliahed than 1. But my mother dissuaded me
from declining it on that account: I should do vastly well. she
laid. if I would only throw aside my diﬂidenoe, and acquire
I little more conﬁdence in myself. I was just to give n plain,
“In new of my aequiremems and qualiﬁcations. and name

m AGNES GREY.

what stipulations I chose to make. and then uwuit the result.
The only stipulation I ventured to propose. was thus I might
be allowed two months' holidays during the yan- to v'sit my
friends, at Midsummer and Christmas. The unknown lady. in
her reply. made no objection to th'u. and stated tint, as to my
acquirernents, she had no doubt I should be able to give alb-
faction; but in the engagement of governﬁses. she considqu
those things as but subordinate points ; as, being situated ind:
neighbourhood of 0—, she could get runners to mpplymy
deﬁciencies in that respect: but, in her opinion. nut to no»
impeachahle morality, a mild and cheerful temper Ind ohliging
disposition were the most essential requisites.

My mother did not relish this it all. and now made any
objections to my accepting the situation; in which my 51“
warme supported her: hut, unwilling to be bulked uglinJ
overruled them all; and. having ﬁrst obtained the consentd'lly
father (who had. a short time previously, been app-bed of tin
transactions). I wrote a most ohliging epistle to my unknown
correspondent, and. ﬁnally, the bargain was oaucluded.

It was decreed that on the last day “January, I was (center
upon my new ofﬁce as governs!» in the family of Mr. Murray. I
of Horton Lodge. near O——-—, about seventy mile from our ‘
village: a formidable distance to me, IS I had neverbeen shove
twenty miles from home in all the coursed my twenty yus’
sojourn on earth; and as. moreover. every individual in that
family and in the neighbourth was utterly unknown to mysdf
and all my acquaintances. But this rendered it only the more
piquznt to me. I hAd now. in some measure. got rid of the
admire harm that had formerly oppresed me so much; the!
was a pleasing excitement in the idea of entering thueuuhon
regions. Ind making my way alone among its strange inhhh
rants. I now ﬂattered myself I was going to see somahingd
the world: Mr. Murray‘s raidenoe was near a large town, and
not in a. manufacturing district. where the peoplehul nothing!!!
do but to make money; his tank, from what I could gatha'.
appeared to be higher than that of Mr. Bloomﬁeld; and. doubt-
less. he was one of those genuine thorough-bred gentry my
mother spoke of. who would treat his governess with due coo-
siderntion a a respectable well—edumtcd lady. the instructor Ind
guide of his children. and not a mere upper sean Then, my
pupils being older, would be more rational, more teachlble. Ind

names GREY. 34;

I55 troublaome than the last : they would be less conﬁned to the ’
schoolrwm. and not require that constant labour and incessant
watching; and, finally, bright visions mingled with my hopes.
with which the are of children and the mere duties of a gover-
nss had little or nothing to do. Thus, the reader will see that
I had no claim to be regarded as a martyr to ﬁlial piety. going
forth to sacriﬁce pace and liberty for the sole purpose of laying
up stores for the comfort and support of my parents: though
oeﬂainly the comfort of my father, and the future support of my
mother, had a large share in my calculations: and ﬁfty pounds
append to me no ordinary sum. I must have decent clothes
becoming my station; I must, it seemed. put out my washing.
and also pay for my four annual journeys between Horton Lodge
and home; but with strict attention to economy. surely twenty
pounds, or little more. would cover those expenses. and then
that would be thirty {or the bank, or little 155: what a valu-
able addition to our stock! Oh, I gnu! struggle to keep this
situation. whatever it might be! both for my own honour among
my friends And for the solid service I might render them by my
continuance there.
.”

CHAPTER VII.
HORTON LODGE.

In arst of January was a wild, tempestuous day: there was a
strong north wind. with a continual storm of snow drilling on the
ground and whirling through the air. My friends would have
had me delay my departure, hut fearful of prejudieing my em-
ployers against me by such want of punctuality at the commence-
ment of my undertaking, I persisted in keeping the appointment.

I will not inﬂict upon my readers an account of my leaving
home on that dark winter morning : the fond farewells. the long'
long journey to 0—. the solitary waiting: in inns for coaches
or trains—for there were some railways then—and, ﬁnally, the
meeting at O——- with Mr. Murray's servant. who had been sent
with the phaeton to drive me from thence to Horton Lodge. I
I'ﬂl its! state that the heavy snow had thrown such impediments
in the way of both horses and steam—engines. that it was dark
some hours before I reached my journey's end. and that a. most
bewildering storm came on at last, which made the few miles'

346 AGNES our.

quote between 0—- Ind Horton Lodge a long and {new ‘
pomge. I sat resigned. with the cold, sharp snow drink ‘
through my veil and ﬁlling my hp. seeing nothing, mm
in; how the unfortunate horse Ind driver could make thdrq
evennwellu theydld:mdiudeeditwashutntoi1m‘
emping style of progression, to sly the best of it. At length!
parsed; and. at the all of the driver. some one nnlatchuli
rolled back upon their creaking hinga what appared toheti 1
park gates. Then we proceeded along: smoother rand. when I
oomsiunally. l perceived some huge hoary mangleumingthrlﬁ l
thedarlmess. which Itookto he nportionoflsnow—dldu‘
Allernoonsidernhle timewe pureed tgain. before the mtelypﬂ‘
tico of I. large house with long windows dmending tothegrnuil. A

I rose with some difﬁculty from under the aperian
snow-drill. and nlighted from the carriage. expecting the! chi
and hospitable reception would indnify me for the toil: Id
hardships of the doy. Ageutlemnnly person in hlnekopaudlh
door. and admitted rue into nspuious hull. lighted Mun-M
coloured lamp suspended from the ceiling.- he led me that
this, along a passage, and, opening the door of 1 hack real.
told me that was the schoolmm. lenteted, and found two you!
ladies and two young gentlemen—my future pupils, I Slipped-
After a {crawl greeting. the elder girl, who was triﬂing our:
piece at canvas and a huket ot‘Gerrnun wools. asked if I slim“
like to go upstairs. I replied in the afﬁrmative, of course.

" Matilda. take a candle. and show her her room," said Illa

Miss Matilda. I strapping hoyden of about torment. with!
short {rock and trousers. shrugged her shoulder: and nude:
slight grimace. but took a candle and prooeeded before me. Q
the hack stairs(a. long, steep. double ﬂight). and through-lent.
narrow passage. to a small but tolernbly comfortable room. 52
then asked me if I would takesorne tenor coﬂ'ee. l was-houtlo
answer No; but remembering that I had taken mthingsinct
seven o'clock that morning. and feeling faint in eonsqu I
said I would take acup oftea. Saying she would tell “ Brawn.‘
the young lady departed; and by the time I had dive“!
myself of my heavy. wet cloak. shawl, bonnet. &e., a miudnl
damsel came to say the young ladies disired to know whet!!!I
would take my tea up there or in the schoolroom. Under ‘13
pleadfutigue. I chose to take it there. She withdrew; end. I”
a while, rained again with a small tea‘tmy, and plaud it on '8

news can. 347

chest at drawers which served as n dressing-table Having civilly
thnnkedher,l nskedntwhattimelshuxldbeexpectedtoﬂsein
the morning.

" The young India Ind gentlenmx hreakinst at half-put eight,
tnn'nm," said she; " theyrise early; but. u theyseldom do any
mos Mombrakfast. l shuddthinkitwilldoilyourisesoon
nae: seven."

Idesiredhertobesokindastocallrnentscven,and,
pzomising to do so, she withdrew. Then, having broken my long
fest an 1 cup of to and 3 little thin bread and butter, I sat down
beside the small, smouldering ﬁre. and amused myself with n
harty ﬁt of crying: after which. 1 said my prayers, and then,
feeling considerably relieved, begin to prepare for bed. Finding
that none ol'my luggage was brought up, I instituted a search for
the hell ; and {Ailing to discover any signs of such: convenience
lnnnyonrnerofthe room, I took my candle and ventured lhrmgh
the long We, and down the steep stairs, on a voyage of
discovery. Meeting a. welbdresed female on the way, I told
he! who! I wanted; but not without considerable hesitation, as
I was not quite smewhether it wusone of the upper servants. or
Mrs. Murrnyheuelf: it happened. however. lobe the hdy‘s-mnid.
With the air of one conferring an unusual Invour. she vanchsnied
toundeﬂnhthetenrlingupofmythings: nndwhenlhsdre—
armed my room, and weited and wondered a long time (greatly
bring that the bed forgotten or neglected toperform ha promise.
and doubting whether to keep waiting or go to bed. or go down
spin) my hopa. At length. were revived by the sound of voices
end hughter. accompanied by the trump 0! feet Along the
purge ; and praently the lnggage was brought in by a. rough-
looking maid nndnmnn, neither olthein veryrespectl'ul intheir
deniemonr to me. Having shut the door upon their retiring
footsteps. and unpacked A few of my things. I betook myself to
test; gladly enough. for I was weary in body and mind.

It was with a strange feeling of dsolntion, mingled with a
strong sense of the novelty of my situation. and a joyless kind of
curiosity concerning what was yet unknown. that I awoke the
nut manning : feeling like one whirled away by enchnntment.
and suddenlydropped from the clouds into a remote nnd unknown

land. widdyand completely isolated from all he had ever seen or
known before; or like a thistletseed borne on the wind to same
was nook of uncongenial soil. where it must lie long enough

348 AGNES GREY.

before it an take root and germinate. umting nor
from what appears so ali to its nature : if. indud. it
But this gives no proper idea of my feelings at all; a:
that has not lived such a retired. stationnry life 1: I
possibly imngine what they were: hardly even it' be h:
what it is to awake some morning, and ﬁnd hirnsel
Nelson. in New Zealand. with aworld ofwatets hetwee
and all that knew him.

I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with whicl
my blind and looked out upon the unknown world : aw.
wilderness was all that met my gaze; at wnste of

“Deserts tossed in now,
And heavy-laden groves.”

I descended to the schooler with no remarkable 1
to join my pupils. though not without some feeling of
respecting what a further acquaintance would revs
thing. among others of more obvious importance. I dc
with myself—l must begin with calling them Miss am
It seemed to me a. chilling and unnatural piece of
between the children of a family and their instructor t
mmpnnion ; especially where the farmer were in their ea
head, as at Wellwood House; but even there my 02
little Bloomﬁelds by their simple names had been reg-an
oﬁensivc liberty : as their parents had taken care to she
carefully designating them Master and Mix: Bloomﬁell
speaking to me. I hid been very slow to lake the hint
the whale mir struck me as so very absurd: but nor
mined to be wiser, and begin at once with as much i
ceremony as any member of the family would be
require: Ind indeed, the children being so much 016
would be less difﬁculty ; though the little words Miss an
seemed to hove a surprising etfect in npmsing all Emil
hunted kindnas. and extinguishing every gleam of i
that might arise between us.

As I cannot. like Dogben-y, find it in my heart to h
my tediousness upon the reader, I will not go on to
with a minute detail of all the discoveries and proceedin
and the following dny. No doubt he will be amply sati
:- slight sketch of the different members of the fami
general View of the ﬁrst year or two of my sojourn nun

AGNES GREY. 349

To begin with the head: Mr. Murray was. by all nccounts. a
blooming. roystering. country squire; : devoted foxvhunter. a
skilfnl hmjodrey and furier, an active, practitnl farmer. and
n hasty Madman By all ncwunts. I say; for, except on
Sundays. when he wait to church, I never saw him from month
to month : unlm. in crossing the hall or walking in the grounds.
the ﬁgure of a lull, stout gentleman, with scarlet cheels and
crlnuon nose, happened to come morass me ; on which mansions.
it‘he paged neurenaughmspeak. on unecremanious nod. accom-
panied by n "aning. Miss Grey." or some such hriefsnlutation,
wns Bully vunchul’ed. Frequently. indeed, his land laugh
ruched me from If"; and oftener still I heard him swearing
Ind hlaspherning Igninst the footmen. groom, coachrmm, or
some other haplas dependent.

Mrs. Murray was A handsome. dashing lady of forty. who
mainly required neither rouge nor padding to add to her
chums: and whose chief enjoyments were, or seemed to be. in
giving or Imqnenting parties, and in til-using at the very top of
theﬁuhiou. I did not see her till eleven o‘clock on the morning
other my arrival; when she honoured me with av‘uit. just as my
mother might step into the kitchen to see I new servant-girl:
yet not so. either. for my maths would have seen her innue-
dintely In: her arrival. llld not wnited till the next day ;' and.
mm, she would have edde her in n more kind and
friendly nunner, Ind given her some words of comfort as well
as n plain exponition of her duties: but Mrs. Murray did neither
the one nor the other. She just stepped into the schoolroorn on
her return from ordering dinner in the housekeeper's room. bode
me good-morning. stood for two minutes by the ﬁre, said a few
words about the weather and the " rather rough " journey I must
hnve hnd yesterday; petted her youngest child~u boy of ten—
Ivho hnd inst been wiping his mnuth and hands on her gown.
alts indulging in some savoury morsel from the housekeeper's
m: told me what a sweet, good boy hem; and then sailed
out. with I selfmmplaeent smile upon her face: thinking. no
doubt. that she had done quite enough for the present, and
had beat delightﬁtlly condescending into the bargain. Her
thﬂdren evidently held the sine opinion. and I alone thought
Otherwise

AM this she looked in upon me one: or twice. during the
iii-Enos of my pupils. to enlighten me concerning my duties 1m

35¢ AGNES can.

Mthem. For the girls she seemed animonlytnrude‘
them as superﬁcislly ettmtive and shortly encomplished u they
could poﬁibly be made. without pmeut trouble or disounht
to themselves ; and I was to not accordingly—to study nnd mil
to amuse and oblige, instruct. reﬁne, and polhh. with thehl
possible exertion on their part, and no ueru'se of authorityu
mine. With regard to the two bays. inns much the sane;
only instead ofaceornplishrnents, I was to get the greatst pull!
quantity of Latin gramer and Valpy’s Delectns into theirhads
in order toﬁt them [or school—the smut pmble quantitylt
least willie-ll trouble to themselves. Johnmightbe I. “ littleh'ﬂ
spirited." and Charles might be a little " nervous and talk)!"—

"But at all events. Miss Grey."snitl she. “I hopeyuvil
keep your temper. and be mild and patient throughout; ge-
cially with the dear little Charles : he is so extraner rim-lid
susceptible. end so utterly unaccustomed to nything but ti:
tenderest treatment. Youwill este my naming thae thing
to you; for the {set is. I have hitherto foundnll the
even the very last of them, faulty in this perticular. '11:]
wanted that meek and quiet spirit, which St. Matthew, or In
01‘ then. says is better than the putting on of Ippud—yun will
know the passage to which I nnude, for you are I dergymu'!
daughter. But I have no doubt you will give said-mien in till!
respect :5 well as the rest. And remunher, on Ill cousin“.
when any of the young people do anything improper, it' persuasion
and gentle remonstmoe will not do. let one of the other: com
and tell me ; for I can speak to them more plainlytlnn it would 1
be properfor you to do. And make them Is Inppyas youul.
Miss Grey, and I dare say you will do very well.“

I observed that while Mrs. Murray was so acutelyle
{or the comfort and happinas of her children. had continually
talking about it, she never once mentioned mine: though M
were at home surrounded by friends. and I In dies: anon!
strangers ; and I did not yet know enough of the wen-kl, not tn
be considerably surprised at this anomaly.

Mis Murray, otherwise Rosalie. was about sixteen when 1
wine. and decidedly a very pretty girl ; and in two yurs long!"
as time more completely developed he tom and added grant 10
her carriage and department, she became positively beeutiﬁal;
and that in no common degree. She was tall and slender. ’5
not thin: perfectly fanned. exquisitely fair. though not with!!!

AGNES GREY. 35'!

annhalthybloom ; behinwhiehsheworeinnpmfuian
gringlets. wnsofnyerylight hrmmindining toycllow;
:were palebine. butsocharand hrightthst iewwanld
rem duker: the rat ofherfentures vac small. not quite
'. end not mknbly otherwise : but nltogether you could
.itntetopmnonncehernverylovelygirl. Iwishlcanldsny
h for mind and disposition as I can for her {arm and face.
think not I have any dreadful them” to unite: she
ely. light-hearted. and mid be very agreeable. with those
dnotemsherw-ill. Towards me. when I ﬁmcame. she
ld and hnughty. then insolent and overbearing ; but an a

nequeintanee, she gradually laid nside her airs. and in
me Is deeply attached to me as it was posible for her
to due of my character and positim: for she seldom lost
For above half-nn-haur at n time, of the fut of my being a
gnnd a poor unte's daughter. And yet. upon the whole,
we sherespected rnemmethnnsheherselfwnsawareof;
e Iwns the only person in the house who steadily missed
)rlnciples, habitually spoke the truth, and generally en—
ued to make inclination haw to duty: and this I my. not.
5:. in commendation of myself. but to shew the unfortunate
r! the family to which my services were. for the praent.
i. There was no member of it in whom I regretted this
nt of principle son-Inch as Miss Murray herself: not only
eshehad tnkenalnncytome.but heuuselhzrewasso
)f what wns plmsant and pmpossﬁsing in herself. that. in
l her failings. I really liked her-when she did not rouse
,ignation, ar rufﬂe my temper by too great I displnyot‘ ha-

These. hnwever. I would lain persuade myself. were
the edcct of her ednmtion than her disposition: she hsd
been perfectly hught the distinction between right and
; she had, likehet brothers and sisters. been snﬂ’ered. from
V, to tyrnnnise over nurses, governess. and servants ;
:1 not been taught to moderate her daires. to control her

or bridle her will, or to sacriﬁce her own plenum for the
(others. Her temper being nnnn-nlly good. she was never

or rnornse. but from cansunt indulgence and habitual
3‘ reason. she was often tuty and capriclm: her mind
ver been cultinted: her intellect. at best. was somewhat
7: she passed considenhle vivanity. some quicknas of
lion. Ind some that for music end the Inquisition 05

332 AGNES GREY.

languages. but till ﬁfteen she had troubled herself to aeqn
nothing ;—then the love of display had roused her facultis. 1
induced her to apply herself, but only to the more showy aoco
plishmenu. And when I came it was the same: everythth
neglected but French, German, music, singing, dancing, his
work, and a little drawing—inch drawing as might product
greatest show with the smallest labour, and the principal in
of which were generally done by rue. For music and singir
Mides my occasional instructions, she had the attendance of I
best master the country all'orded ; and in these momplishrna
as well as in dancing. she certainly attained great proﬁcient
T o music. indeed, she devoted too much of her time: x
governess though i was, I frequently told her; but her mall
thought that it' rlu liked it, she amid not give too muh time
the acquisition of so attractive an art. of fancy-work l hi
nothing but what I gathered from my pupil and my own ohm
tion; but no sooner was I initiated. than she made me usdvl
twenty diﬁ‘erent ways: all the tedious parts of her work I
shifted on to my shoulders; such as stretching the frama, stitt
ing in the canvas, sorting the wools and silks, putting int
grounds, counting the stitches, rectifying mistakes. and ﬁnkhi
the pieces she was tired of.

At sixteen. Miss Murray was something of a romp, yet I
more so than is natural and allowable for a girl of that ex
but at seventeen. that propensity, like all other things, began
give way to the ruling passion, and soon was swallowed up
the all-absorbing ambition to attract and dazzle the other st
But enough of her: now let us turn to her sister.

Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoyden, of whom lin
need be said. She was about two ymrs and a half younger“!
her sister ; her features were larger, her complexion much darn
She might possibly make a handsome woman ; but she was!
too big-honed and awkward ever to he called a pretty girl. at
at present she cared little about it. Rosalie knew all her charm
nod thought them even greater than they were, and valuedthe
more highly than she ought to have done. had they been ill"
tines as great ; Matilda thought she was well enough, but can
Mk about the matter: still 155 did she care about the cultir
u of her mind, and the acquisition of ornamental accompllﬂ
“ts. The manner in which she learnt her lessons and practi!
. mic. was calculated to drive any governs; to distill

AGNES GREY. 55;

ad easy as her mks were, if done at all, they were slurred
any time and in any way; but generally at the least
errt rims. and in the way least beneﬁcial to herself. and
tistactory to me: the short half-hour of practising was
strummed through ; she, meantime, unsparingly abusing
tef tar interrupting her with corrections. or for not recti-
n‘ mistakes before they were made, or something equally
noble. Once or twin. I ventured to remonstrnte with
>usly for such irrational conduct: but on mch of those
rs. I received such reprehensive expostulations from her
as convinced me that, if I wished to keep the situation.
mu let Mis Matilda go on in her own way.
1 her lessons were over, however. her ill—humour was
y over too: while riding her spirited pony, or romping
: dogs or her brothers and sister. but especially with her
)ther John. she was us happy as a lark. As an animal.
was all right, full of life. vigour. and activity: as an in-
;being. she was barbaroqu ignorant, indocile. cudsr.
ttional: and. consequently. very distressing to one who
: task of cultivating her understanding. reforming her-
}. Ind aiding her to acquire those ornamental attain.
'hich. unlike her sister, she despised as much on the rat.
nther was partly aware of her deﬁciencia. and give me
lecture as to how I should tryto form her tastes. and
rur to rouse and cherish her dormant vanity; and. by
ing, skiliul ﬂattery, to win her attention to the desired
which I would not do; and how I should prepare and
the path of learning till she could glide along it without
t exertion to herself: which I could not. for nothing can
ht to any purpose without some little exertion on the part
nrner.
moral agent. Matilda was reckless. hudstrnng. violent,
tmenable to reason One proof of the deplorable state
rind was. that from her father's example she had learned
r like a trooper. Her mother was gmtly shocked at the
ylike trick." and wondered " how she had picked it up."
m can soon bruit her of it. Miss Grey." said she: " it is
unbit. and if you will just gently remind her every time
too. i am sure she will soon lay it aside” I not only
* remind " her, I tried to impress upon her how wrong
tnd how distressing to the cars of decent people ; but all
It

354 AGNES GREY.

in vain: I was onlyanswered by: cards laugh,ud,"0
Miss Grey, how shocked you are ! I'mso glad I" Or, "Wd
l can‘t help it; papa shouldn't have taught me: I bandit
from him : and may be a bit from thewechmnn.“

Herbrother John. alias Master Murray, 73 shot: detaih
I came : a ﬁne. smut. halthy boy, frank and good-neural“
main. and might havebeen a decent had had he ha Fql
educated; but nowhewnsas mghasayonngbeu,”
unruly, unprincipled. untaught. utenhable—et last, I!
governess under his mother’s eye His masters at sehoollﬂ'
be able to manage him better—for to school hemmt. 1!!
to myrelief. intheoourse Mayaninastatejtism
sandalous ignonnoe as to Latin. swell-s theme-
thmgh more neglected things: and this. dunhtles, well!
be laid to the acecm‘nt of his education having been annual
“ignorant femaleteacher. whohad presumedtotake ink
what she was wholly incompetent to perform. I m not
liveIed from his brother till full twelve months aha, 'hs
also was despatched in the same state of disgnneful ignul
as the former.

Masta Charla was his mather's peculiar darling, “2'
little more than a year younger than John. but much all
paler, and lus active and robust; I. pettish. cowardly. cl
dons. selﬁsh little fellow, only active in doing mischief, nth
clever in inventing falsehoods: not simply to hide his mum
in mere malicious wantonness, to bring odium upon othus.
fact. Master Charles was a very great nuisance to me: ltII
trial of patience to live with him pamhly; to watch over
we: worse: and to rush him. or pretend to tech him,
inconceivable. At ten years old. he could not read currently
ensiest line in the simplest book; nnd as, according to
nathefs principle, be was to be told every word. before he
time to hesitate or examine its orthography. and never a!
be informed. as a stimulant to exertion, that other boy: i
new than he. it is not surprising that hemadehntl

during the two years I had charge of hisednul
initiate portions of Latin grammar, kc. were to bezepe
-bhim, till he chose to say he knew them. and then he
5‘..de to ﬂy them; i! he made mistaks in his linlm
oh arithmetic. they were to be shown him at one. end
If" ‘eadofhisbeingleﬂtoexeru'sehisﬁm

mum cm. 35;

a ﬁnding them out himself; so mu. 0! cause. he tool: no
ch: ta ovoid misuhstt frequentlyset dmhi: ﬁgure!!!
w, without my adulation at :1L

1 did not invariably conﬁne myself to due lulu: it In:
ﬁintlmynonscienne to do so: but Iscldnmcouldventnnto
Whomthanin the slighustdegree,withoutincuningthc
'11:): of my little pupil, and subsequentlan his human: to
'hunhevouklruatemy tansgresions. mdidwslyexugmled.
l'ldonwd with embellishments of his own: and often. in can.
Wm I onthepoint oflosingormigningtnysitmtion.
hi,forthn‘rskanhome. Immheredlnypridenndsnp
fused my indignation. and managed to struggle on till my
mm: tomato! In: dspatched lo whoa]; his faith: declaring
tum situation was "no go for him, it was phin: h‘s
math-speak! him outrageously. and hisgavm could make
to had of him I! all."

Ahmoburntinnsnbom Hmlndgenhditsongoings,
ullnvedonewithdryddaipﬁonfor thepresent. Thehouae
Pu a my respectnhlg one; superior to Mr. Bloomﬁeld‘l, both
unggdn,mdmnxniﬂceme: thegudenwunotsomtgﬁdiy
I“ out: but instead of the smooth-shaver: lawn. the young trees
:urded by pilinp. the grove of upstart pnplus. end the plan-
Iﬂm of ﬁn. there was n wide park. stocked with deer. and
Mad byﬂn: old trees. The surrounding mntry incl! n:
m. u fnr u fertile ﬁelds. ﬂourishing trees. quiet green
Mudsmilinghedgeswithwildﬁowm saluted umng
uhcouldnukniz; but it was deprminglyﬂnttnoneborn
ndnmwednmongtherugxedhillsof—.

We were situated narly two miles from the village m.
m. unequally. the inn:in carriage was put in requisition
ray Shad-y morning, and sometimes am. Mr. and Mn.
(way My thought it snﬁcient to dim: themselves It
mometh ofthe day; butfreqmdythechildnn
mains-second time to wanderin'nbontthegrmmd:
I! III: day with nothing to do. If some of my pupils chase to
ﬂkudhkcmewith them. itwu well for me: forotherwise.
Iy position in the cnrringe was, to be ﬂushed into the-coma
uthutﬂomthzopenwindow.andwith mybncktothehonsz

which invariably mule me sick; Ind. if I were not
eullyohliledtolnvelhechmhinthemiddhonhem.
nydnmiwmdiamrbedwithnieelingd huoorandaick-

356 AGNES GREY.

lines, and the tormenting (ear of its becoming wars
depressing hudache was generally my companion th
the day. which would otherwise have been one of welt:
und holy. ulna enjoyment.

" It's vay odd, Miss Grey. that the mrriage shoul
make you side: it never makes me,” remuked Mis M:

“Nor me either." Said her sister, “but I dare my
if I m where she does-such a nasty. horrid plane. M
I wonder how you can bear it I"

I am obliged to bear it. since no choice is left me—I n1
answered; but in tmderness for their feelings I only
“Ohl itis but a shortwny. and if I am not sick in
don't mind it."

If I were called upon to give 3 description of the usual
and emngemcns ofthe day. I should ﬁnd itnerydiﬁcu
1 her] all my meals in the sehoolmom with my pupils, at s
assnited their fancy: sometimes they would ring for dim
it was hall-cooked ; sometimes they would keep it waiti
table for above an hour. and then be out of humour be
potatoes were cold. and the gravy covered with salt: of
sometims they would have tea I! (our: frequently, th
storm at the servants bemuse it was not in predsely at I
when thse orders were obeyed. by way of eneoung
punctuality, they would keep it on the table till seven 1

Their hours at study Were managed in much the same
judgment or eonvenienoe was never once consulted. S
Matilda and John would determine " to get all the plagu)
over before hrealdast." and send the maid to call me u
past live, without any scruple or apology ; sometimes. I
to he rudy prec‘uely at six. and. having drused in I ha!
down to an unpty room. and afterwaiting along time in :
discovered thlt they had changed their minds. and we
bed ; or perhaps, if it were a ﬁne summer looming. BM
come to tell me that the young ladies and gentlemen h
a holiday, and wee gone out; and then. I was kept w:
hreukfast till I was almost ready to faint : they having
themselves with something before they went

Otwn they would do their lessons in the open air : wh
nothing to say against: except that I frequently mughl
sitting on the dump grass. or from exposure to the even
or some insidious draught. which seemed to have no

’\
AGNES GREY. 357 =

eﬂect on them. It was quite right that they should be hardy;
get. surely. they might have been taught some consideration for
others who were less so. But X mint um blame them for what
was, perhaps, my own fault: for I never made any particular
objections to sitting where they pleased; foolishly choosing to
risk the consequences, rather than trouble them for my con-
Vmience. Their indeoorous manner of doing their lusous was
quite as remarkable asthe mprice displayed in their choice of time
and place While receiving my instructions. or repeating what
they had learned. they would lounge upon the sofa, lie on the rug,
stretch. yawn. talk to each other. or look out of the window;
Whereas, I could not so much as stir the ﬁre. or pick up the
handkerchief I had dropped; without being rebuked for inatten-
tinn by one of my pupib. or told that " mamma would not like
In; to be so useless."

The servants, seeing in what little estimation the governess was
lteld by both parents and children. regulated their behaviour by
the some standard. I have frequently stood up for them, at the
risk of some injury to myself. against the tynnny and injustice of
their young masters and mistrmes ; and I always endavoured to
give them as little trouble as possible : but they tirely neglected
my comfort, dapised my requests. and slighted my directions.
All servants, I an: convinoed, would not have done so; but
domestics in general. being ignorant and little maintained to
reason and reﬂection. axe too easin corrupted by the carelessnas
and bad example of those above them; and these, I think. were
not of the belt order to begin with.

I sometims felt myself degraded by the life I led, and ashamed
ofaubmittlng to so many indignities ; and sometimes I thought
myldf a fool for mring so much about them. and feared I must
be udly wanting in Christian humility. or that charity which

"mﬂereth long and is kind, seeketh not her own, is not easily
provoked. heareth all things, endureth all things." But, with time
and patience. matters began to be slightly ameliorated: slowly.
itis true, and almost imperceptibly; but 1 got rid of my male
pupils (that was no triﬂing advantage), and the girls, as I inti-
muedbefore eonoeming one of them, became a little less insolcnt.
Ind began toshow some symptoms of esteem. “ Miss Grey was
aqua creature: she never ﬂattered, and did not praise them
halfenough; but whenever she did speak favourably of them, or
anything belonging to them. they could be quite sure her appro-

158 AGNES Guy.

halo-mus sincexe Shemveryobliging. quiet. and W
inthenuin,butthcreweeesomethingsthnputheromd
tulips: theydid not muchm forthat. tobestue. but will
wuhettertokeephexintuue; nswhenshewuinagoodhm
shewouldtelktolhem. Indbevuyngmenblenndunusingm
times. in herway ; which we: quite diﬂment to mm's.hullil
verywell for It chmge. She hndherownopiniouoneveq-b
jut. Ind kept steadily to them—way tirsome opinions theydll
were; I: them alw-ys thinking ol’whnwu right and!“
unimagmdhndastnnge reverence immanent!
with religion. and an uncountable liking to: good people.‘

H—

CHAPTER VIII.
THE "comm: OUT."

AT tighten. Mist Murray was to emerge flout the quick
acuity of the schoolroom into the full blue of the W
world—as much of it. at last. I: could be hadoutof landﬁll
forherpnpemnldnotbepusudedtolenehinunlw
and pursuits. even fox- a few weeks residence in town. ﬂ
was to marshal-Wan the 3rd of January. at a mlgniﬁca
hall. which her munmn proposed to give to Ill nobility And
choice gentry of 0— and its neighbourhood for twenty nib
round. Of com, she looked forward to it with the wildest in
patience, and the most extravagant nnticipationa of delight.

“ Miss Grey." said she, one evening, a month befae then!!-
imponant day. as I was penxsingalong and extranely inwatiﬂl
letter of mysisler's—which I had just glanced at in the mix
to see that it contained no verybud news. and kept till now. Im-
nbk before to ﬁnd a quiet moment for reading it—" Miss Guy.
do put away that dull. stupid letter. and listen to mel I'm an
my talk must he [at mote amusing thin that."

She seated herself on the low stool at my leet; an“. sip-
pressing a sigh of vuntion, began to fold up the episde.

“You should tell the good people at home not to hover“!
with such lung letten." said she; " and above all. do hid M
Write on pmper note-paper. end not on those greet vulglr M
You should set: the charming little lndylikenotes mumm- writs
to her friends."

AGNES any. V 359

“ The good people at home." replied I. " know verywell that
the longer their letters are, the better I like them. I should he
my my to receive a charming little ladylike note from any of
ﬂan; and I thought you were too much of a ladyyourself,
Ili- Murny, to talk about the ‘ vulgarity ’ ofwriling on ulurgc
aha of paper.”

"Wdl. l oulynidittoruyou. But nowlwunt to talk
about the hull; and to tell you that you positively must put 05
you haliduys till it ‘3 ova."

"Why-ﬁ—I shall not be pruent at the hull."

" No, but you will see the rooms decked out before it begins.
Indhoulhewusic. Ind. eboveull. see mein my splendid new
om. luhollhesochnming.yan'llberadytomhipme~
you really must stay."

"I should like to see you very much; but I shall have many
with: of seeing you equally charming. on the mansion or
meofthemberlse lull: and pani: that mlohemndl
mum disappoint my friends by postponing my return so long."

"0h. neverxnindyourfriendsl Tellthemwewon‘tletyou go.‘

“ Bunnnythetrmh. itwonldheudisappointmem to myself:
Ilmgroseethemasmuehulheytoseeme—palnpsm"

"Well. hutitissnch urhort time."

" Nady u fortnight by my oompumu'on; grid, besides, I can-
not bar the thoughts of 3 Christh spent from borne: 1nd,
m, my sister is going to be married."

“ lube—1m P "

" Not till next month; but I wannabe there to assist herin
linking premiums. and to make the best of her company
while we have her."

"Why didn‘t you tell me before P”

" I‘ve only got the new: in this letter, which you stigmatise as
dull and stupid, llld won't lei me read."

"To whom is she to be rnnrried ?”

"To Mr. Kidmrdson. the vicar of a neighbouring parish."

“ I: he rhh l"

“ﬂu: only comfortable"

" II he bubonic P "

“ No. only deceit."

"Yul? ..

" No: only middling."

“O mercy! vhntuwraehl Whntrortol'nhoureisit?”

360 AGNES GREY.

“ A quiet little vimmgc. with an ivy-clad porch, an ok
Michael garden, and "—

“O sop l—yan'll mike me sick. How cm she bear it?"

"I expect she'll not only be able to bear it, but to be I!
happy. You did not ask me if Mr. Richardson were a goo!
wise. or amiable man ; I could have answered Yes. to all the
questions—at last so Mary thinks. and I hope she will In Ell
herself mistaken."

"BJI—«mismble creature! how can she think of spmdin
her life there. cooped up with that nasty old man : and who;
of chase?"

" He is not old: he's only six or seven and thirty; xndsll
herself is twenty-eight. and as sober as if she were ﬁlty."

“Oh I that‘s better then—they’re well numbed : but doll!
all him the 'worthy vicar‘?"

" I don't know ; but if they do, I believe he merits the epitha.

" Mercy. how shocking! and will she wear a white apron,“
make pies Ind puddings?"

“ I don’t know about the white apron, but I dare say she-i
nuke pies and puddings now and then; but that will be r
great hardship. as she has done it before."

"And will she go nbaut in a plain shawl, and a large sin
bonnet. carrying tracts and bone soup In her husband's pa
parishioners?"

" I'm not clear about that; but I dare say she will do her be
to make them comfortable in body and mind. in accordnoewﬂ
our mother’s example."

CHAPTER IX
THE BALL.

" Now, Miss Grey." exclnimed Miss Murray, immediately
entered the schoolmm, after having taken off my ontdoorlll
ments, upon returning from my four weelLs' notation, " Now
shut the door, and sit down, and I‘ll tell you all shout the hill-

“No,——dnmn it. no!" shouted Miss Matilda. "Hold yot
mag-lie. can’t ye? and let me tell her about my new Elm-1K
. splendour, Miss Grey ! a ﬁne blood mare"—

" Do be quiet. Matilda ; and let me tell my nuns ﬁst."

AGNES GREY. 361

"No. no. Rosalie; you‘ll be such a damned long time over it
—she shall hear me ﬁrst—I‘ll be hanged if she doesn‘t l "

" l'nt sorry to hear, Miss Matilda, that you've not got rid of
lint shocking habit yet."

" Well. I can't help it: but I‘ll never my: wicked word again.
ilyou'li only listen to me. and tell Rosalie to hold her confounded
tongue."

Rosalie remonstrated. and I thought I should have been ton in
line between them : but Miss Matilda having the loudest voice.
has‘merutlengthgsveimnnd suﬂ’md hertotellhastoryﬁrst:
no I was doomed to luar I long account othersplendld mare. its
Bleeding and pedigree. its poms. its lotion. its spirit. to. and of
her own amuing skill and courage in riding it ; concludingwith
uassertion that she could curative-honed gate "likew-inking."
Ihat pupa said she might hunt the nut time the bounds met, and
Insrnlns had ordered a bright scarlet hunting‘halrit {or her.

“ Oh. Matilda! what storis yan ore telling l " exclaimed her
titer.

" Well." answered she. no whit abashed. " I know I could
elur s hmhnrred gate. it‘ I tried. and pops will any I may
hunt, end momma will order the habit when I uh i "

“Well. now get along." replied Miss Murray: " Ind do. den-r
Mstiidn. try to be a little more ladylike. Mist Grey. I wish you
we“ tell her not to use such shocking words ; she will call her
horse: mm: itissoimcei-vnlljshocidngi and thensheuss
sueh dreadful expressions in desuihing it : she um! hove lamed
it from the groom. It narly puts me into ﬁt: when she begins."

"i learned it from papa. you ass! and his jolly friends." said
the young lady. vigorously cracking a huntingAwhip. which she
habitually carried in her hund. " I'm as good a judge of home-
ﬂsh as the best oi'ln."

" Well. now get along, you shocking girl I I rally shall take a
ﬁt if you go on in such a way. And now. Miss Grey, attend to
me: I'm going to tell you about the hall. You must be dying to
her about it. I know. 0h, writ 2 ball ! You never saw or heard.

oiled, or dreamt of anything like it in all your life i The decan-
ﬁonl. the entertainment. the supper. the music were indescribable!
and then the guests 1 There were two noblegsen, three huonets.
Indﬁre titled ladies. and other ladies and gentlemen innumerable.
Thiadiu. of course. were of no consequence to me. except to put
“I in a good humour with myself. by showing how ugly and
M 2

36;. AGNES GREY.

awkward most or them were; and the best. run-om: told me.

the mast tmnscendcnt bmutics mung them. were nothing

me, As {a etc. \liss Grey—I'm so Jar-r] you didn't see me!
‘ nsn‘t I. Matilda?"

 

H No. but I really war—at leut so more said—and Bo
and Williamson. Brown said she was sure no gentleman an
set eyes on me without falling in love that minute : and so In:
“W to be a little vain. I know you think me ashockiv
wind, {rivalous girl: but then. you know, I don't nttrilﬁ
a ulna my personal attractions : I give some praise to their
dream and some to my exquisitely lovely rim—you must!
murmur—white gauze over pink satin—and to Mt!) mar
ad I necklace and hamlet of bwutiful. Inge pearls l "

“ I have no doubt you looked very charming: butshnuld L‘
delight you so very much?"

«Oh, no l—not that alone i but then, I was so much admin
ma I made so many conquests in that one night—you'd he at
mud to hear “—

«- But what good will they do you?"

"Whnt good! Think of any woman asking thnt ! “

’ "Well, I should think one conquest would be enough; 2
go much. unless the subjugation were mutual."

l'Oh. but you know I never agree with you on those poil
)1", unit a. hit. and I‘ll tell you my principal admirers—[h
tho made themselves very conspicuous that night and after:
he been to two parties since. Unfortunately the two nublem
Lad G—-— and Lord F—-, were married. or I might h
“descended to be particularly gracious to Men; as it me
did not : though Lord F——, who hams his wife. was cvide:
much struck with me. He nskr-xl me to dance with him twit
I; is a charming dancer, by-.hc~bye, and so am I: you c:
wink how well I did-l was astonished at myself. My lord r
m complimcnur)‘ tou—mthcr too much so in {net—ant
naught proper to be a little haughty and repellent; but Il
u pleasure of seeing his nasty. cross wile ready to perish \\

and \-exation“-——

"0h, .\liss Murray! you don't mean to say that ch 3 lb
“kl rally give you pleasure! Ilou‘cvur cross 0 ——

«Well, I know it's very “Tony—but never mind! I m(

.he‘ood some time—only don't preach now, there‘s :1 :0

 

 

nouns Gm. 363

cream Ilnvm‘ttoldyouhalfyet. betmesee. Ohl Iwas
going to tell you how my unmistakable admirers I hadz—Sir
Thomas Ashby was one,—Sir Hugh Ml:ma 3nd Sir
Wilmareoldcodgus. only ﬁt companions for pope and mm
SirThomuisyoung. rich. and my: hit an uglybeutmna-
Mar. however. momma saysl should not mind thataltera
few mths‘ Icqunintnnoe. Than. there was Henry Melthnn.
Sir Hugh's younger son: rather good-looking. und a pleasant
£ellowto ﬂirtwith: hut king-younger son.thalisall he is
good for; the: then was young Mr. Green. rich enough. but of
no family, and a great stupid fellow, a mere country booby '. and
that. our good rector, Mr. Hatﬁeld: un Amt: admirer he
ought to consider himself; but I far he has forgotten to number
humility among his stock of Christian virtues."

 " Was Mr. Hatﬁeld at the ball?"

" Yes. to be sure. Did you think he was too good to go?"

" I thought he might oonsider it nuclei-i "

" By no means. He did not profane his cloth by dancing!
but it was with diﬁculty he could refrain, poor man: he looked
asifheweredyingtousk my hand just for m m: and—oh]
by-the-hye—he't got a new cunte: that seedy old fellow Mr.
Bligh has got his long-wished-fat living st last, out! in gone"

"And what is the new one like?"

“ Oh. Mb a beast l Weston his name is. I can give ymxhi:
description in three words—an We, ugly. stupid block-
had. That’s tour. but no matter—enough of his now."

Then she returned to the hull. and gave me a further account
of her department there, and at the several parties she had ﬁne:
attended ; and timber particulars respecting Sir Thomas Ashby
and “2:55. Meltham, Green. and Hatﬁeld. and the ineﬁaeeahle
hmion she had wrought upon each of them.

“ Well. which of the four do you like best P" said I, suppres-
ing my third or fourth yawn.

“ I detest them all I " replied she, shaking her bright ringlets
in um scorn.

" That means. I suppose, I like them all—hut which most? "

" No. I really detest them all : but Harry Melihum is the hand-
mat und most amusing, end Mr. Hatﬁeld the clcverest. Sir
11mm the winkedest, and Mr. Green the most stupid. But
them I‘m to have. I suppose, if I‘m doomed to have any of
than, in Sir Thomas Ashby."

364 AGNES GREY.

"Surely not, if he's so wicked, and ifyou d‘ulike him?"

“01:, I dan't mind his being wicked: he's all the better for
that ; and as for disliking him—I shnuldn't gmdy object tubing
my Ashby of Ashby Park. if I must man-y. But if I could he
nlways young, I would be always single 1 should like to enjoy
myself lhmvughly. and noquet with all the world. till 1 am on the
verge of being called an old maid; and then, inescape the infamy
of that, after having made ten thousand conquests. Io break Ill
their hearts save one. by marrying same high-born. rich, induL
gent husband. whom, on the other hand, ﬁlly ladies were dying
to have."

" Well, a long as you emennin Lbs: views. keep single bynll
means. and never-marry stall: not even no escape the inﬁll”
ol‘ old‘midenhood."

....

CH AFTER X.
THE CHURCH.

"WELL. Miss Grey. what do you thinkof the new mac?"
asked Mis Murray, on our return fmm church the Sundly
me: the recommencemenl of our duties.

"I can scarcely tell." Wﬂ my reply: “ I have um even hard
him preach."

" Well. but you saw him. didn't you?"

" Yes, but I cannot pretend to judge of a nun's chum by
3 single. cursory glance at his face"

" But isn't he ugly? "

“ He did not strike me as being particularly so ; I don't d'ulih
that cast of countenance: but the only thing I panicularlynou'cd
about him was his style of reading; which W to use (00d
—inﬁnitely better, at last, than Mr. Hntﬁeld‘s. He ﬁnd the
Lesson: as it“ he were bent on giving full eﬂ'ect to everypnmg‘:
it seemed as if the most careless person and not have helped
amending, nor the most ignorant have failed to undusund:
and the prayers he read as it' he were not mding n alkali
praying em-nutly and sincerely from his own heart."

" Oh. yes, that's all he is good for: he can plod throngth
service well enough ; but he has not a single ida beyond it."

" How do you know?"

" Oh! l knew perfectly well: I mu an excellent judge in mi

AGNES GREY. 365

mutter: Did you see how he went out of church? stumping
dong—as il' thee were nobody there but himself—never looking
to the right hand or the left. nnd evidently thinking of nothing
but just getting out of the church. and. perhaps. home to his
dinner: his great stupid head could contain no other idea."

" I suppose you would have had him cast I glance into the
Iquire's pew," said I, laughing at the vehemenoe of her hostility.

" Indeed! I should have been highly indignant if he had
dated to do such a. thing ! " replied she, haughtily tossing her
head; then, after a moment's reﬂection, she added—" Well,
well! lsuppose he's good enough for his place: but I'm glad
I'm not dependent on Aim for amusement—that’s nlL Did you
see how Mr. Hatﬁeld hurried out to get a bow from me. and he
in time to put us into the carriage?"

" Yes." answered 1 ; internally adding. "and I thought it some.
what derogatory to his dignity as n clergyman to come ﬂying from
the pulpit in such eager haste to shake hands with the squire.
and hand his wife and daughters into their carriage: Ind. more-
over, I owe him a grudge for nearly shutting me out of it; " for.
in tact, though I was standing before his face, close beside the
carriage steps. waiting to get in. he would persist in putting them
up and closing the door. till one of the family stunned him by
ailing out that the governtss was not in yet: then. without a
word of apology, he departed, wishing them good-morning. and
laying the {column to ﬁnish the business.

Nata ku.—~Mr. Hatﬁeld never spoke to me. neither did Sir
Hugh or Lady Meltham. nor Mr. Harry or Miss Meltham. nor
Mr. Green or his sisters, nor any other lady or gentleman who
inquemed that church: nor, in fact. any one that visited at
Halon Lodge.

Mist Murray ordered the carriage again, in the afternoon. for
haselfund her sister: she said it was too cold for them to enjoy
themselves in the garden: and besides. she believed Harry Mel-
tlurn would be at church “ For," said she. smiling slily at her
on fair image in the glass. " he has been a most exemplary

Itlendant I! church these lust few Sundays: you would think
has quite n good Christian. And you may go with us. Miss
Gtey: Iwnnt you to see him; he is so greatly improved since
he returned from nhroad—you can't thian And besides, then
you will have an opportunity of seeing the beautiful Mr. Weston
IKain. and of hearing him preach."

366 tons Gm.

[did heuhimprmch. mdwusdecidedlyplmedwiththeenl-
geliceltruthofhi: doctrine. as well Is the eel-nae simplicilyd
his menner. and the clenrnus and force ofhis style. It warmly
ﬁshing to hearsuch nserrnon, cfterheingso hug-manned
to the dry. prosy discourses of the former curate. end the stilllu
odifying hmngues of the rector. Mr. Hatﬁeld would corue stil-
il‘ up the aisle. or ruther sweeping slang like I. whirlwind, with
his rich 5‘“: gown ﬂying behind him and rustling egginst the pet
doom. mount the pulpit like I conqueror ascending hB triumpﬂ
an then. sinkingon the velvet cushion in an Initude ofstudied
Irene, remain in silent prostration for n certain time ; then mutt:
over 5 Collect, and gahhle through the Lord's Player, rise, drn'
oﬁane bright lavender glove. to give the congregulon the beneﬁt
of his sparkling rings, lightly put his ﬁngers through his well-
mrled heir. ﬂourish e cambric handkerchief. recite a very short
wage, or, perhaps. a mu: plume of Scripture, u- heedpieet
to his discourse, and. ﬁnally. deliver n companion which, no
composition, might heconsidered good. though (er too studied
Ind too artiﬁcial to be pleasing to me: the propos’tiourwae
well laid down. the urguments logically cmdueted; and yet. it
we: rometima hard to listen quietly throughout. without me
alight demonstrations of dispprovel or impatience.

His favourite subjects were Church discipline. rites and ae-
monies, aposme succession, the duty of reverence and abdi-
enoe to the clergy. the atrocimu criminality cfdissent. the absolute
ucesity of observing all the forms of godlinss, the reprehensible
presumption of individuals who attempted to think for thenudm
in matters connected with religion, or lobe guidedby theirowuin-
tapretnticns of Scripture. and occasionally (to please his wen-Mt]
parishioners) the necessity ofdeferential obedience from the poor
to the rich—supporting his renxhns and exhortnticm throughout
with quoutions from the Fathers : with whom he append to be
hr better acquainted than with the Apostlesand Evangelism. Ind
whose importance he seemed to consider at least equal to theirs
But now and then he gave us an sermon of a dither-it order—what
mmewould callaverygoodonc; but sunlessind severe: repre-
senting the Deity us a terrible mkminster, rather than a benevo-
lent father. Yet, ls I listened, I felt inclined to think the melt
wu sincere in all he said: he must have changed his views, and
boom decidedly religious ; gloomy and austere. yet still devout.
But such illusions were usually dissipated. on coming out of

Auras our. 367

mkw‘hﬁ‘ﬂehwm'ﬁmdh
Wam.c,puhaps.thcllmysmanadu;p
“ﬂywh'uhkmmmmmhhdﬁm
thennﬂypecplesmnhingmdﬁnkﬁwﬂpamnmm
ﬂinthtlnu‘lnﬂntuld Bwadns'wld mkylside
mdnmhdﬂmdhupipe.rhidahdhuhsdﬂymb¢
for was a! thirty yen: an: Gauge Higgins would be
mmmdhisSahanhueningnnsandﬂnmhch
nmﬂbeudymbhdinﬂsmmminhis
mmdcauinhopedajwhlmntblmdny.

Mlmmhlcmdudelhtﬂn Winona“
Ihnsewho"hindhavyhunlms,udgdnousmhhune.ud
hythannpmm'sshaﬂdagwhﬂethqﬂmnd‘uumnot
mm‘ﬂhmdmﬁngasflndvho“mmem
«mammwmmmmgmm
hmdm" Imwdlplmsedmommu
lb:mmumﬂdhim,ufarnslmldu.ilmd
thesepuﬁculnu.

“WdLMis&q.vhtdoyondﬁnkolhimm?“nidMLu
Mum.uwemokmphosinmanhgemm

" No harm still,“ replied I.

"NohamVnpnud :he.in m "W'lm do you
man?"

“Imithinknomeofhinlhmldidbebm”

“No worse! I should think um indeed—quit: the canary!
Bhenauuﬂyinpomd?"

"OIIJH: Iaymwch indoui,‘ mpliedl: fox-1han dil-
mmnmrmrymmmmt,mmw~u
Thumﬂetnanhad ragerly come forward tospuaklotheyomg
India: xlhing he would hardly have ventured to do had uni:
motheran Fluent: he had liknwise politely landed them into
the carriage. He had not attempted to shut me out. like Mr.
Hmﬁeld; ncithcr, of course, had he oﬂ‘ered me his usislnnoe (I
should not hive «sampled it. if he bud). but us long as the door
remained open he had stood smirking and clnuing wilh them.
Ind (he: liked his but and dept-ted to hixownnhode: but I
had sandy undead him :11 dz: ﬁlm. My companion. haw-
evu’,h:db=nmotnavnm:ud.uwemlled alongthq
dbansedbawmthgmnot only his loob.wordn. sud mitts.
bateva {mum of his face, undeverymiclc of his tppud.

"You mm have him all to yourself. Roadie," slid Min

368 AGNFS GREY.

Mnﬁldantthecloseofthisdismssion; "Ilihehiinzlhol
he'd nuke a nice. jolly companion for me."

“ Well. you're quite welcome to him. Matilda." replied its
sister, in a tone of aﬂected indifference

"And I'm sure." continued the other. "he admire meqtiu
as much as he does you: doesn't he, Miss Grey?"

" I don't know: I'm not noqnzinted with his sentiments“

"Well. but he doe: though."

“My dear Matilda! nobody will ever admire you tillng
rid of your rough, Awkward manners."

"Oh. sluﬂ'! Harry Melthun likes such manners; and sodl
pope's friends."

“Well. you my mptivale old men. and younger sols; bu
nobody else. I am sure, will ever take I. fancy to you."

“I don't care: I‘m not always gruhbing after money. Iii
you and mamma. if my husband is able to keep n fewguol
horses and dogs. I shall be quite satisﬁed : and all the r: nu,
go to the devil I"

" Well. ifyoru use such shodting expressions. I'm m nor!
gentleman will ever venture to come near you. Really, Mi:
Grey. you should not let her do so."

" I can't possibly prevent it, Mis Murray."

' ‘ And you're quite mistaken, Matilda, in supposing that Hurt
Meltham admires you: I assure you he does nothing of tb
kin .“

Matilda was beginning an angry reply : but. hlppily. our join
ney was now at an end ; sad the contention was cut short hyth
batman opening the carriage door. and letting down the $91:
for our descent.

C H A P T E R X I.
THE CO'HAGERS.

As I had now only one regular pupil—though she contrived “
give me as much trouble as three or {our ordinary ones. am
though her sister still took lessons in German and drawing—I hm
considerably more time at my own disposal than I had ever barf
blessed with before. since I had taken upon me the govemtsﬁ
yoke; which time I devoted partly toyoorrespondenm with I“)

nouns GREY. 369

friends. partly to reading. study. and the practice of mimic, sing-
ing. to. partly to wandering in the grounds or edjaeent ﬁelds,
with my pupﬂs if they wanted me. alone if they did not.

Often, when they hnd no more agreeable occupation at hand,
the Misses Murray would amuse themselves with visiting the
poor eottagers on their futher's estate, to receive their ﬂattering
homage, or to bar the old stories or gossiping news of the germ-
lous old women ; or, perhaps. to enjoy the purer pleasure of malt
ing the poor people happy with their cheering presence and their
occasional gifts,” easily bestowed. so thankfully received. Some-
tima, I was mlled upon to accompany one or both of the sisters
in thee visits; and sometimes I was desired to go alone, to fulﬁl
some promise which they had been more ready to make than
to perform: to carry some srnnll donation. or read to one who
was sick or seriously disposed: and thus I made a few acquaint-
anoa among the cottagers ; and, occasionally, I went to see them
on my own account.

1 generally had more satisfaction in going alone than with either
of the young ladies : for they, chieﬂyowing to theirdd'ective educa-
tion, oomported themselves towards their inferior: in n manner
that was highly disagreeable for me to witness. They never, in
thought. exchanged planes with them; and, consequently. had
no consideration for their feelings. regarding them as an order
of beings entirely different from themselves. They would watch
the poor creatures at their meals, making uncivil remarks about
their food, and their mnner ofenting ; they would laugh at their
simple notions and provincial exprasions. till some of them
scarcely dun! venture to speak ; they would call the grave elderly
men and women old fools and silly old blackheads to their faces ;
and all this without meaning to attend. I could see that the
people were often hurt and annoyed by such conduct. though
their taro! the "grand ladies" prevented them from testifying
any resentment ; but It!) never pemeived it. They thought that.
IS these cottagers were poor and untaught, they must be stupid
nod brutish; and as long as they. their superiors. oondesoended
to tail: to them. and to give them shillings and half-crowns, or
artiela otclothing, they had n right to amuse themselves. even
at their expense; and the people mint adore them as angels of
light, oondesoending to minister to their necessities. and enlighten

tha'r humble dwellings.
' I made many and various attempts to deliver my pupils from

37o sexes our.

the delusive notion: without alarming thu'r pride—ambit
easily oﬂ'ended, end not soon amused—hut with little appuru
result; and I know not which was the more reprehms-ibleola
two: Matilda wu more rude and hoisterom ; but from Roadie
womanly age and ladylike exterior better things were expend
yet she was as pmvdcingly “reins and inconsideratean
child of twelve.

One bright day in thelast week oi'Febrnnry. I was walkingi
the park. enjoying the threefold luxury of solitude, e book, In
pleasant weether: for Miss Matilda had set out on her dail
ride, and Miss Mumywas gone in the enrringe with her manna
to paysomemorningmlls. But it struck me that I ought I
lenve these selﬁsh plasures. and the park with its glorious mm;
of bright blue sky, the Vat wind sounding through its yet leeﬂe
branches, the snow-wreaths still linguing in in hollows. in
melting fest beneath the sun. and the graceful deer browsing 0
its moist herbage, already nssunling the ﬁshness and Verdun-
spring—ind go to the cottage of one Nancy Brown. nwidov
whose son wn: atworkalldayintheﬁelds. Indwhnwuamide
with an inﬂammntion in the eyes; which ind for some do
incnpncitated her from reading: to her own greet grief. {out
was awomanoi‘nserious. thoughtful turn of mind. I occult
ingly went, and found her alone. as \sual, in her little. do.
dark cottage. redolent of smoke and conﬁned air. but u tidy-u
clean as she could make it. She was sated beside her littleﬁl
(consisting of u few red cinder: and nbit of stick), busily knitting
with a small sackcloth cushion at her feet. planed fortheanoon
modalion of her gentle friend the cat: who was seated duet-ea
with her long tail half encircling her velva paws, and her in!
closed eyes dreamin gazing on the low, crooked (ends.

" Well, Nancy, how are you to-day?"

" Why. middling. mig, i‘ myseln—my eyes is no better. hi
I'm a deal easier i' my mind nor I have been," replied she, risin
to welcome me with n contented smile : which I was glad tests
for Nancy had been somewhat afﬂicted with religious melandxol)
I congratulated her upon the change. She agreed that it was
great blessing, and expressed herself " right down thankful ic
its" adding, " If it please God to spare my sight. and make in
soulmnrendmyﬁiblengain, Ithink I ihnllbeuhaml
a queen."

" I hope He will, Nancy." replied I ; "and, mantimz, 1'1

AGNES any. 371

memdxeuitoyonnowud then. when I have a ilttietixne
in spam."

With uptsdon: oi“ gntefu! pimsure. the poorwonun moved
togetmeuchnir: but, a: I savedher the trouble, she bum:
henelfwith mining the ﬁre. and adding a few more sticks lathe
decaying embcn end then. taking her well-used Bible Earn: the
shelf, dusted. it umfuily. and gave it me. On my askingﬂ‘ there
muypanhiupansheshaﬂdiﬂtemetomd,sbeanswaed—

“Well. Min Grey. ii'it‘s Ill the same to you I should like to
um um chapter in the Fiat Epistle of St. John, um nys. '0“:
islannndhethaldwellnhinlme dwelleth in God, undGod
h m. ..

With A littleleuching, I found these words in the tannin
clupur. Whenlcune to thesaenth vane she interrupted me,
end. with needless apologies for such : liberty. desired me to
rudltvetysiowly. tintshemight uke it all in, and dwell on
ewradzhapinglwnnldexmseher. ushewubut; "simple
body. ‘

"Thevlsen panes," I replied. “might think over eaeh of
thue vases hubs-int. mdbeniithehetterforit; and Iwould
rather mi than slowly dun not."

Accordingly. I ﬁn'uhed the chnpleresslawly as need be, and
II the-me time u imprusivelyns I could; my-udiwrlmened
ml! “relatively All the while. Ind slnea'dy thanked me when I
hid dam I ‘1 still about half a minntetogive hertimeto
reﬂect upon it; when, somewhat to my surprise, she broke the
plus by “king me how I liked Mr. Watch?

" I dm’t know." Implied. I little startled by the middeunus
olthequuﬁon; "I thinklze preaches vetyweli."

"Ay, hedoam: nndmiitsweii we."

" Does he?"

“ He does. mybe. you haven't seen kink—not to talk to
him mull. yet?"

“ No. I never see any one lo talk Ila—except the young ladis
«the hell."

“Ah; they'tenlee, kindyoung indies; but they can't talk”
he does"

"Then be m to nee you. Nancy?"

"He doel. miss: and 1'se thankful for it. He comes to we
llmpcet bodies-dealt)an Mahler Bligh. orth’ Rector
Iva did: lll' it's well he does, ﬁat he's IIWI’l welcome: we

373 AGNES GREY.

an'l say as much for IE Radar—there 'nt ays thean
faredonhim. “'henheeomesinmahonse. xhqsnyhc's-z
'oﬁndsummul wronand beginaulling 'em nssoonul
mlh’ doorsrnns: hnlmaybehelhinisithisdnry-lih!
tell 'em what's wrong. And vayoﬁ he nuns o‘ pnrpu!
apron folk {or not coming to church. or not kneeling an' sud
ing when other folk does, or going to the Methody elupd,¢
snmmur o' charm: but I an‘tsny'axheevafnnd Inndxﬂ
wi‘ me Hemroseemeonoeorlwiu. alorcMnisterWanl
come. What Iwassoill unuhledinrnymind; and I: I hadd!
very poor health hauls. I made hold In send for him—audit
mine right enough. I was sore W, Miss Grey—M
God, it‘s owered now—but when I took my Bible, I could :6
no canton of it at ell. Thu ray chap“! '1: you've jmhu
reading troubled me as much as might—J He the: loved: ml
knowethnotC-od.‘ [Immedfarsolnetomwforlﬁellﬁn
IlovedneithetGodnorrnnn u I should do.and could mi
I tried ever so. And th' chapter aim. where it says—' He Ill
is born of God tannin commit sin.‘ And another placevha
it s:ys——' Love is the fulﬁlling of the law.’ And many, nan:
others. miss: I should {airwaryyon out. in was total] lbw
all. But all seemed In condemn me, nnd to show me ’a: I I1
no: in the right way: and as I knew not how loge! innit.
sen: our Bill In beg Maisrer Hatﬁeld to he as kind us look in at
me some day; and when he me, I telled him Ill my tmuhls

" And what did he say, Nancy E'"

" Why. miss, he seemed to scorn me. I might be mista'en—
but he like gave a sort of a whistle. and I saw a hit of a snail;
on his face ; and he said, ‘ Oh it's all stuff l You've been among
rhe Methodists, my good woman.’ But I lelled him I'd new
been near the Meme-dies. And then he said—

“ 'Well.' says he, ‘you must come to church. where yon'l
hear the Scriptures properly explained. inslead of silting poring
over your Bible at hame.’

“But I lclled him I always used coming to church when i
had my health ; hul lhis very cold winter weather I hardly duﬂl
venture so far—and me so bad wi' lh' rheumaxiz and all.

"But he says. ' Il'll do your rheumaliz good to bobble to
church: there‘s nolhing like exercise for the rheumaliz. Y0“
can walk about the house well ennugh : why can't you walk ‘0
church? The fact is,’ says he, ' you're getting loo {and of 10W

AGNES any. 37;

use. It's always easy to ﬁnd excuses for shirlting one's
thity.’

“ t then, you knmv. Miss Grey. it wasn't so. However,
I telled him I'd try. ‘But please. sir.‘ says I. "if I do goto
dutch, what the better shall I be? I want to have my sins
blotted out. sud to feel that they are remembered no more
Iplnst me, and that the laveofGod is shedabroad in my hart:
Illd if I an get no good by reading my Bible an‘ saying my
Fayus at home, what good shall I get by going to church?’

“ ‘The church.’ says he, ‘is the place appointed by God {or
H's worship. It‘s your duty to go there as often as you nan.
If you want comfort, you must seek it ln the path or duty '—u'
I deal more he said, but I cannot remember all his ﬁne words.
However. it all came to this. that I was to come to church as
oh as ever I could, and bring my Prayer-book with me. an' read
up III the sponsezs after the clerk, an' stand. nn' kneel. an‘ sit.
en' do III as I should. And tnlte the Lord‘s Supper at every
opportunity. nn’ hurken his sermons, and Minister Bligh's, an“
it '31:! be all right: if I went on doing my duty. 1 should get
A blessing It last.

" ' But if you get no comfort that way.‘ says he, ' it's all up.‘

" 'Then sir.’ says I. ‘ should you think I'm a reprobme?’

"'Why.' says he—he says. 'if you do your best to get to
heaven and can't manage it, you must be one of those that seek
to enter in It the strait gate and shnll not be able.’

" An‘ then heaslted me if I‘d seen any of the ladies 0' th' I-Iall
about that mornin‘; so I telled him where I hid seen the young
minis 3!: on th' Moss-lane :—-an' be kicked my poor eat right
was: th‘ ﬂounan' wentafter 'emasgnyasa lsrk: butlwu
very sad. That lsst word 0' his fair sunk into my heart. an' lay
thee like 3 lump 0' lend, till I was wary to bear it.

"Hm. I follered his advice: I thought he meantitsll
{or th' best. though he had a queer way with him. But you
know. miss. he's rich an‘ young. and such like cannot right
understand the thoughts of a poor old woman such as me. But
however. I did my best to do all as he bade rue—but maybe

l'm plaguing you. miss. wi' my chatter."

"Oh no, Nancy! 60 on. end tell me all.”

"Well. my rheumatiz got better—I know not whether wl'

M1 to church or not. but one frosty Sunday I got this cold
i' myeyu. Th' inﬂammation didn‘t come on all at ona like,

17.; AGNES cm.

but bit by hit—but I wasn't going In hell you about myeyls
l was Inlking about my trouble 0‘ mind :——and to tell the lml
Mia (inry, I don't think it was anyways cased by coming ll
chmll—mught to speak on. at least: I like got my healﬁ
bum ; but that didn't mend my soul. I hﬂrkened Ind m
and the ministers. and read an‘ read at my Prayer-book: mi
was all like sounding brass. and a tinkling cymbal: the sum
i couldn't understand. an' th‘ Prayer-book only served to shot
mohowwieked! was,that I could rad such good wordsu
new: be no better for it. and aliens feel it a sore labour an':
heavy task beside, instead of a blessing and a privilege as It
pod Christians does. It seemed like as all were barman
dark to Inf. And then, than dreadful words. ‘ MID, M Id
heater in. andshsll notbeable.’ Theylﬂteostheyﬁirdrk
up my xperriL

" But one Sunday, when Maister Hatﬁeld gave out about til
mm, i noticed where he said, ‘ If there be any of you do
«not quiet his own conscience, but requireth forth: comic
or counsel, let him come to me. or some other discreet am
Iraer minister of God's word. and open his grief 1' So, on
Sunday morning. nIore service. I just looked into the «my
im' hem a talking to th' Rector again. I hardly could {asth
no "Ike such a liberty. but I thought when my soul was at silk
I shouldn't stick a: a triﬂe. But he said he hadn’t time I
attend to me then.

"‘And, indeed,’ say: he. ‘I've nothing to say to you bt
who: I've said before. Take the sacrament. of course. and a
on doing your duty; and ii that won't serve you. naming will
So don't bother me any more.’

"So then. I went away. But I heard Maisler Walnu-
Mnister Weston was there. mi$—thls was his ﬁrst Sunday:
Hutton. you know, an' he was i' th' mtry in bk surplinr
klping th‘ Rector on with his gown."

“Yes. Nancy...

"And I heard him as}: Maister Hatﬁeld wholwas; u'h
A ‘Oh. she's a aiming old iool.’

ml l was \‘L‘l'y ill grieved, Miss Grey: but I went to m,
m mini 1 tried to do my duty as ﬂoretime: but I like got n-
"on. An' I even took xhe sncmnenl: but I {cltas though
m outing and drinking in my own damnation all th' till:
*1 went home. sorely lroublnd.

 

 

 

AGNES can. 375

3 mt next day. nfore I‘d gotten fettled up—lor indeed, this,
I'd no hurt to sweeping nn‘ fettling. an' washing pots; so l at
me down i' th' much—«Ibo should come in but Mnistzr Watcn l
I need siding stuﬁ‘ then, an' sweeping an' doing: and I u-
pacted he‘d begin a milling me for my idle ways, as Mnlster
Hatﬁeld would a’ done : but I was mistl'en : he only hid me good
unin' like. in I. quiet daoent way. So I dusted him a chair, nn'
[ﬁled up th' ﬁreplnce a bit; but I hadn't forgotten th' Rector‘s
“gas, may: I. ‘1 wonder, sir. you should give yaurself that
trouble, to some so far to See a. “canting old tool." such us me.’

"Hemedtnkennbacknt that: but he would thin pu'suade
me 'u the Rector was only in jat ; and when that wouldn't do.
M-ys. ‘Well. Nsncy. you shouldn't think so much about it:
Mr. Hatﬁld was I little out of humour just then: you knaw
we'le mneof ns patent—even Moss spoke unndvisedly with his
Hp. 31:! Writ dawn n minute, if you can spnre the time. and
tell mull you doubt: and lens; and I'll try to remave them.‘

"So I sat me down uncut him. He wns quite n stranger.
youknaw. Miss Grey. and even younger nur Maister Hatfield.
I hd'nva; att' I had thought him not so pleasant-looking as
him, nndmhernhitcrosish. at ﬁrst to look at: buthespnkc
so civil like—and when th' cat. poor thing. jumped on to his
hee.hem|ymkedha.andpvenhitafnunilezm!
thnnghtthntvnsagood sign; for once. whenshedidsototh'
W. be hacked her all. like as it might be in scorn and
Inge, pau- thing. But you un‘t expect a cat to know manners
lie 3 Chﬁsu'an, you km, Mus Grey."

“ No; of must: not. Nancy. But what did Mr. Waton say
that ?"

" He aid naught; but he listened to me as study nn’ patient
Sewldhe. u' never a hit 0‘ scorn nbonthim; solwenton.
nn‘ tailed him Ill. jut as I've telled you——an' more too.

" ' Well.’ snys he. ‘ Mr. Hatﬁeld was quite right in telling you
to persevere in lining your duty ; but in advising you to go to
chuck and attend to the service. and so on. he didn‘t mean that
was the whole of n Christian’s duty : he only thought you might
the lean: what more was to he done, nndbe led to take delight
in the exaciscs, instead of ﬁnding them n task and a burden.
And if you had asked him to explain these words that trouble
you so much, I think he would have told you. that it many shall
seek to enter in at the strait gate and shall not be able. it is

376 AGNES GREY.

their own sins that hinder them ; just as a mun with ulnrgesck
on his back might wish to puss through a. narrow doorway, and ’
ﬁnd it impossible to do so unlss he would leave his sankhehind
him, But you. Nancy. I dare say. have no sin: that you on!
not gladly throw aside, if you knew how?‘

“ ' Indeed, sir, you speak truth,‘ said I.

" 'Well.‘ says he. 'onI know the ﬁrst and great comm
mam—and the second. which is like unto it—on which two can-
mandments hang all the law and the prophets? You a] yol
cannot love God; but it strikes me that if you rightlyeousida’
who and what He is, you cannot help it. He is your tuba. your
best friend: every blazing, emything good. pleasant, crucial.
comes from Him ; and everything evil, everything you havem
to hate, to shun, or to fear. comes from Satan—Hi: eneuyls
wellasours. Andfortltircausewascodmanifestintheﬂﬂ.
that He might destroy the works of the devil : in onewordJ‘M
is LOVE; and the more of love we have within us. the nearu‘lt
me to Him. and the more of His spirit we pom'

"‘Well. sir.’ I said, 'if I oauelwaysthinlron thesethingsl
think I mlghtwell loveGod: but human Ilovemryneighhm
when they vex me. and be so eontmiry and sinful 1: man
'em is?‘

"'It my seem n hard matterlaays he. 'toloveonrneiglt-
hours, who have so much of what is evil about them. and who!
faults so often awaken the evil that lingu': within ourselvu; but
remember that H: made them. and H: love than : end who»
erer loveth him that begat, loveth him that '3 begotten list).
And iIGod so loveth III. that He gave His only begotten Son to
die (or us. we ought elso to love one another. But if you unnot
feel positive uﬂection (or those who do not are for you. you can
at least try to do to them as you would they should do unto you:
you can endeavour to pity their failings and excuse theitoﬂ'enoa.
and to do all the good you can to those about yon. And if you
nocustom yourself to this. Nancy, the very eﬂ'ort itself will make
you love them in some degree—tn say nothing of the goodwill
your kindnss would beget in them, though they might have little
else that is good about them. If we love God and wish to srve
Him. let us try to be like Him. to do His work. to labour for His
glory—which is the good of man—to huten the coming of His
kingdom. which is the peace and happims of all the world 2
haweverpowerlas wemayseem lobe, in doingall thegoodwe

AGNES GREY. 377

an through life. the humblest of us may do much towards it:
Indlet us dwell in love, that Hemaydwellinmand wein H' .
Theme happiness we batow, the more we shall receive. even
here: and the greater will be our rewnrd in heaven when we
Mfmn our labours.’ I believe. miss. them is his very words,
hr l‘ve thmight 'an over many a lime. An' then he took that
Bible. 311' read bit: here and (here. an' explained 'em as clear as
the day: and it seemed like u a new light broke in on my soul :
In' I felt fair a glow about my heart, an' only wished poor Bill
In' all the world could ha' been there. en’ heard it all. and re-
loieed wi’ me.

"All: he we: gone, Hurrah Rogers. one 0' th' neighbours.
nine in and wanted me to help her to wash. Itelled herI
couldn't just then. {or I hadn‘t set on th' politics for th' dinner.
norvalhed up th' breakfast stnﬂyer. So rhenIhe beganacall.
In: me for my nasty idle ways. I was a little bit wed nt first.
but I nevu- said nothing wrong to her : [only telled her. like all
in I quiet way, ’at I‘d had th' new person In scene; but I'd get
doneuquiekaseverloould. an' then me an‘ help her. So
lhenshexonened down ; and my hurtlikeas it warmed towards
hann' in a bit we was very good friends. An‘ mix is. Miss
01v. 'a soft answer turth away wrath; but grievous words
“it up anger.‘ It isn't only in them you speak to. but in
MK."

“Very ﬁne, Nancy, if we could always remember it."

“Ay. ihre could I "

“And did Mr. Weston ever come to see you again?"

" Yes, my a time; and since my eys has been so bad. he's
It an' read to me by the half-hour together: but you know,
his, hehas other folks to see. and olher things lode—God bless
in! An' that next Sunday he preached .mrk a sermon! His
at was. ' Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden.
mad I um give you rest.‘ and them two blessed verses the: follows.
.’on wasn't there. miss. you vms with your [ﬁends (hen—hut it
nae memhappy! And I am happy now. thank God! an‘ I
Ike a pleasure. new. in doing little bits 0' jobs for my neigh-
ours—snch as a poor old body 'a 'ta hall blind can do; and
my take it kindly of me. just as he said. You See. miss. I'm
nlttlng a pair 0‘ stockings now :——they're for Thomas Jackson :
:'l n qua-m: old body. an‘ we've had many a bout a: thmp-
3. one unit t' other; an“ at times we‘ve (littered sorely. So I

 

378 AGNES can.

   
   
  

thnuglit I couldn't do better nor knit him a plir o' m m5
ingx; nn' I‘ve {lit to like himaded mm. poorold mil
It‘s turned out just I: Mlkter Weston said."

"Well. l’m veryglad to see you so hnppy, Nnnqmull ;
wise: butlmustgonaw; than he wanteduthe hear-ii .
I; and bidding her good-bye, I departed. making in (1‘
again when I had time. and feeling neuly es hem uh
self.

At another time. I went to read to a poor lehoilru'hons'l
the lust stege of mnsnmption. The young ladie- had heal
see him. and somehow a promise of raiding bed been and
fromthem: but itwnsioomuch trouble.na theybe‘gedum
do it instead. I went, willingly enough: And thee too I '-
mtiﬁed with the praises of Mr. Weston. both from the sick llll
and h‘n wife. The former told me Lhnt be derived greet min
and lament from the visits of the new person. whn
unnetoeee him, and was “mother guussanot' man" toll.
Hatﬁeld; who betore the other's arrive! nt Horton hadnmud
then paid him a visit; on which ocmsions he wound tiny: ilﬂ
upon having the cottage door kept open, to ndmit the Mill
for his own convenience, without eonsng how it might injn
the sufferer: and having opened his Freya-hook end hen.in
read over a part of the Service for the Sick. would hurryeny
again : if he did not stay to administer some hush rebuke Inlhe
afﬂicted wife. or to make some thoughtless. not to any bullies.
observation, rather calculated to increase than the
troubles of the suﬁ‘ering pair.

"Whereis." said the man. "Minister Weston ’ull preywilh
me quite in a diil'erent fashion. nn' talk to me as kind lawn:
nn' oft read to me too. nn' sit beside me just like a htothc.”

"Just for all theworldl” exclaimed his wife; "an‘ about-
three wilt sin'. when he seed how poor Jet-n shiveed wi' cold. “1'
whnt pitiful ﬁres we kept, be end if wer stock of coal: was ml:
done. I telled him it was, an‘ we was ill set to get more: N!
youknow, mum. I didn‘t think 0' him helpinglls: but m.
he sent usnsnck o' coals next day; nn'we've hnd good EM
"er sin: nn' a great blessing it is. this winter time But M'l
his way. Miss Grey : when he comes into :1 poor body's hm: E
I n' sick folk, he like notice: what they most sundi‘ need
on: nn’ ifhe thinks they can't readin ya it theneln. he has
my! mom about it. but just gets it for '0"). An’ it isn't every-

m cm. W

hykﬂbih'ahsslinkuskms:hmbn
"Imhc'smlalalmliwcubuthahmh'lh‘m.
"Msmmghlkyﬂy."
Immﬁmaspdsdmﬂmwbhd
m nyld I vulgar km: by ck: amiable H‘s
Inapmhemsﬂumwdnhsuquh
ammrwam.w3.
hmﬁgmuugelﬂnuyhmand W601!
“lummumahnzmahhgwdwn
u-Ildﬂﬁunlhmymmy.mlmdydxwiw’.of
nymlib: (cl—Judy. ﬂaunﬁunmhlnnmh.
lunynrwy—r.¢neptdwin¢nyhﬂinunlsdmu
mﬂtummmrhCIIwuldopmmym
lidywkmymvhhuyhpedsymplhymrm
mm: “Mullah”:pran
vhhwhmlunﬂmhyns‘nglemldnalmchlinm-
m.arvhnsecumnxionwascalcnlaldwladsue
Bu..bmubppisdnnhdz¢:¢vho.nsﬁruleaﬂ
amhgluuyhanﬂedbymine. Mycolymp-niom
umm¢m,mmwgﬁ;
mmmm,msdhﬂemoamaldﬂ
mall-asumede Bumbeusuicmi
nsnchamdalsnsascﬁousevil.hmhinisimmediaueﬁuns
ultbmathalmlikdywm Never-new
haﬁﬁngthughlumxomebomwilhonthdsnchu
humane-unformemoammﬂyunhﬂn
madmdmskkmudﬁdenny.mmeyeadd
annexing
Phﬁmmmhmwmlgmzinﬂum
"Mum’smindsnndmnnas. WWII-sanctions":
rewrbeforeauqes.whmewordsmminmurs.vﬂl
nanny lad us. alde Against our will. slowly. radially.
npaceptiuy. whys. to w and spak a: they dA I will
mmlouyhowfar this inls‘srible powerof
m:butifonedvilisdmanmdmedwp¢nad¢m
an midlnne of intractable savages. unless h: bud pan:
1 hum than. 1 gmﬂy question wbexher. a the close of that
eriod.hewnldncthave becom.allust,nbarbaﬁnnhimnll.
.341 I, aslconld not nuke my young companions better. {and
Wylymuheywould make me worse—would gradually
ring nylaling:,hnbhs,cnpapixiu.mthe lcvcl of bdrm:

380 AGNES GREY.

without, however. imparting to me their lighl-W ml‘
cheerful vivncity.

Alrudy. I seemed to feel my intellect deteriorating, my hart
petrifying. my soul contracting: uud I trembled lest myvuy
moral perceptions should become deadened. my distinction: of
rlght and wrong confounded. and all my better faculties he sank.
at last. beneath the hunefui inﬂuence of such a mode of life. The
gross vapours of earth were gathering Mound me. and closingin
upon my inward heaven; nnd thus it was that Mr.»W§ton rose
at length upon me. appearing like the morning-5min my horimm
to save me from the fear ofutter darkna; and I rejoind thltl
hnd now a subject for contemplation that was nbove me. not
beneath. I was glad to see that all the world was not nudeup
oiBloamﬁelds. Mumys, Hatﬁelds, Ashbys, &c. ; end that limit
excellence was not a rueredream of the imagination. Wham:
hen: alittlegoodandnohnrmofapelson, itiseasynndplensnnt
toirnnginemore: inshon.itisneedlustonnnlyselllny
thoughts : but Sunday was now become a day of peculiar delight
tomeﬂwnsnowalmost hmken-intothebultenrnerintl:
carriage), {or I liked to bar him—and I liked to Ice him. we;
though i knew he was not handsome. or even what is tailed
agreeable. in outward aspect: but, oeruinly. he was not
ugly.

In stature he Ins n little. I very little. above the middle in;
the outline of his face would be pronounced too sqmre for beauty.
but to me it announced decision of character; his duh brown hair
was not carefully curled. like Mr. Hatﬁeld' . but simply bruhd
aside over a broad white forehead ; the eyebrows. I suppose.
were too projecting. but from under those dark brows the:
gleamed no eye of singular power, brown in colour, not large,
and somewhat deep-set, but strikingly brilliant, and full of ex‘
prssion : there was character. too, in the mouth. something that
bespoke n man of ﬁrm purpose and a habitual thinker ; and when
he smiled—but I will not speak of that yet. for. at the time i
mention. I had never seen him smile: and. indeed. his gennﬂ
appearance did not impress me with me ida of 1 man given In
such n reluntion. nor of such on individual as the cottages
dud-bed him. I had mly formed my opinion of him; 1nd. in
spite of M‘ss Murrny's objurgntions, was fully convinced that he
was a man of strong sense ﬁrm faith, and ardent piety. hut
thoughtful and stern : and when I found that, to his other good

AGNES GREY. 38:

qualities, as added that.of true benevolence and gentle, con-
siderate kindnus. the diseovery, per-hope. delighted me the more.
uIIndnotheenpreporedtnexpectit.

...,.

CHAPTER XII.
'm: snow“.

Tn: next visit I paid to Nancy Brown was in the second week
in March : for. though I had many spare minnts during the day,
I seldom could look upon an hour as enu'rely my own: since,
where everything was let! to the code of Miss Matilda and her
sister. there could be no order or regularity. Whatever occupa-
tion I chose. when not actually buied about them or their
concerns. I had, as it were. to keep my loin: glrded, my shoes on
my feet, and my stalf in my hand: for not to be immediately
forthcoming when called for. was regarded u a grave and in-
curable oﬂ'enoe: not only by my pupils and their mother. but
by the very servant. who came in hreathlss haste to call me.
enclairnin'g. "You're to go to the schoole dim”). mum—
the young ladies is WAITINGII" Climax of horror! actually
waiting for their governes l l I

hit this time I was pretty sure of an hour or two to myself;
for Matilda was preparing for a long ride. nnd Rosalie was
dissing for a dinner pony at Lady Ashby'l: no I took the
opportunity of repairing to the widow's cottage, where I found
her in some anxiety about her cat, which had been absent all
day. I comforted her with as many anecdotes of that animal’s
roving propensities as I could recollect. “ I'm feared 0' th'
“keepers,” said she, '- that‘s all 'at I think on. If th' young
gentlemen had been at home. I should a' thought the! d been
vetting their dog: It her, an' wort-led her, poor thing, as they did
In] n poor thing’s eat ; but I haven't that to he lured on now."
Nancy‘s eyes were better, but stﬂl far from well: she had been
rying to nuke I Sunday shirt for her son, but told meshe could
mly but to do a little bit at it now and then. so that it progressed
mt slowly. though the poor lad wanted it sadly. So I proposed
0 help her a little, after I had read to her, for I had plenty of
{me that evening. Ind need not return till dusk. She thankfully

33; Iters cm.

accepted the diet. “An‘yon'll be a bit 0' comp-n
min.“ sidshe; "Iliheoslfeellonesontewithoutn
when I had ﬁnished reading. and done the half of
Nancy's capacious brass thimhle ﬁtted on to my tin]
of: roll of paper. I was disturbed by the entrance of
with the identical cat in his arms. I now saw tl
smile. and very pleasantly zoo.

" I‘ve done you a piece of good service. Nancy.
then seeing me. he acknowledged my prance by s
I should have been invisible to Hatﬁeld, or any cm
of those putt: “ I've delivered your cat," he eonti:
the hands. or nther the gun, or Mr. Mumy‘s gun

“God bless yon, sit)" cried the grateful. old won
Veep forjoyu shenceived her favom-ite from his:

“ Takemolit," said he. "and don't let it gone
vnnen, forthegamekeeperswearshe'ﬂshootit ifhe
again: hewould havedoneso to-day. ifl haan
to stop him—I believe it is raining, Miss Glen" ad<
quietly. observing that I had put aside my work, 1
paring to depart. “Don't let me distnrbyon—l ah:
minutes."

“ You'll MA stay while this shower gets meted."
as she stirred the ﬁle, and placed anotherchnir bﬁid
there's room for all."

"I can see better here. thank yon, Nancy,” repli
my work to the window, where she had the goodnm
to remain unmolested, while she got a brush to rein
hairs from Mrr Weston's coat. carefully wiped the r
hat, and gave the cat its supper. busily talking a
now thanking her clerical friend for what he had
wondering how the cat ind found out the warrer
lamenting the probable eonsoquenoes of such a dis
listened with I quiet, good-natured smile. and at in
seat in compliance with her pressing invitations. I
that he did not mean to stay.

" I have another place to go to." said he, "andl
ing at the hook on the table) " some one else has i
to your"

“ Yes. sir; Miss Grey has been as kind as read m
an' now she's helping me with a shirt {or our Bill—hi
she‘ll be cold there. Won't you come to th' ﬁre. In

Acm GREY. 383

mm. Nancy. I'm quirewnnn. I must go «slam
ower is over."

nisl You said you could stupwhile dusk!"criedthe
goldwman. nner. Wswnseiaedhishnt.

sir," exclaimed she, " pray don't go now, while it nine

it strikes me I'm keeping your visimr away from the

you're not, Mr. Weston," replied I. hoping them was
in e fulsehood of that description.

sun!" cried Nancy. "What. there's lots 0' room !"
Grey." said he, halt-jestingly, us if he felt it nevus-ﬂy
2 the present subject. whether hehad unything particnlnr
not. “ I wish you would unite my peace with the squire.
I see him. He was by when I rescind Nlncy's cat. and
rite npprvve of the deed. I told him I naught he might
tre all his rabbits than she her cat. for which nudacious
he mated me to some rather ungentlemunly language;
r I retorted u triﬂe toe warmly."

awful sirl I hope you didn't fall out wi' 01' rnnister for
Natl he cannot hide answering again—an th' matter."
it's no matter. Nancy 1 I don‘t care about it. rally; I
in; mundvil; and I supr Mr. Murnyie leans-
use rather strong language when he's heated."

it; it‘s a pity! "

now, [really must go. I have to visit a place a mile
xis; and you would not have me to return in the dark:
:has nearly done raining now—so good evening, Nancy.
ning. Miss Grey."

. evening, Mr. Weston ; but don't depend upon me far
'aur peace with Mr. Murray. for I never see him—to

I you i it an't he helped then." replied he in dolorous
in: then with a peculiar half-smile. he added. " But
rd; I imagine the squire has more to npologise forthau
left the cottage.
an with my sewing as long us I could see. and then hide
Kid-evening; checking her tho lively grntitude by the
le assurance that I had only done for her what she would
:form,ifshehadbeeninmyplaceunrllinhers I
back to Horton Lodge. where hnviug entered the school-

384 norms GREY.

room, 1 found the tea-table all in confusion. the tray ﬂooded!”
slope. and Miss Matilda in a most ferocioul humour. ‘

“Miss Grey, whatever have you been about? I've hall -
halfanvhour ago. ma had to make it myself. and drink kl
alone! I wish you would come in sooner l”

" I‘ve been to see Nancy Brown. I thought you would Ii
be back from your ride."

" How could I ride in the min. I should like to know? T.
damned peltng shower was vexntious enough—coming on vb
I was just in full swing: and then to come and ﬁnd nobudy'l
to tea l—nnd you know I ain't make the tn Is I like it."

"I didn't think of the shower." replied I (and indeed. B :
thought of its driving her home had never entered my head) ,
“ No. of course: you were under shelter yourself, and y!
never thought of other people."

I bore her coarse reprth with astonishing equmimity. a!
with cheerfulnss; for I was sensible that I baddane morepd
to Nancy Brown than harm to her: end perhaps some uh
thoughts assisted to keep up my spirits, and input A relth
the cup of cold. overdnwn ten, and 1 churn to the other'i
unsightly table : nnd—I had almost slid—to Miss Men‘lhi
unnminhle face. But she soon betoolr herself to the mhh
and left me to the quiet enjoyment of my solitary meal.

   
    
 

CHAPTER XXII.
THE pxlunosns.

MISS MURRAY now always went twice to church, for she so land
admiration that she could not bear to lose a single opportunit1
of obtaining it ; and she was so sure of it wherever she

herself, that whether Harry Meltharn and Mr. Green were that
or not. there was certain to be somebody present who would not
be insensible to her charms: besides the Rector. whose oﬁcili
cepacity generally obliged him to attend. Usually. also, if the
weather permitted. both she and her sister would walk home:
Matilda, because she hated the conﬁnement of the carriage ; she.
because she disliked the privacy of it, and enjoyed the comp-n]
that generally enlivened the ﬁrst mile of the journey in walklnl

AGNES GREY. 385

m the ehmh to Mr. Green’s park-gates: near which con.
mead the prime mod to Horton Lodge. which lay in the
pot-he direction: while the highwly continued in a straight-
wd came to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh
=lthn.m. Thus there was always a chance of being wooin-
nied. so far. either by Harry Meltlnm, with or without Mix
:lthnm. or Mr. Green. with perhaps one or both of his sisters.
11 any gentlernm visitors they might have
Whether I Inlked with the young ladies or rode with their
rents. depended upon their own capricious will : if they chose
"take" me. I went; it', {arreasons best known to themselves.
eyehoutogoalone, I took mysentin the tarﬁnge. liliked
hiking better. but a sense of reluctance to ohtrude my presence
I nny one who did not desire it. always kept the passive on
me nd similar occasions : end I never inquired into the causes
lthelrvnrying whims. Indeed. this was the best policy—far
Inthmit and oblige was the governess’s part, to consult their
In plenum: m that of the pupils. But when I did walk, the
It hit of the journey wns genenlly I great nuisnnoe to me.
J none of the before-mentioned India and gentlemen ever
ntieed me. it was disagreuhle Lo wnllt beside them. Is illisten-
I: to what theysaid. or wishing to be thought one of them.
hiletheytalked over me. or hm; nndiftheireyes,inspeek-
u. chanced to fall on me. it seemed as if they looked on vmncy
uiltheyeithudid notseememrwereverydesiroustomnke
appear to. It was disagreeable. too. to walk behind. and
M appear to acknowledge my own inferiority; far. in truth, I
Insidered myself pretty nearly as good u the best of them.
Id wished them to know that I did so. and not to imagine that
bolted upon myself I: a new domestic, who knew her own
line too well to wnllt beside such ﬁne ladies and gentlemen as
eywere—thongh her young India might choose to have he:~
iththun. andeven condacend to convuse with her when no
war company were at hand. Thus-l am almost ashnmed to
ﬂies it—hut indeed I gave rnyself no little trouble in my en-
Ivonn (il' I did keep up with them) to upper perfectly uncon-
iens or reg-villus of their presence, as i! l were wholly absorbed
my own reﬂections. or the conteman of surrounding
jecu: or, if I lingered behind. it wes some bird or insect,
me tree or ﬂower. that attracted my attention, and having
ly mined tl-t, I would mun my walk alone. It a leisurely
N

 

mm GREY. 3:7

.hdviliﬁus. m um- prepared to expect them from anyone
Mnkofﬁmbdge. Yetthisdidnotmtme
hfaﬁngtﬂlﬂeumfmblein hispluenae', And I. pm-
thﬂwmypupilsnnmuchquickerpcemmbemn;
WM.“MLW6DHMMCBI§€WMMM
pu-wixhom. mocha-word. I might have repaid iLanhcur
uh: Nthedidnon Ammhaknpidwnﬂdnmmbut
nadhnlypeiorhim.

"wath hankﬁyuualone,"nidhe.

'Ya, Mmmidwizh more twee-blammpmy.”

«mam trouble yous-Inc ova-ulna them."

[AM my pace; but an! Inth regretted having done
In: my companion did no: speak; and x bud nothing in the
whiny-ad fared he might beinthewnepxedinmt.
hm.hvm.hebmke¢hepnmhyaskiuvixhamin
«ummmmwmrlwm

"Yancy mud," Imam: “wildﬂ'owenapeﬂaﬂy.”

“lﬁhﬂdﬂmf'u'dh: "(n-ha: Idon'lmeabom,
beanie I have no panicuhr associations connected with m—
mﬂmormo. Vii-canyon: {noun-inﬂow?"

"Prhnm.hine~belk.mdhabhlosoms"

“Notiﬁes?”

"No; because. as you say. I have no Wumu
“Hawaiians; fwhmmsweau‘olenmg the
HBndulkynmdmyhoma."

"hmhnpuconsolaﬁnnlo mun-m: born, Miss
Gag." m my mug-aim ma- xshoxt plan: “how-
own-mmtmmmﬁsieeddﬁnninmmin‘m
hi."

"Iti'aolnucbthtl «kid: I could not luv/m it." wild
Links-mum:th n! which I immdhmdympamdﬂu I
though: il man have maddesmddly- in!“

" Ohycs; yumﬂ;"nidhs,withalhan¢hmih. “The
BMW-Adam lift axe (mugher than you indium-dun
Myron:me has not {akhcwrouﬁxlyﬂaqupuned
“KW. Ycumightbemiserable withomahnumhm
mmmﬂdﬁue; andmtmnimblyuyaumppa: 1TH-
mmhlﬂm lndiu~mhbecz Ilitdesuellsin. hmagut
“dun-thunk. H ‘lmh man than nothingwilkd'murh
hmmmmwmwiusm'mm it. Ash ﬂu
numb-sol our Ema, mixnviul pant Mb

#8 m cm.

Mmmhwmm Emhlav
MmkrﬂmmhxsmkayixIEnmﬁnhza
mmmﬁsﬁndhmaﬂmﬁkﬁ
hmwdmhauy:mdatadayd
mdMﬁRMaHy'sphwﬂdn-kn
mwmmdimm
"lspaihunW-ym The-sad:
mqumdo-umlmfnﬂypamdddﬂ
mmmMm-mmmrgmmwum-
m:mawdmmwmam
hardtobnndmud;hnnovlhwnoh-n—mlmymnuﬂ
dgnﬂynymhhdrwuuﬂatmbysncham:—d
nandvemntbagokadnl-uandmdwyarly
M:andya.naoulylkve.hrlannuvhouydsim
dmmmmﬁrmﬁﬁ:WImm
Wmlmkﬂmmmummngeuhdu
ddxy,andsaeminhlﬂanupacaﬂygazhaudaound|hdr
MMManI-dofavnmm
. L.
"Youdon'lbovvhlhappinslisbdmeyuuyafsﬁdl:
'ywmwwonlyhlhemlofymrjtuuq.’
-'mbesxdhappincss."mpliedhe."smmu4y—dn
mandlbewiﬂlnbensefnl'
Wemappmchdastykmmhlhgwhhaw
Immncledwafarm-hmse.vbue,lsuppa,.\lr.wm
pnrpaudlomkehimsdl"usdnl:"lorhemndylonkldm
Mme.:ruuedthenyk,andu‘v¢rmdlh¢palhvithhismal
ﬁm.ehsdcuad.hvhgmclopandarhkmxdsaslwnﬂnud
mywmsealane. Ihadheardbefomthhehadlusthiswhu
nolmanymomhsbelarehcm Shethmnslhelastaml
duradhisurlyfriendnandhehadum lpiﬁedhim
from myhan: Ialmosl wcp‘ far sympalhy. And Ihis.! thought.
mindforlheshadeofpmme moughtfulnzsthatsofn-
quently clouded his brow. and nbuined for him the reputation
of a mores: Ind sullen disposixian will: the charitable Miss
Murray and all her kin. " But," though! I. " he is not so miser—
ableaslshmlldbeundersnchndeprivatiun:heleadsanactive
life; and a wide ﬁeld for useful exertion Ila before him. He
can male lriends;and hecannukeahom too,“ he pleases:
and, doubtless. he will plus: mine rim. God grant the perms
ol'lhal home maybewanhyofhischoice,nndmnkeiklhappy

AGNES GREY. 339

ane—nchshomeahedeservstohavel And hawdelightful
it would. be to"——- But no matter what I thought.

I began thk bookwith the intention of annealing nothing;
lint those who liked might have the beneﬁt of perusing a fellow—
creltm'e’s hurt: but we have some thoughts that all the angels
in haven are welcome to behold. but not our hrother-men—not
even the best and kindest amongst them

By this time the Grows had taken themselves to their own
abode. end the Mnrrays had turned down the private road.
whither I hastened to follow them. I found the two girls warm
innn nnlmated discussion on the mike merits of the two
young oﬁoers ; but on seeing me Rosalie broke oﬂ‘ in the middle
of a sentence to exclaim, with malieimu glee—-

" Oh. ho, Miss Grey! you're come at last. are you? No
spender you lingered so long behind : and no wonder you always
stand up so vigorously for Mr. Weston when I abuse him. Ah,
ha! lseeitnllnow!"

” Now, come. Mix Mumy, don't be foolish," said I, attempt-
ing n good'natured laugh ; "you know such nonsense can make
no impression on me."

But she still went on talking such intolerable stuff—her sister
helping herwith appropriate ﬁction coined for the occasion—that
I thought it necessary to say something in my own justiﬁcation.

"What folly All this is!" I exclaimed ” I! Mr. Weston's
roudhappened to be the same as mine for a few yards, and if he
chose to «change a word or two in passing. what is there so
rennrlnthlein that? I assure you, Inevet spoke to him before:

once."

,"Where? where? and when?" cried they eagerly.

" In Nnncy‘s cottage."

"Ah, ha! you've met him thae. have you? " exclaimed
Roslie, with exultant laughter. ” Ah ! now. Matilda, I’ve
found out why she's so fond of going to Nancy Brown's! she
goes there to ﬂirt with Mr. Watch."

" Really. that is not worth contradicting I—I only saw him
there once. I tell you—and how could i know he was coming?"

Irritant as I was at their foolish mirth and ventioms imputa-
tions. the uneasiness did not continue long; when they had had
their laugh out. they returned again to the mptain and lieutenant ;
and. while they disputed and commented upon them, my indigna-
tion rapidly cooled : the cause of it was quickly forgotten, lllt’ '

390 mm m.

mummnplwm Th:
aedednphpﬁandamudrhehnu;udnslu
muwmmhs.lhdhm.ueﬁugmn
munmmumiuwiﬁmﬁnglem
mumu,mmmdw.1renw
“Map-mutmtimpumume: “J
dme."lsmtosymunghm;ht.“mhﬂ.nn
mmmmumyhh'mydﬂfmm
“Mmboﬁmadmawh
nelw—"MMH,TMV&1-atdspinl'lsnir
“Immune. Ilseanedtomethnm's'ulﬁ
lannsnrMyiplmedfuramym;n-y.m
Lhaprincipal objeadmyhn’sdesim Iliglnl
dmdﬁngmpelf;mtml¢nmmemu
manhopeldidnotnskhnin. Ashrdlpn‘
keptmdmhaghuhmyrmmamq\
pletelylrilhaed. and ﬂu: huusemaid [1111.11151on
mdmmxmmmhmdm,
mmﬂ.lldwmkupthnlm

CHAPTER XIV.
'rns um.

TH: {alluring day was as ﬁne as the preceding one. 5
breakfast Miss Mndldm Raving galloped and blundau
I. few unproﬁuhle lessons. and vengeany thumped xhe
“but. in nae-dbl: human: with had: me and it. be
mun-uh not giveheraholiday,hadheukenhm
(noun: pincer of rum-t. xhe ynrds, the sums. and
kennels ; and Miss Murray was gone forth to enjoy a qni
with I m hshionable novel for her companion. leavi
mm lurdaxwozkuponnwner-ooluur drawi
lhdmmwdwdohhzr,andwhidn she insisted
ﬁnishing that day.

Aunth lay: liule mush terrier. It was the pr
Mi. Wilda; balm hated Minimal. Ind intended
nIeginaMhquapoibd. Itwnsranyu

was any. 39;

:kind: buuhexﬁmuiitwasﬁt {at nothing.“th
Immune toknow its own misuss.

mmshehad purchseditwhm Mus-gummy.
'nﬁmthnnomshonldwuchitbuthnsell; human
gwdmhehmudmhlsmeamﬁngmm
ielddwnymmbenﬂwdmukechugedk;
yaniulymrﬁnglheﬁuleunmefxmhfauyw
me. of cam-lethal obtained in Mam: am 1
ml: greatly valued. and looked upon a {at outh
:oublelhad hadwilh mind umpoorSmp’spneful
Whimwmy-hushwordmdmynspﬂeful
lpinch Milkmenmdwmhenanindn‘u
: " pm my.“ in consequence. or mashed to lame
w—hundwur. Butlwwcouldlbelp i2? Icauld
: the dog hate me, by cruel Ira-mam; and she would
rid-u himtykindness.

vex, while I thus sax, working any with mypeneil. Mrs.
lame. half-sailing. half-bustling, into the mom.
iGrey."she began,—“dearl hownan you sit st you:
aid: adnyas this?" (She thoughllwudoingizfnr
plasma.) " I wonder you dan‘x pm on your bonnet
mt with the young M6."

.nk. m'un, Mis: Murray is tending; Ind Mis Mnﬂda
ng heme]! with her dogs."

In would try munue MisMatﬂda yourself a little mole,
be wandnothedn‘mtoseekammtinthecomo
nipoldogsmdhotscs, andgroonu.somuchusheis;
u: would be a lime more cheerful and countable with
my. shewonldnmxooﬂengomderingintheﬁdds
oak in herhand. However, I don‘t want u: vex you."
he,:edng.lsuppose,um mycheelubumed end my
mbled with some unamiable emolion. " Do, pray. uy
= so touchy,——thue's no speaking to ynu else. And tell
uknovl whae Rnsilie'ugone: and whyshelikesto he
alone?"

saysshelihsmbeakmewhen shehasenewbookto

why can't aha read ninthepuk orthepzduP—why
he go into the ﬁeld: and Inn? Andhowisic thath
iddsookcnﬁndaherom? Shemldmelulveekhe'd
khan: byher sided! up Mas: Line; Mml‘m

392 norms our.

sure it was he I saw from mydmn‘ng-momwindow, walking-
hriskly past the park-gates. and on towards the ﬁeld the i
so freqlmtlygoes. I wish you wonld go andaeeifsheirtkt:
and just gently remind her that it is not proper for a young H]
of hernnk and pmpects to be wandering about by herstll'l
that manner, exposed to the attentions of any one that prem-
to addrrss her; like some poor neglected girl that has no [Ill
towalkin, and nofriendstotakecareofher: Indth '
her papa would be extremely angry if he knew of her truth .'
Mr. Hatﬁeld in the familiar manner that I far she dos; Ill .
-—ohl if you—if any governess hxd but half a mother's null- »
fulness——-half a. mother’s anxious care. I should be said Ii
trouble ; and you would see at once the necessity ofkeep’ngyrl '
eye upon her. and making your company ngreahle to—
Well. go—go; there‘s no time to be lost.” cried she, lea'ng tht
I had put away my drawing materials, and was waiting in ﬁt
doorway for the conclusion of her addrm.

According to her prognostications, I found Min Manny'-
her favourite ﬁeld just without the park; and. unfortunately.“
alone; for the tall. stately ﬁgure of Mr. Hatﬁeld was duly
sanntering by her side.

Here was a poser {or me. It was my dutyto interrupt ll!
rite—6421:: but how was it to be done? Mr. Hatﬁeld could an
be driven away by so insigniﬁcant 1 person as I z and to go and
place myself on the other side of Miss Murray. and intrude my
unwelcome presenoe upon her without noticing her cornle
was a piece of rudenes I could not be guilty of: neither lull]
the courage to cry aloud from the top of the ﬁeld that she Ins
wanted elsewhere. So I took the intermediate course ofwalhnx
slowly. but steadily towards them ; racking, if my approach
failed to scare away the bean, to pas by and tell Miss Murray
her mamma wanted her.

She certainly looked very charming as she strolled, linga'ing
along under the budding horse-chtstnut trees that stretched thu'r
long arms over the park-palings. with her closed book in one
hand, and in the other a graceful sprig of myrtle. which served
her as u very pretty playrhing; her bright ringlets gaping po-
fusely from her little bonnet, and gently stirred by the brunt.
her fair cheek ﬂushed with gratiﬁed vanity, her smiling blue
eyes, now slyly glancing towards her admirer, now gnn'ng
downward at her myrtle sprig. But Snap, running before me.

 

AGNES GREY. 393

tempted her in the midst of some half-pert. half-playful re-
triee. by atehing hold of her dress and vehemently tugging
rerun; till Mr. Hatﬁeld. with his cane, administered a re-
mnding thwuch upon the animal's skull. Ind Sent it yelping
salt to me, with n clamorous outu-y that afforded the reverend '
aitlelnnn great amusement: but seeing me so near. he thought,
mppose. he might cs well be taking his departure; end as I
looped ta caress the dog. with ostentatious pity to show my
liscpproval of his severity. I heard him sly—-

“When shall I see you min. Mis Murray?"

“ At church. I suppose." rcplied she. "unless your business
chances to bring you here again. at the precise moment when I
heppen to be walking by."

“ I could alwcys manage to have business here, if I knew
precisely when and where to ﬁnd you."

“But if I would. I could not inform you, for I am so im.

mahodicnl. I never can tell tc-day what I shill do to-morrow."

"Then give rue that. meantime. to comfort me." said he. half
fairieg and hnlfin earnest. extending his hand {or the sprig ot
myrtle

“ No. indeed. I shnn‘t."

"Dal pmydol I shall be themost miserableal'men ifyou
don't. You cannot be so cruel as to deny me a favour so easily
stunted, and yet so highly prized l" pleaded he. as ardently cs
ifhis life depended on it.

By this time. I stood within a very few yards of them, im-
pliently waiting his departure.

"There then! take it and go." said Rosalie.

He joyfully received the gift, murmured something that made
he blnsh and toss her head, but with a. little laugh that showed
her displmlure was entirely affected; and then with a courteous
snlntation withdrew.

" Did you everseesuch a man. Miss Grey ?" said she. turning
tame: “ I‘m so glad you camel I thought I never should get
ﬁt! of him: and I was so terribly afraid of papa seeing him."

" HIS he been with you long?"

“ No, not long. but he's so extremely impertinent: and he’s
clays hanging about, pretending his business or his clerial
duties require his attendance in these parts. and really watching
For poor me. and pcuucing upon me wherever he sees me."

“ Well. your men-ma thinks you ought not to go beyond the

n a

394 nouns cunt.

park or gardm without some discreet. Mronly pet
to neoornpnny you. and lnoep 05 all intrude: Shed
Hatﬁeld hurrying past the park-3:15. and forthwith
uwlthinmcﬁonsmsockmupudmhhem
likewise to worn"—

“Oh, mamm's so tiresome! As if I couldn't t
myself. She bothered me More about Mr. Hatﬁ
toldhu'shemightmme: Imshanldforgetn
swim: for the mos delightful nun the: eva- bruth
he would go down on his knees tomorrow. Ind in:
be his wife, the: I might just show ha how mishk
supposing that 1 could m— 0h,it provoku I
think that I couldbesucbnfool as to fallin (we!
beneath the dignity of a woman to do wch a thing
detest the word! as applied to one of arr sex. Iihinl
insult. Apreﬁereooe I m‘gluuhiowledge: but in
like poor Mr. Hotﬂeld. who has not seven bundle
N55 himself with. llike to ulk to him. because I!
end musing—I wish Sir Thomas Ashby wete h:
buides, I must hnve :mMy to ﬂirt with. and no a
the sense to comehere; and when we go out. mu
me ﬂirt with Inybody but Sir Thomas—if he‘s thee:
“there. I'm bound hand and foot. for fear motel
go and make up some exaggerated story. and put it il
that I'm engaged. or likely to be engaged. to son)
or. what is more probable. for fear his nasty old me
see or hear of my ongoings. and conclude that [‘12: n
for her excellent son: as if the said son were not
stamp in Christendom : and as if any woman t
decency were not a world too good (or him."

" Is it really 50. Miss Mutiny? Ind dos your m
it. and yet wish you to marry him? “

“To be sure she does! She knows more again
1do.lbelieve: shekeepsitirornmalestlsho
outraged: not knowing how little I care about 5
For it's no great matter. really : he‘ll be all right
married.ulnamma says; end reformed aka llll
hnshnds, mated) knows. I only wish he were in
M: I“ I think about : but then there's no choice
mtry: and papa will not let us go to tendon“—

" But I should think Mr. Hntﬁeld would be far b1

AGNES any. 395

" And no he would, if he were lord of Ashby Park—there‘s
tot-Wont: butthefactis,lnuthaveAshbyPuk,
whoever Alum it with me."

"But Hr. Hitachi thinks you like him all this time: you
don't conﬁde! hm bitterly he will be disappointed when he
Inch Mum“

“I‘No, indeed] It will be I W punishment tor his pie-
Iunptian—lneevu dan‘egto think I could like him. I mould
ujoynothiugnmudiulining thevdlfmmhiseyu.”

"The loom you do it the better then."

“No; Itellyou, I llketoamuae myselfwithhim. Battles.
hedomaﬁmﬂythinkllihhim. lukexoodweofthat:
you don‘t know how cleverly l mange. He may mm
thinkhluniu’m me to like him: for which I shell punkh
him I: he deserves."

"Well. mind you don't give too much masonic: mh pro-

'I III." Ieplied I.

Mlﬂmyexhrmation: weleinvain: theyonlymldehet
whet more noticin todisgltise her wish: Inth thoughts
tonne. Sbetdked no more to me abouthekector; butl
Wanth mind, it'not herheutnvu ﬁxed uponhim
:61]. and that “I: was intuit upon obtaining mother interview:
b: W. in compliance with her mother‘s inquest. I we: now
Minted the companion of her rumbles for I time, lhesﬁll
W in wandering in the ﬁelds and lanes that hyin the
m maimin In the road; Ind, whether she hiked tome
caulthehooh she mied in her hand. shekeptcontinually
puln‘mbokronndhenol-gueupthemadtoeeeifuyone
“looming; Indii'a honeman trotted by.lem1ldtellbyhs

‘ ablne of the poor eqmtrian, whoever he might he,
{hit Illa hated him ham he was not Mr. Hntﬁeld.

"Surely." thought I, "the is not so indifferent to him «the
halievuluselfwhc, orwould have ather: to belimher; Ind
he WI anxiety i! not so wholly causeless as she ﬁrms."

'nuee day: posed “my. And he did not mike his appellant.
On the Molina! the fourth, as we were walking beside the

purl: paling: in the memorable ﬁeld, ench furnished with a book
(for I Ilwuys took am: to pxovide myself with something to he
doing when she did not require me to talk), she suddenly inta-
I'Ipd my studies by exclaiming—

“0h. MinGreyl dobeeakindutogoandseeMukWond.

395 AGNES GREY.

and take his wife halfom from toe—I should have given or
sent its. week ago, but quite forgot. There I " said she. W
me her purse, and spetking very fast—" Never mind gating i
out now. but take the purse and give them what you like ; Imld
go with you. but I want to ﬁnish this volume. 1']! come Ind
meet you when I've done it. Be quick. will yon—und—dt.
wait; hadn't you better read to him I bit? Run to the house
and get some sort of a good book. Anything will do."

I did an I was desired; but. suspecting something from ha
hurried manner and the suddennss of the request, I just gland
back before I quitted the ﬁeld, end thuewas Mr. Hatﬁeld about
to enter at the gate below. By sending me to the hanseﬁxl
book. she had just prevented my meeting him on the rad.

"Never mindl" thought I. " there‘ll be no great hamdone
Pom- Mark will be glad of the half-crown. and perhaps of tie
good book too ; and if the Rector dos stal Miss Rosalie'n hurt.
it will only humble her pride :1 little : and if they do get martini
at last, it will only save her from a worse fate; and she will be
quite a good enough partner {or him. and he for her."

Mark Wood was the consumptive labourer whom I mention!
before. He m now mpidly wearing away. Miss Mnrny. by
her libemlity, obtained literally the bleming of him that mind!
to perish ; for though the half-crown could be of very little sﬂv'ﬂ
to him, he was glad of it for the sake of his wife and t‘JtildtaJV
so soon to be widowed and {atherlnn After I had sn n {:1
minutes, and read a little for the comfort and ediﬁcationof him
self and his ntﬂicted wife, I left them ; but I had not prowedod
ﬁfty yards before I encountered Mr. Weston. apparently on his
way to the same abode. He greeted me in his usual quiet, on»
affected way, stopped to inquire about the condition of the sick
man and his family, and with a sort of unconscious. brotbedy
disregard to ceremony. took from my hand the book out of which
I had been reading. turned over its pugs, made a few briefbut
very sensible remarks. and restored it : then told me about some
poor sufferer he had just been visiting. talked a little about
Nnucy Brown, made a few observations upon my little rough
friend the terrier. that was {risking at his feet. and finally upon
the beauty of the weather, and departed.

l have omitted to give a detail of his wora. from a notion that
they would not interest the reader as they did me. and not be‘
cause I have forgotten them No: I remember them well: {or

AGNES GREY. 397

I thought thaverandoverngniuin thewuxseofthatdnyand
many succeeding ones. I know not how alien: and recalled every
intonation of h'u deep, clar voice, every ﬂash of his quick. brown
eye, and every glean: of his plmsant, but too transient smile.
ﬁnch a eonfasion will look very absurd. I fear: but no matter: I
have written it: and they that read it will not know the
writer.

- While I was walking along, happy within. and pleased with
at around, Miss Murray me hastening to meet me : her
hwylnt step, ﬂushed cheek. and radiant smilm showing that
she, too. was happy, in her own way. Running up to me, she
but her am through mine, and without waiting to recover
hath, begun—

"Now, Miss Grey. think yourself highly honoured, for I’m
come to tell you my news before I've breathed a word of it to
any one else."

“Well. what is it?"

" 0h, nub newsl In the ﬁrst place. you must know that Mr.
Hatﬁeld came upon me just after you were gone. 1 was in ml:
I way for fear papa or mamma should see him; but you know I
nouldn't call you back again. and so I—oh. deal-l I can‘t tell
you all about it now. (or there's Matilda, I see, in the park. and
1 must go and open my budget to her. But, however. Hatﬁeld
In: most uncommonly audacious, unspakahly complimentary.
and unpreoedmtedly lender—tried to be so. at least—he didn't
succeed very well in Ilmt. because it's not his win I’ll tell you
all he said another time."

" But what did you say—I‘m more interested in that?"

"I'll tell you that. too. at some future period. I happened in
be in I very good humour just then; but, though I was com-
plaiunt and gracious enough. I took are not to compromise
myself in any possible way. But, however. the conceited wretch
chose to interpret my amiabilily of temper his own way. and at
last): mined upon my indulgence so far—tht do you think?
——he acmﬂyﬂmade me an offer l "

I "And you "—

' " I proudly drew myself up, and with the greatest coolness a-
prsledmy astonishment at such an occtmenoe. and hoped he had
seen nothing in myoonduct to justify his expectations. Yonshould
have not how his countenance fell! He went perfectly white in
thine. I Assured him that I esteemed him and all that. but

398 AGNES GREY.

coddnmpomhlyamedemhhproposlnudil‘ldnm
and mm could never be brought to gin tha'r mt." ‘

" 'But it'tlwy outld.‘ said he. would younhe wand-'2'

"'Cedninly. Mr. Hatﬁeld: ! replied. with a cool deck“
thick queued all hopeak once. 0h. ifyouhadaaahowdmd-
iullymoniﬁedhewu—hnwaushedto theeanhbyh'nd'n-
appointment! really. I almost pitied him myseli

"One more dspaue mania. however, he made. AMI
silence of considmhle duration. during which he struggled lob!
aim. and Imbegruhiorl feltasu'ongmsitytohn'h—
which would havenlined all—heuid, with the ghost dam-

" ‘But tell me plainly. Miss Murray. in had themlthafﬁ‘
Hugh Mcltham, or the ptuspects of his eldst son. would”
still refuse me? answenne truly, upon your houow.‘

"'Cmainly.’ said L 'Thst would malt. no diﬂ'uent:
whatever.’

"It was a greai lie, but he looked so conﬁdent in his on
animations still, that I clan-mined not to leavehim one m
uponanotha'. Helookedmeﬁillinlhehce;hulkqtly
countenaneesowell that he could not imagine Imnyilgany-
thing more than the actual truth.

" 'Then it's all over, lsuppose.'heuid.looltingasifhecuuﬂ
havediedmthupotwithvexation-ndtheinmaityofhisdqak.
But hem anyyuwelludis-ppointed. Mmhﬂﬁ-
lugsounspeakxhly. andtherewas l, thepltllescause ofllll.
so utterly impenetrable to all the artillery of h‘u looks and met
so calmly cold and proud, he could not but feelsmexuenmti
and with singular hith he began—-

" ‘ I certainly did not expect this. Miss Murray. I might say
somethingaboutyourpustcondm.and thehopesyuhaveled
me to foster, but I forbear. on «Miami'—

" ‘No conditions. Mr. Hatﬁeldl' said i. not truly indignant
at h”: moles-:2.

" ' Then let me begit u a favou,‘ hemplied, lawetinghi: vote
at once. and taking a humble! tone: ‘let mental that you will
not mention this atfair ta any one whatever. ll‘you will keep
silence about it. there need be no unpleasantnesx on eithe- side
walking. I mean. beyond Whll is quite unavoidable: for my
own feelings I will endeavour tokeep to myiell‘, it 1 cannot-uni-
hilnte them—d will try to forgive, if I cannot forget the cause of
my suﬁerings. l will no: suppose, Miss Mum. thlk you he!

Acnss GREY. 399

an deeplyyouhaveinjuredme. [would not Inveyou um
(it; butlf. hudditiuntotheinjuryyouhnveulrwdydonem
qua-don me. but whether innocently or not. you In: done it.
all! ifytm mid to it by giving publicity to this unionmte um,
rrnnningitdallqouwill ﬁnd thztltooesnspakmndthough
vou warned my love. you will hardly scorn ury‘———

" He stopped, but he bit his Noodles lip, and looked st)
m-lbly ﬂame that I was quite frightened. However. my pride
upheld the stnl, and I answered disdainfully—

" ‘ I do not know what motive you suppoa I could have for
ruining it to anyone. Mr. Hatﬁeld; butif lwere disposedto
do”. yonwouldnnt determehythruts; anditismlythe
pm of a gentleman to attempt it.‘

" 'Pnzdou me, Miss Murray,‘ said he, ‘1 have loved you so
intensely—I do still adore you so deeply, that I would not
willingly oﬂ'end you; but though I never have loved, and never
can laveIny woman as I have loved you. it is equallycertajn
that I never was so illAtreated by any. On the contrary. I have
always foundyour sex the kindest and most tender and obliging
of God‘s elation, till now.‘ (Think of the conceited fellow
suing that 1) “And the novelty and harshness ot‘the letsanyou
have taught me today, and the bitterness of being disappointed
in the only quarter on which the happiness of my life depended.
must excuse any appannoe of asperity. If my presence is dis-
agreeable to you, Miss Murray.’ he said (for I was looking about
mewshovhowlittleImredforhiru.sohethwghtlwustired
of him. I supIpoSe).—' if my presence is disagreeable to you,
Miss Murray, you have only to promise me the {avourl named,
and I will relieve you at once. There are many ladies—some
even in this parish—who would be delighted to accept what you
have so sooml‘ully trampled under your feet. They would be
mutually inclined to hate one whose surpassing leveling: has so
mmplttely stranger] my heart from them and blinded me to
their attractions; and a single hint of the truth from me to one
of these, would be suﬁicient to raise such a talk agliizst you as
would seriously injure your prospects, and diminish your chance
of success with any other gentleman you or your rumours night
daizn to entangle.’ -

" ‘What do you mean, sir?’ said 1. ready to stamp with
passion.

" 'I mean thatthlsaﬂairfrvm beginning round appears»-

400 mm GREY.

Mamdmﬁanyﬁehndk—aﬁa‘
asymmﬂﬁndkmhu’bmmhlmhﬂandw
theta”: Myiihlhcaddiﬁmandaaguaﬁnsdyﬂ
mm, wha'ouldheloog'admpﬁﬂh ﬂaming?!
odyﬁvethmahndkloix. Bull
dagmﬂlulnotmdwsyﬂaﬂgthnwdbm
Mdieslnﬂmmpemylips.

"'Vle, well. I won't nation iL' 5121 I. ‘Ym myrrh
up“: myﬂcnce. ilthatunakrdyuuanyoanm'

“You‘re-nix it?"

"'Ya,’ Instead, for l mmmgetridofhimm.

“'FaranLIhml'saﬂl-eJx-amosxmlnn-sﬂm:
umwi‘halookwhaeprideninlysuuglu‘lugaimdspﬁ.k
madmath away: longing.nodouln.toguhune.lhtk
mi‘ht ihm himself up in hisstudy and cry—if he dosa‘t lust
into Ian More he gets them"

"Btu you hav: hrolun your promise almdy,‘ said Lilli”!
horriﬁed at her paﬁdy.

"Oh! it's only toyou; I know you won't mam iL'

"Certainly. I shall not: butyousayyoumgoingtotdlyw
sister; mashgwintcuywrbrotberswhaththamud
Brownimmediatclnyyoudomucnhaymsdhudﬁwn
willblawnit,arbethemcansafblamningitthrwghoutdl

" No. indeed. she won't. We shall not all berm all. unis
ll be under the promise of the strictest

“But how canyauexpect hartokeephcrmiscsbettu'thn
her more enlightened mint-55?"

“ Well, well, sh: shan't [war it thin," Sid Mis Mumy, mm:-
what snappishly.

“ But you will tell your mamma. ol'couxsc," pursued I ; “and
the will tell your papa.” '

"Of comm! shall tell mamma. that is thevery thing that
pleases me so much. I shall naw be able to convince lur hm
mistaken she was in her fears about

"0h. nun it, is it? I was wondering what it was that
delighted you so much."

"Yes: and another thing is, that I've humbled Mr. Hatﬁeld
locharrm'ngly: and another—why. you must allow me some
than: of female vanity: I don't pretend to be without that mosl
essential attribute of our sex—and if you had seen poor Hatﬁeld's

 

 

J

I
r

E:

AGNES GREY. 40!

in in making his ardent declaration, m his

“thing proposal. and his agony of mind. that no effort of

Ili'leoould conceal. on being refused, you would have allowed

Ihdsomeeame tobegratiﬁ ."

"The grater his agony. I should think, the less your cause

for gmiﬁmﬁon."

"Oh. nonsense I" cried the young lady, shaking herself with
ration. “You eitha can't understand me or you won't. II
I had not conﬁdence in your magnnnimity. I should think you
envied me. But you will. perhaps. comprehend this cause of
plum—which is as great “any—namely, that I am delighted
with myself for my prudence. my self-command. my hem-Hess-
has. ifyou plase. I was no: a bir taken by surprise, not a. bit
confused. or awkward, or foolish; I just acted and spoke as I
ought to have done, and was completely my own mistress
throughout. And here was a man, decidedly good-looking—
Juue and Susan Green call him hewitchingly handsome—I
suppose they're two of the ladies he preiends would he so glad
so hive him ‘, but. however, he was mainly a very clever. witty.
agree-bk companion—not what you call clever. but just enough
to make him entertaining: and a man one needn't he ashamed
oi Anywhere, and would not soon grow tired ol’; and to oonl'tss
mecuth. I rather liked him—better even, of late. than Harry
Melanin—and he evidently idolised me; and yet, though he
nose upon me all alone and unprepared. I had the wisdom and
the pride. and rhe strength to refuse him—and so scornﬁilly and
coolly us I did: Ihavegoodreason tobeproudohhntl"

" And are you equally proud of having told him that his having
the weath of Sir Hugh Meltham would make no diﬂerenoe to
you when that was not the case; and of having promised to tell
no one of his misadvenrure, apparently withoui the slighkest
intention of keeping your promise?”

"Ofooursel whatelse could I do? Youwould not have had
rue-but I see, Miss Grey. you're not in 1 good temper. Here's
Mnt‘ddn; l'll see what she and mm have in say about i "

She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, and thinking,
no doubt. that I envied her. I did not—at least, I ﬁrmly believed
I did not. I was sorry for her; I was amazed. disgusted at her
beards; unity : I wondered why so much beauty should be given
to those who made so had a use of ii. and denied to some who
would nuke ii a beneﬁt to bark themselves and others.

    

402 AGNES cxsv.‘

Buncodmbesglcmdudd 111mm. Isuppose,some
masvainmssalﬁshdndmheanlasuehclignniperhnﬁ
summawa topunishthen.

.99..

CHAPTER XV.
m WALK.

"Ohm! I wishHmﬁeld had notheensopedpitauel‘nirl
Rosalie next day at four ma, as. with a ponenwns yawn. she
laid down he: worsted-work and looked lisdssly townde the
window. " There's no inducemenl to go out mm; and nothing
tolooltfarwnn‘lto. Thedayswillbesolonganddullwhenlhue
are nopenis menliven them; and Wmmhmthkwﬂu
next eithet, that I know of."

" Pity you were so ms to him." observed Matilda. to whom
this lamenmtion was addxused. " He'll never mm min: Ind
Isnspectyouliked him aim-all. Ilwped yanvvould hnnuhn
himforyotn'beau. nadieﬁdczrﬂarrytome."

"Humphl my but: must bennAdnnisindeed. Mlmda. Ih
admined ofall beholden. if I an: to beconlmledwithhimnlme.
l'n: sorrle lose Hatﬁeld, I canfese: but :he ﬁrst decent nun.
wnuhuafnan, thatcomemsupplyhisphmwillheme
than Vulcan. 11': Sunday to-mortow—l do wonder haw he'ﬂ
look. and whether he'll be able to go through the service. Host
likely he'll pretend he‘s got a cold and make Mr. Westm do
it all."

" Not he I " exclaimed Matilda, somewlm contemptnonsly.
"Fool as he is. he's not so suit as that 00w to."

Her sister was slightly offended ; but the event pmved Matilda
was right: the disappointed lover pet-{mad his puma! dntits
as usual. Raslie. indeed, afﬁrmed he looked very pale and de-
jected; he might be a little paler; but the diﬂ'exenue. it any. was
scarcely perceptible. As for his dejection, I certainly did no:
but his laugh ringing from the wily as usual. nor his voice
loud in hilarious discourse ; though 1 did heat it uplifted in rating
the sexton in a runner that made the congregation suue; and.
in his transits to and (mm the pulpit and the communion-table
therewa: mom of solemn pomp, and less of that irreverent. sell-

AW any. 40;

conﬁdent, or lather self-delighted impel-Eminent with which he
mally swept along—that air that seemed to say. "You all
mamdadoteate. I km; hutifenyonedounonldefy
himtotheteethl" Butthemosttunarhhleclua‘em,“
he never once suﬂetdhise'yaslovandetinlhedmof
Mt. Mmy‘s pennant! did not lave the child: till mm
gene.

Mr. Huﬁeldhnddmhtlasreeeivedeva-ymeblw: but
his pride impelled him touseewryeﬂ‘orttoeoneealthedects
ofiL Hehedhemdkippcintedinhismaiahopeotohtainin‘
not only a hantil'ul, and, to him. highly attractive wife. but one
whose nnh and fortune might give brilliance to far inferior
charms: hem likewise. no doubt. intensely mortiﬁed by his
tepnlte. and deeply handed at the conduct of like Murray
throughout. It would have given him no little consolation to
have known how d‘uappointed she was to ﬁnd him apparently
solittlemved,andtosathathewasabletole1tuinfmm
asking I single glance at herthmughnnt bothservices ; thmxgh,
she deﬂated, it shaved hem thinking of her all the time. or
meyumldhavefnllen uponher, if itvrereonlybychance:
mirtheyhnd Io chanced to falLshemmld have ﬁrmed it
was beam theynould not mist the nth-action. It might have
pleasedhimtoo.lneamedegrec,tohavesemhwdnlland
dissatisﬁed she In thtwghoat that week (the grater part ofit,
at leuthu' lankot‘ha usual sontceot'excitement; aath
onenahemgtmed hav‘ng "useth up so soon." like a child
that. having devoured its plmke too hastily. sits sucking its
tinged. and vainly lamenting its gteedimss.

At length I was cal-led upon, one ﬁne morning. to accompany
her in a walk so the village. Ostensihlysbewmtwgetsome
shades of Berlin wool, at a tolenbly mpectable shop thaw
chin mppmed by the ladis of the vicinity: mlly—l mm
there is no laugh of charity in supposing that she went with the
ides of meeting a'ther with the Rector himself, or some other
ndmiret by the way ; far I: we went along, she kept wondering
"what Hatﬁeld would do or sly. if we met him," &c. &c. ; as
we pased Mr. Green's pat-legals. she “wondered whethu’ he
was at home—great stupid blackhead:" as Lady Meltham's
carriage passed as she "wonderai what Mr. Hm was doing
this ﬁne day;" and then began to ablue h'u eldet brother {or
heing"|nehaioolnstagetmmiedandgonndliveln London.”

494 AGNES cm.

"Why,"mid l. "I thought you wanted to live in Lanna
yourself."

“Ya. became it's so dull here: but then be main it sill
dullerhytakinghimselfon‘; andit‘hewexenot married [might
have him instead nfthat odious Sir Thoma."

Then, observing the prints of a horse’s feet on themahet
miryroad. she " wondered whether it was a gentleman’s hats."
and ﬁnally concluded it was. tbr the irnpresions were too snail
tohavebeen made by a “gr-at. clumsyam-hmse;" nndthm
she “ wondered who the rider wuld be," and whether we shmld
meet him earning hack, for she was sure he had only passed that
morning; and lastly, when we entered the village and saw only
a few of its humble inhabitants moving about. the “wondaetl
why the stupid people couldn't keep in their houses; shewas
sure she didn't want to see their ugly fans. and dirty. vulgar
clothes—it wun't for that she came to Horton!"

Amid all this, I oonl’, I wondered, too. in seuet. winch
we should meet, or mtch a glimpse of somebodyelse; and:
we passed his lodgings, I even went so fnr as to wonder whethe‘
he was at the window. On entering the shop, Mis Murray de-
sired metastand in the doorwaywhileshetmnsacledherbni-
nus. and tellhzril’anyonepased. But alas! mmwumone
visible besides the villagers, except Jane and Susan Green coming
down the single street. apparently returning from a Walk.

" Stupid things I " muttered she. as she came out after luving
coneluded her bargain. " Why owldn't they have their dolt d
a brother with them? even I: would be hater than nothing."

She greeted them, however. with a cheerful smile. and pro
testations of plusnre B! the happy meeting equal In their own.
Theyplaeed themselves one on each side of her. nndnllthree
walked away chatting and laughing as young ladis do when
they get together. if they be but on telemny intimate term
But I. feeling myself to be one too many, leﬁ them to their
merrirnent and lagged behind. as usual on sul‘h omsions: I had
no relish for walking beside Miss Green or Mix Susan like one
deaf and dumb. who could neither speak nor be spoken to.

But this time I was not long alone. It struck me. at ﬁlst.
as very odd, that just as I was thinking about Mr. Warm he
should come up and amast me; but afterwards. on due reﬂec-
tion. I thought there was nothing odd nbout it, unlss it were
the fact of his speaking to me; [or on such a morning and so

AGNES GREY. 405

nr his own abode. it was natnrul enough that he should be
out; and as {or my thinking of him. I had been doing that,
th little intermission. ever since we set out on our journey:
there was nothing remarkable in that.

" You Ire alone again. Miss Grey 1 " said he.

" Ya."

" What kind of people are those ladies—the Miser Green?"
“ I really don't know.“

' 'Thnt's stranghwhen you live so nut- and seethem molten i"
“Well. I suppose they are lively. good-tempered girls: but
magine you must know them better than I do, yourself. for I
var exchanged a word with either of them."

"Indeed! They don't strike rue as being particularly re-
wed."

"Very likely they are not so to people of their own clus:
it they consider themselves as moving in quite a diﬁerent
here from me I "

He mule no reply to this ; but after A short pnuse. he said—'
“ I suppose it's thse things, Miss Grey. tint make you think
u could not live without I home?"

“ Not exactly. The {act is I am too socially disposed to be
tie to live contentedly without I. friend: Ind as the only friends
have. or am likely to have. are It home, if it—cr rather, it they
3TB gone—I will not say I could not live—but I would rather
ll live in such a desolate world."

" But why do you say the only friends you are likely to have?
re you so unsociable that you mnnot make friends?"

" No. but I never made one yet ; and in my present position
ere is no possibility of doing so. or even of forming a common
:quaintanoe. The fault may be partly in myself. but I hope
)1 altoget ."

" The {unit is partly in society. nnd partly. I should think, in
mr immediate neighbours: and partly, too. in yourself : for
any ladies. in your position. would make themselves be noticed
Id accounted of. But your pupils should he eompunions for
n: in some degree: they cannot be many yum younger than
mrself."

"Oh. yes, they are good company miner: but I cannot
in them friendS. not would they think of hutowlu M I'
we on nae—they have other companions bettu‘ I

sus."

406 AGNES cm.

"Puhplyonmtoowiseﬁwthan. Howdoyonm
yawsell’when alone—do you madam-1:?“

“Readingismyfnvourixeoecnpnion.vhnlhveldmxek
itandbooksmrad."

mespakingdbooksinmup-dmdihm
NSinparﬂcﬂax.mdproeeededbynpid transitiomm
ioplcwtopk,dumenimmmma£mudopiniee.m
been discussed considerably within the 1pm duke-Jim.
bu: wimontmeubdﬁshmdwymﬁuhim-
selﬁhebe‘ngevidemlylssbmzuponmmmnhﬁnghhm
lbanghtslndpndilecﬁonsdhnmdiemﬂngnlne. Hem
mltheuu.orthem,mmectmhembymy
mﬂugmnymﬁmumidemMu-w
mlofhisownmrleadingtheconmﬁon by hum
Mgr-hamlomwpiuuhewiehedmedven wzbm
mmthptmmmme-ighw-
nesscouldnotposiblyoﬂ’endme.

“Andwhylhouldheinmhimuﬂudlin-ymnlud
Wandda:whathilmlﬂmvhnllhinhuhdf"
Iasliedmysdf. Andmyhanlhnyhhedilmto'be
quatiou.

BuszeendSImGleeneoonmdzedlhn‘rhome. Auk;
noodpuleyinguche park-gnlsmﬂempﬁngto puma-kw
Mmylncome in,l wished W. Wanner-alldeit
nigh! noiseehim with me whenshetumedmlmd; but.“-
fmunmly.hisbusin&,whichwnsmpaywemviilwpu
Marl: Wood,ledhimlopumelhenmepuhuwedid,ﬁl
nearlythecloeeofmzrjoumzy. Whamhovm,bonvihal
Rmdiehndnleenhaveofhaﬁ-iudslndlmlhunhjdn
113,11:me hveiehmeendpnssedonuequiekupc:
but. us he civilly lifted his hat in passing her. to lay-spilt.
Wefmxingzhesﬂumwith:slil.m¢ndmhov.du
modhimwiihme ofher "teem mﬂel,uld.v1lkingby
hilllde. began to talk to him with all imaginable Wuhan
md mhility: andsawe proceeded nllthree together.

After a than pause in the conversation. Mr. Wm nude
some mmrk addressed particularly to me. as [slewing to w
ﬁlingwehadbeenmlkingofbefom: huhhel‘areleouldlusva’.
Min Mnmy replied to the observation Ind enlarged nponit:
berejoinod} and.from Hence to tbeclouohheinmrvlewmhe
engmsed him entirely whenelf. I! might be pull, owing»

AGNES cum. 4;;

my own stupidity. my mt «Imam! Issuance: hit I feltmr
selfwrouged:1trembledwithnpprdien§on;nndllkteuedwith
envyto Many,me ﬂowofmtemnaemndnwwith Inn‘ety
the bright smile with which she looked him his. ﬁn: hm hm:
totime: forshemswalking-htﬂninedmbuhsm
(as Ijudged) of beingseen as walla: heard. Ifherconvemtion
was light and trivial, it was amusing. and she was nevu- at 9.10s
for something to say, or for suitable words to express it in.
There was nothing pen or ilippunt in her manner now, as when
she walked with Mr. Hatﬁeld ; there was only a gentle, playful
kind of vivacity. which I thought must be peculiarly pleasing to
I man of Mr. Wesmn's disposition and tempemmenL

Whenhewugoneshebegnntohugh. end muttered to her-
self—“I thought I could do ill"

“ Do what?" I shed.

" ﬁx that nun."

“What in the world doyuu mean?"

“thhat hewillgohnmeanddrenmofme. Ihave
shot him through the heart ! "

“How do you know?"

“ By many infallible proofs: more especially the look he gave
me when he went away. I! was not an impudent look—I
exonerate him from that—it was I look of reverential, tmder
adoration. Ha, ha! he's not quite such a stupid blockhud
u I thought him 1 '-

! made no answer. for my heart was in my thin-t, orname—
thinglike it, and I could not trust myself to speak. "0 God,
avert it l " I cried lntemally—" for his mhe. not {or mine!"

Mks Murray made several trivixl obmvnliom uwepused
up the park, to which (in spite of my reluctance to let one
glimpse ofmy feelingsappeu) I couldonly numerbym
syllable. Whether she intended to torment me, or maely to
amuse limit, I could not Isl—and did not much cute; but I
thought of the pour mu and his me lamb, Incl lherich man
with his thousand (lot-J‘s; and ! dmded I knew not whztlor
Mr. Waton. independently of my own blighted hopel.

Right glad Wu 1 to get into the house, and ﬁnd myself alone
one more in my own room. My ﬁrst impulse was to sink into
the chair beside the bed ; and laying my head on the pillow. to
aedtnlietinnpusionme burstoflmn: menus-nim-
perative craving for such an indulgence; but alas] 1 mm

408

rutnin and swallow back my feelings still : there was the hell
—the edicts bell for the schoolroom dinner; and I musth
down with n mltn face. and smile, and laugh. and talknonm
——yes, and eat, too, it possible, as if all m right. and I was
just returned from a plusont walk.

AGNES GREY.

,.

CHAPTER XVI.
ms scusrr’ro-nos.

NEXT Sunday was one of the gloorm'est of April days—n dayd
thick, dark clouds. and heavy showers. None of the Murray!
were disposed to attend church in the afternoon, excepting
Rosalie: she was bent upon going as usual ; so she ordered the
carriage. and I went with her: nothing loth. of course. lot: It
church I might look without fear of seorn or censure upon stunt
and face more pleasing to me than the most beautiful of God's
creations; I might listen without disturbance to a. voice more
charming than the sweetest music to my ears : I might seem to
hold communion with that soul in which I felt so deeply in-
terested. and imbibe its purest thoughts and holiest nspimtions.
with no alloy to such felicity except the secret reproaehes of my
conscienee. which would too often whisper that I was deceiving
my own self. and mocking God with the serviu: of u been mt!
bent upon the creature than the Creator.

Sometimes such thoughts would give me trouble enough ; but
sometimes I could quiet them with thinking—it is not the men,
it is his goodness that I love. “ Whatsoe'va things are pure.
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are honest and
ofgood report, think on these things." We do well to worship
God in His works: and I know none of them in which so many
of His sttnhutu-so much of His own spirit shines. as in 111's
Hi5 faithful servant: whom to know and not to appreciate.
were obtuse insensihility in me. who have so little else to occupy
my heart.

Almost immediately after the conclusion or the service. Miss
Murray left the church. We had to stand in the porch. for it
was raining, and the carriage was not yet come. I wondered
at her coming forth so hnslily. for neither young Meltham nor

AGNES GREY. 409

qtixe Green Ins there; but I soon found ithsloseolu'ean
“mien with Mr. Wston us he came out. which he presently
I'd. Having Muted us both. he would have passed on. but
Iedetninedhim: ﬁrst with observutions uponthedisngteenhle
anther, nndthenwith ukingilhewmtldhesoltindu toeome
use time tomorrow to See the grmddaughler of the old woman
In kept the porters lodge. for the girl was ill oi'a. fever, and
ished to see him. He promised to do so.

"And at what time will you be most likely to come. Mr.
lesion? The old woman will like to know when to upect
Int—you know such people think more about having their
lungs in order when decent people come to see them then
a lie apt to suppose."

Here wls a wonderful instance of considention from the
longhtlal Miss Murny. Mr. Wston named an hour in the
Inning It whieh he would endeavour to be there. By this
are the «triage was ready. and the footman was waiting. with
a open umbrella, to escort Miss Min-my thlmlgh the church-
Ini. I we: about tofollow; but Mr. Weston had an umbrella
n.1nduﬁeredmethebmeﬂtulits shelter, for it was raining
wily.

"No. thank you. 1 don't mind the min,“ I said. I always
inked common sense when taken by surprise.

" But you don‘t Iii: it. I suppose ?—eu umbrella will do you
ohnm at any rate," he replied, with I smile that showed be
'u not oKended; as a man of worse temper or lat penetration
‘ouldhavebeenatsudiarei’usalofhisaid. I could notdeny
letruthot‘hisassertion, and wwent withhiln tothecan-iage;
eeveu oﬂ'eted me his hand on getting in: an unnemsaxy piece
I civility. but I accepted that too, for fear of giving oh’enoe.
he glance he gave, one little smile at parting—it we: but for I
meet; but therein I read. or thought 1 read. a meaning that
indled in myhart a hrighta'ﬁnmeofhapethanhadeveryet
risen.

" I would have sent the i’ootmzn hack for you. Miss Grey. if
ou'd United 3 moment—you needn't have taken Mr. Weston's
mhtella.” observed Rosalie. with a very unansiahle aloud upon
er pretty face.

"I would have come without an nmhrella. but Mr. Waton
ﬂared me the beneﬁt of his. and I could not have refused it
me than I did without offending him," replied I. smiling

41° AGNB GREY.

Mania-my inwud happiness madethlamusing,“
muhnmundedmuanotherﬁmg

Them-i'agemnawinmoﬁnn. Misﬁmuybnxh-
mmlﬂdmtdmemuwemmm
Wm Hampdnghomcmdldmgthemwwgud
diduotmmhishmd.

“Suzpidiw‘edshgthmwiuhﬂsdlt-ck-guinhlh
seat. “You don't know W you're kn bymtlookin‘lhil
my!"

"Whalhuhelm?"

"Ahov&omme.thnwauldhuenisodhimlothemuﬂ
haven!"

Imadenoanswer. Isawshewasounfhnmumndi
derivedamagmiﬁmdonfrmxbc (-3.110111131is
mail-Illhushaxhoughlshehidmtohen hulk
muﬁnkmyhapeswemmenﬁrely‘hcoﬂkwingm‘myﬂh
nudimngimzicn.

"Imelnionlusuer.Weslonins¢udanLHAﬂd.'
saidmyamnpunion-ﬁerasmmwmmmingsomm
oihamnlchnfulns. “Thebllnmhyhrkmlaph:
on Tuesday.you knaw;and mamma thinlskverylikdydﬂ
Sir'nwmswiﬂptopmemmethcn:mch‘hinpmdlmdoﬂ
in the privacyofthe bathroom. when sandman“: manly
W.mdhdi§mos¢uchnnﬂng. Buliflmlobemried
wsmn.[mslmabthehsldlhepmtliﬂe:lmdﬂﬂ~
mlhtﬁeldshaﬂnmbetheonlymwbmkyhkhuﬂ
azmyieehlndimplmemetoweepuhewonhhly'ﬁin-il.‘

“IfymmnMr.Wawnmbeoneofywrvictim"nﬂ
I,vi\hnﬁcaaiindiﬁ‘erenoe.“youwillhavelonﬂsemm-
mayamadfuunyouwmﬁnditdiﬂiqdnodnwhckmhe
nhymwﬁnﬁltheupeuﬂmsyuuhavenind."

“Idan'zmppouhevillukmetouarryhim—nmnhoﬂdl
dsimnzmmdbemkrmmuchpresumpﬁonlwl
intend himlofeeimypower. Hehasfcltil aluminium:
but heshaﬂadmldgzitmo;nndwhm viﬁonnqhnpuh:
myhave.hemusz keeptohimself. nndonlyamusemn with“:
rank of them—{m- a time."

" Oh i that some kind spirit would whisper untoward: inh'l
uri"Iinwnrdlyuclaimed. lwasfanooindiznanlwhlnrd
nreplywhet observation,alaud;und nothing EDEN-a
lbw: Mr. Weston that day. by me or in myharing. Bulnd

0......-

Acns Gm. 411

waing.mnnerluum.1ﬁsllmyumeimome
mum musing:- was employed Itha- midis. at
min-Isms. hmmmm.mw. "Mlmdl.
Inmyonmlakeawalkwithmeabomdeveno‘doﬁ.”

"0h,lum‘t,kon1iel lbuemgivecrdasaboutmym
www.mmwmem-umamms
(up: m-qumgnwithyuu."

“No.1mtpu."saidkmlie; andallinghas'stertothe
Iindﬁw,§hewhi§pueduexpiamﬁoninberar:uponwhich
Ihehnsmmedmgo.

ImmbaedthtelevmnsthehomatwhichMr.Wm
Wtoeomesoﬂmpondslodge; andeth
Ihehddthewhol: continue: Wugly,a1dinner, Ivms
Wﬁmalong amount of haw MLWEKMI had over-
hhathemastheywerewalkingnlongthemd; mdhowthey
Midnhngwalkandtalkwithhim,andteﬂiyfonndhin
quiveungmblemmiomandhowhemusthavebeen,
ndevidanlywu,ddightedwiththmandtheiramuingm-
minuteﬁc.

CHAPTER XVII.
comssmus.

Al I In in themycfwnfssions.1 my swell lcknowledge
an, ammme, i paidmmeanentiontodressthmeverl
bd done More. This k not saying much ; for hitherto I had
luau-little negiecﬁulinlhal particular: but now. 3190, inns
no uncommon thing to spend as much as two minutes in the con‘
mpkﬁm‘myownhnlgeintheghss; though Inevereculd
derive my cumulation flom such a study. I could discover no
beauty In those marhd (centres, that pale hollow cheek. and
udinnryduk brmm hlh': there might be inteIlect in thefore-
land. theremight be again in the dark grey eyes : but what
dthnHivarechnbraw, mdl‘ngebhck eyesde (i
eminent would be esteemed {at pedal-ibis. It is foolish to wish
h- bemny. Sensible people never either desire it for themselva.
cute uboutit "in others. If the mind be but well cultivated,
Ind the heart well disposed. no one ever cares for the exterior.

    
  
   
   
  
    
   
  
   
  
 
 
  

4:2 AGNES GREY.

Snsnidthetachetsdourehildbood:nndsolyl'eu
children of the present day. All myij
na doubt: but.“ suehnswﬁousupponed by Inn-I
perienee?

Wenre mtumllyd‘upoled tolmewhntgivansplnsm.
whatmoreplasingthnnnhuutifnlfnoe—whenwekno'no
ol‘thcpossessnrntleast? Alittlegirlloveshchitd—
Becauseit livaand feels; because itis helplulnnd
A toad. likewise. lives and feels. and is equally upland
less; but though she would not hurt a toad, she annals!
like the bird, with is graceful farm. loll lathe-s, Ind ‘
speaking eyes. If a woman is fair and amiable. she is
{or both qualities, but especially the former, by the hulkd'
kind: ii.on theother hand. she isdisagreenblein pawl
character. her plninnes is commonly inveigbedngnlml
gratest crime, because. to wmmonohserveu, it give the
niche: while. it'she is plain Ind good. ptwidedshe in
of retired mnnnetsnnd sedudedlile. nooneeverkmld
goodness. except her immediate connections. Othus. II
contrary. Axe disposed to form unfavounble opinions of hﬂ‘ '
and disposition, ii' itbe but toenuse themselva fol-M
tive dislike of one so unfava by nature: end virtual!
her whose angel form consuls n viciotu heart, or M l Eh
deceitful charm over defects and foibles that would not
tolerated in another. They that hnve beauty. let tha
thankful for it, and make a good use of it. like any nth: LIKE
they that have it not. let them console themelvs, and do Ii
but they can without it: «mainly. though liable to be m
summed. it is 3 gift of God, and not to be despised. M
will feel this who have felt that they onuld love, Ind whosehlﬂ
tell them that they are worthy to beloved Ignin; whileyulH
mdebnrred by thehckofthisorsomesuchseeminguiﬂe,”
giving and receiving that happiness they sent Ilmost all“
feel and to impart. As well might the humble glow-Iii
despise that power of giving light without which the Mill”
might pass her and repass her a thousand times. and new”
baide hu- : she might hm he! winged darling laudng oval”
around her: he vainly seeking her. she longing to be fund,“
with no power to make her practice known. no voice mail
him, no wings to follow his ﬂight ;—the ﬂy must teek moth
mate. the worm must live and die lime.

AGNES GREY. 4i 3

ch wue some of my reﬂections about this period 1 might
I: pruning more and more. i might dive much deeper. and
me other thoughts. propose quatious the reader might be
led to unswer. Ind deduoe arguments that might startle his
dies. or. puhnps, povohe his ridicule. betzuse he could
nuptehend them; but I forbear.
It. More. let us return to Miss Murray. She uncom-
ad he: mums to the ball on Tuesday : of course splendidly
ad, Ind delighted with her prospects md her charms. As
py Perk wu nearly ten mils distant {mm Hanan Lodge,
had to m out pretty early. and i intended to have spent
setting with Nancy Brown. whom I had not seen for: long
; but my kind pupil took care I should spend it neither
: nor anywhere else beyond the limits of the schoolmom, by
5 me u piece of music to copy, which kept me closely occu.
till bed-time. About eleven next morning. as soon as she
lei! her room. she came to tell me her news. Sir ’Dwmzs
indeed proposed to her at the bull : an event which reﬂected
: credit on her mnmma's sugncity. if not upon ha skill in
fie-nee. I nther incline to the belief that she had ﬁrst laid
inns. and then predicmd their success. The offer had been
pied. of coune, Ind the bridegroom-elect was coming thnt
to settle matters with Mr. Murray.
antic wls pleased with the thoughts of hecmning mistress of
)y Park; [he was eluted with the prospect of the bridal
nony Ind its nttendant splendour ud klut, the honeymoon
t abroad. and the subsequent gsiets'es she expected to enjuy
ondon and elsewhere: she appeared pretty well pleased too.
In time being. with Sir Thomas himself. because she had so
"an him. danced with him. and been ﬂattered by him ; but.
1“. sheseunedteshrinkfromtheidenotba‘ngsosnon
:d 2 she wished the ceremony to be delayed some months. at
:Ind ! w'uhed it too. It seemed a horrible thing to hurry
1e inauspicious match, and not to give the poor creature time
rink and renan on the irrevocable step she wns about to take.
tde no pretension to "a mother's watchful. anxious are."
l was Lmued and horriﬁed at Mrs. Murray‘s heartlessness,
Int of thought for the ml good of her child; and. bymy
aeded warnings and exhemtions. I vainly strove toremedythe
Mi- Mumy only laughed at whut I suid; nnd I soon
d thnt her reluctance to An immediate union arose chieﬂy

4:4 mm can.

hmndesimmdavhmmdnnﬁcuﬂdmﬁnm
guﬂemdhmlnquﬁnmmbdmeﬁemiup-Mdh
Wm‘xhid’ofﬂieldnd. It mmﬁhmm.&
mnﬁdiugtomethemofhchahh-dm
a min dun I waﬂdnotﬁanlwrdm Iii: silica-l]
one. And when 1 am this. udth behaldhu h“
recﬂly mnmimo the dept}: oihurﬂmmJH
nor more piiy for bet. “Came win: will." I. ‘hmght. "h
dammit. Slr'l'hnmas unnotbcmhdinrhu:ullk
smile she in inundated from Wit; and all:
dam.”

Themddingmﬁndfathemntlm Beam“
udmahiulbunwuslimenm-mdxweeb; with
Wamplishedskinmmmasﬁm. which
ltdme.evenwiihinthupaio&: ambuska
nostonhoinnrimhlpndon;vhid:rhewemup.hwulii
tomieahirswithhkhwyernudmboﬂaspleplnﬁmh
themdzhgunpﬁzls. He endeavnwedmmpptythnl
ofhhpmenmbyaprmymnmtﬁtedhﬂm-dm; but:
did not uni-act the na'ghhann’ madam and open wiggle
pamnnlvin’uwuuld havedme:ndddLIdIAshbfsm.
smspiritdmwithhddhaﬁonxspmdinghmvih
her indifferent mm: pram-med ha- cuming in visit h: ﬁlm
daugha-in-hu: so um. dwgethu. this nﬁir In ht!"
domihnmhﬁingsmﬂym

anld,umeﬁnusmhzrlava‘seﬂshunb
couvhcemtwhazﬁnd.mhmbmhwun&mh
Shinwdmthlamﬁuoﬂrrwmﬁen
fem Mr.vahindmlth¢m,c,-he
pmsedi.the“wimk“mpludhixmimpmh¢wh-
omdeninl mldmtsﬁsﬁ: hem main-ad“
Henddnmhnvadmcsuifhemnidhveuathgdw
his fair idol made over his moving appuls to her feelings. In!
hard her maxi lmghtzr. and the oppmbxim with sh:
heaped upon him for his game;

“'Why daqu you in!) him. at once. that you: n W?”
lashed.

"Oh. I don't want him to know that." replied she. “If h
knew“, his skiers and everybody wmlld know it. and than than
Vmuidbelnendufmy—qhan! Anibesidcmiflwidhim till.
ha would think my cum: ms Ch: only obstacle. and M

mm on“. 41;

Iwmﬂhvemiflmme:wbichimldnuburmm
mshmldﬁink.“he.dnﬂothﬂs,athﬂ. kidston‘t
unhrhisknasfsheddedwnmptmy: “bunnyva
noﬂmuheMmdbokugrm-dfshhm
Ineethinﬁlonlyamme.”
mm,mgMdmmmpnmthumlinhivﬂucn
“Magma-1mm“: Ind,an by Mm'lda's enm-
www.mmmmmuﬁmmmm
eivmquuiredﬁnmhawordmshemiadanuuin-uda
mdmnmmdberm'mﬂm Shng
mannaptsmbﬁugﬂr.ﬂuﬁddoncemmhrlm; in!
ﬁnding them Wﬁd. she repaid his haughty hm
mm’ﬂloilierm,mdspoleoflhmumhdiuhin
“Manushehadformiydoneolhiim But,
anidmﬂxis,shenevsfuramhn‘gkdﬂnwmm
Siegdnnedeveyoppoﬂunilyofmeﬁngﬁnnidmm
In We him. and pnrsucd him wimasmuﬁh We“
ﬁshemnyfovudhimlnéno aha-.Udtblqpinuoﬂur
ﬂdcpmdedupmeﬁcidnglmdm Suﬁmdm
mmpiadybeyandmywmpnbnsim. Hullmit
thmd,lshauld havethoughlitm;hdl
luditdescn‘bedbymhersthonldhvemic-mimh
anmggenﬁon;bmwheniuwitvilhmquu,m
mmﬁmoJowldmlywndudcmummity.
mm.hxdemmehun,emhvathemﬁu.ud
permuthefeeﬁngs;andthudogsmmhemy-m
“.mmmmethm.wﬂlyugh‘mvhnhey
mm “dyndgechesmﬂksmsdbaming
m
Shemhmmenaemdybmiacmlolhapcwm
Hammian unang' them mm: widely extruded, her
mmr humblemlﬁngs wee moreth mire
thatheyhndmbcenbelm Hereby,sheumedunang¢ca
mWndncmdemendingmdvayzh-ﬂuﬂeywng
My1mdrhirenconﬁnmsweteswemberepeatdbﬂr.
szmmnlsu shehadlhusadaﬂychmcealmsﬁngin
morctbcrofmdrlbodu,orinheruansilslbnndimnnd
ohmlikewisﬁsln could gubernhmughmeir gussip,eowhn
phashcwnsﬁelyup-I suchudmhlﬁne,wmm
W:chﬂd,artovisilthe-ged.mich,ln-d.orlhe
dying; and most shimmy sh: laid her plans mouldingly. In

416 AGNES GREY.

thae emulsions she would rometim go with berm-chm.
hysome mannshehml persuaded or hrlhedto eats-into
sauna—50mg alone. never, now..with rue; an M1
debnrred the planned seeing Mr. Weston, or henr-inghls
even in nonvemtlnn with mother: which would certainly
been it very glut pleasure. however hurtful or hmever
withpnin. Icmrldnotevurseehimntchmh: (or 31an
undersome trivial pretext. chose tode Mul-
inthefarnilypewwhiehhndheaunineevasineelau;d ‘
urrlml had the presmnptiontnxtetion mynen'betmllr.
Mn. Murruy. 1 must sit with my hack to the pulpit. whidrl
cordineg did.

Now.nlsn.lnevermlltedhomewith rny pupihzthey '
their mamma thought it did not look well tonne threepenpk‘ '
of the Emily walking. nncl only two going in marriage; Ii.
as they gmtly preferred wnllting in ﬁne “the, I :hnnlll k ‘
honoured by going with thescninrs. “ And, Wes." aid
"youcnn'twnlltufastusweda; yauknowyon'renlwlysﬂ-
gingbalml." I knewthesemrefﬂseestqut I nude
objections. and never nontrudicted such assertions. well '
the motives which didnted them. And in the mar-nous. anti-t
those six memorable weelu. I never went to church It ell. lll
had it cold, or my slight indispnn'ition. they look ndvnntuul
that to make me stay at hame; and often they would tell me I”
were not going again that day. themselvs. and then Fuel!
change their minds. and set otf without telling me: so nun-gill
their departure thnt I neverdiseovered the change of pin-pull
too lnte. Upon their return home. on one of thae and“
they entertained me with an animated account of: muesli!
they had had with Mr. Weston as they mine nlnng. “Arid I
asked if you were ill. Miss Grey," said Mums-l; “but meld
him you were quite well, only you didn‘t wnnt to come to M
-——sn he'll think you‘re turned wicked."

All chance meetings on week-day: were likewise mrefully FB-
vented; for, lest I should go to see poor Nancy We all!
other person, Miss Mnrrny look good care to provide said!
employment for all my leistne hours. There was elm): ml
drawing to ﬁnish. some music to copy. or some work to lb
mﬁeient to incapacitate me from indulging in nnythhg hand
1 short walk about 1h! grounds. however she or her aisle M
be occupied.

  
  
     
 
   
   
   
    
   
    

AGNES GREY. 417

m, having sought and waylaid Mr. Weslon. they
high glee to give me Ill account of their inmizw.
used after you Ixtin." said Matilda, ln spike other
I but imperative intimation that she should hold her
Hemderedwhyyouwerenemwiﬂrus.lnd
1 must hue deliuu: health. as you me out so

I'l. Matilda—what um you're talking ! "

alie. whnl a lie] He did. you know; and you laid
Elie—hung it 5-1 won't be pinchede And, Mix
: told him you mquiu well. but you were nlvmys
,yonrhooks (In: yon hadno plasurein anything

nideahemusunnufml" “bought.

Isked. "clnesoldNnnnyewrinquirelhonkme?"
mlwelellheryoumwi’nndofmdiug 1ndan-
,candonothinge "
mnheeuelhwghﬁfyouhadtoldherl wuso
lnotoometuseeherjtwmlld Mnheennumtbe

:hinlr it would,” replied Miss Mutiny. Iuddenly kind-
I’m sure youhnve plenty of time to yourself nnw.
we so lilxle leaching In do."

use beginning to dispuie with such indulged, un-
reaiure: so I held mypaee. [VI-s “untamed.
ping silence when things distasteful to my ear wen
d now. loo, 1 was used to raring l plucid smiling
"then my hurl nu: hitter vrlxhin me. Only lhosa
:luhelikeclnime‘ine myfeelinp. Islnkwilhnn
of smiling indiﬂemenee. listening to the «counts or
as: and inmiews with Mr. ann, which they
ndauchplamreindesu-ihing in me; and hearing
tedofhimwhich.ﬁomthe chandler afﬁx:an
Wiionsm pervasionsonhcnulh. Unman-
-lhinp derogatory to him, and ﬂattering to them—
. Miss Manly—which I burned to contradict. or. m
vwmydmrbunhougbntduednot: laminexprar
diet. I should displny my in“: too. Other ihings
[eh I feltorlnuledwereindeed Ion true: but I Inns!
my Inxiety respecting him, my indignnﬁon against
:nh a careless aspect; M‘s-ill. new bug: of

 
  
    

1.1! AFSJ‘.‘ GIIT.

mur- .gs:-:15mut=‘t:?ugduhrmenﬁ
mgr: Syﬂhuyu

:nn-ﬂuﬁsljag.'&ﬂm

mhh‘g'

nem— miﬁhﬁmﬂmund

     
 
   
 
   
    
      
   

  

 

"s: mhwwwmh

2 Marxism—ﬁlial!
.bs-‘xnlnsm-udlyol
v inmaéuyﬁgnsh
grim tﬂashccmldﬂi

Madh'shpﬁnq:

    

  
    
  
 
   
 
 

.bcmidlhuhe-hudl
. 1' Wmhimml"
Mahmmnesw‘jn‘ghdigmdlﬁ“
' lhxvesaﬁedyhilbdllhim. I ‘
:txhnduesnbldmym
=einlhcm. Ins-dosed
‘ thiscuauatias. My”
.5': ~. fats. It: W we M
Huwzalau.

weanhanssedbymwam.uhl
passed 1, a: pctm'ul ie-Jings whH-emul law”
(on obninandseeknosvmplhyﬁomuy“

 

   
 

 

 

alien

 

our existing case, or in our on anunpts to give W.
those thoughu and feelings in mains lea mnsiul. pad.“
but more appropriate, Ind thud“! mm: penetrating IIdIP'
pubﬂic, and, for the time. more soothing. or more land“
museum! lounbnrden thecpptusedmdnwenhnn. 3‘“
thin time, It Wellvood House and hue, when min; 5‘
home-dd: mehncholy. I ma sought relief ‘wioe or thrice n I“

m source of consolnlion; and new I ﬂew to it mull“

AGKE‘S GRIN. m

aviditythnnever.hecanselsuned to needitme. I
:sa-vethwerelicsol post suffering: and W.m
of whom :3 up in travelling through the VII: of lit: to
miculnroocunenoes. The toomeps are obliterated now;
eofthe oountrymaybe changed: but thepill-r ‘3 still
:0 remind me how all things wee when it was reared.
emdershould hecurimu to seemyoftheseeﬂu‘mu. 1
'our him with one short specimm: cold and languid as
smayseen,ﬁwnsaimoetapnsainno€gﬂe€towhinh
wed their being.

"otutxqtunnbbd meoltbehope
Myspiritheldlodur;

Theyvﬂlnotlexmhlrthltvokc
Mysmddelixhutohae.

Theywiﬂmtletmemthatfzm
Isudgliglittosou

And they have also all thy sails,
Aldullthylaveﬁvmmr.

We“, let then mix: on all they an ;—
One treasure still is mine,—

A heart that loves to think an thee,
And feel: the worth of thine.“

at least. they could not deprive me of um: I could think
day and night ; and I could feel that hows: worthy to be
t at. Nobody knew him as I did; nobodyomtld am
im Is I did; nobody could love him as l—mld, if I
but there m the evil. What business hd I to think
h of one that never thought of me? Was lt'not foolth
1ot wrong) Yet, if I found such deep delight in thinking
and if I kept those thoughts to myself, Ind ambled no
:e with them. when was the hum of it? I would ask
And sud: reasoning prevented me from making any
at effort to shtke off my fetter-s.
if those thoughts brought delight. inns a pninhl. troubled
e. too near akin to anguish: Ind one that did me more
:lun I was swore o£ It was an indulgence that a person
: wisdom or more experience would doubth hive denied
And yet, how drary to turn my eyes from the con-

420 Aunts GREY.

umphlian of mm bright object Ind force them ‘0 dwell a
dull. grey. desome prospect umnd: the joylcs. hope
solitarypnxh lhatlny beforeme. ltwuswrong lobesojoy
so desponding: I should havemnde God my friend. and u
Hiswin theplelsurenndthebusinusof mylife; butkilh
weak. and passion was too strong.

In this ﬁne of trouble I had two other muss of laid
Theﬁrst myseem arr-Ede. but it cost me many I mar: SI
my little dumb. rough—visaged. but bright-eyed. Winn-h:
companion. the only thing I Ind to love me. In: taken 1‘
And delivered over In the lender mercies of the village rut-cm:
a man nowriousfurhisbruulueumrdh'uunimsh
Theothawasseriursenough: my letters from home gm
timion am my father's he..th was wane. No bodingl
were «pressed. but I vns grown timid 1nd dawndem.
mid not help fearing khat some dreadful nhmity nwniur
there. I seemed lo see the black cloudsgntherlnground
native hills. md lo bar the Ingry mullet-ingot n snot-mum
abantmbum. nnddesolueourhearth.

CHAPTER XVIII.
nun-m AND nourmmc.

THE rs! oUune arrived at last: and Rosalie Mumme
muted into Lady Ashby. Most splendidly handful she la
in her brick! costume. Upon her return from church. mm
ceremony. she mm: ﬂying into the schoolmam. ﬂushed
excitement. and laughing. half in mirth. and half in red
desperation. as It seemed lo me,

"Now, MISS Grey. I'm Lady Ashby ! " she excluimed. '
done. my Me is sealed: rhere‘s no drawing buck new.
came to receive your congratulations and bid you good-bye :
then I'm of {at Paris. Rome. Naples. Switzerland. Loud
oh. dear! whalndeallshunseenndhearbdore I come
again. But don't forget me: I shan't forget you. though
bee: a naugth girL Come, why don't you conga!
me ..

AGNB Gm. 411

I cannot congratulate you." I replied, " till I kuaw whether
change is rally for the better: but I sinMely hope it is;
I wish you true happinus and the hem o! hmingx."

Well. good—bye. the carriage is waiting. and they're calling

he geve me a hasty Isis. and was hurrying away : but, sud-
ly tanning, embraced me with more median than I thought
capable ul'evineing. and departed with tears in her eyes.
n-girll Ireatllylnvedherthen: mdforgaveherfromtnyhmrt
the injuryshe had done Mothersnlso: Shebath
l'lrnnwu it. I was sure; and I prayed God to pardon her

)uringtheremainderofthatdayof Madness. lwasldt
ny nwn deﬁed. -Being too much unhinged for my study
upetion. I wandered about with a book in my hand for several
trs. more thinking than reading, {or I had my things to
lkabout. In theeveaing. I made use of my libety toga
laeemyoldfriend Nancyonee again; to apologise for my
g absence (which must have seemed an neglectfnl and unkind)
telling herhaw busy I had been: and to lallt,orrmd.or
rk for her. whichever might be most acceptable. and aka. of
rse, totellherthenewsofthisilnpottnntday: and perhaps
)htain a little information from her in return. respecting Mr.
ston's expected deputul'e. But of this she seated ta know
hing. andlhoped. asshedid, thatitwas all a falsereport.
:was very glad to see me; but. hppily. he! eya were
I so nearly well that she was almost independent of my ser-
1 She was deeply intaested in thewedding: but while I
used her with the details of the festive day. thesplendnun
hehridal party and otthe bride herself, she often sighed and
okherhudmnd wished good might come otit; she seemed.
: me, to regard it rather as ethane for sorrow than rejoicing.
I! a long time talking to her about that and other things—but
m mm.

ihall Iconic“ thatlsometimealoalted towards the door
h ahalfupectant wish to see it open and give entrance to
. Weston. as had happened once before? and that. returning
Jugh the lanes and ﬁelds. loften paused :0 look mud me.
lwnllted more slowly than was at all neeesary—(nr. though
he evening, it was not a hot one—and. ﬁnally. felt a sense
unptineu and disappointment at luving reached the house

42: AGNES car.

without meeting or even mtching : distant glimpse at :1
except a few Iahoum returning from thair work?

Sunday, however, was appending: I should”: him
[or nowthnt Min Murray was gme. I outﬂdthve mydd
again. I should see him. and by look. speech. and mm
might judge whether the circumstnnoe of ha- mrriag: h
much Amused him. Happily. l nould pertzive no M
diﬂ'crmee'. beware the sameupect as h: had worth
.go—wine, look. matter. all nlilw managed: than I
satin beenvsighted. undouded truthfulnen in his dim
same forcible ale-meta in his style. the same earnest sit!
in all he said and did, that mad: iself not marked hyt
and ear. but felt upon the hatrtsof hit nudism.

I walked homewith Miss Matilda: but I: W Mi:
Matilda In: new sadly at a loss (or Imminent,“on
want of I companion: her brothers at school. her sham
and gone, she too young to be admitted into moiety; {or
from Rosﬂié‘s example. she was in some degree hzginu
acquire a taste—a taste ll least for th: computny min
of gmtlemen; at this dull time of yzar—no hunting pi.
no shooting even—for. though she might not join in tint.
mixing“) 5m: her father or the gatekeeper go out wi
dogs, and to talk with them on their return. about the di
birds they had bagged Now. aka. she was denied the
which the companionship of the machmnn. grooms. l
greyhounds, and pointers might have afforded; for her I
having. notwithstanding the disadvnnmges of a many
satisfactorily disposed of her elder daughtgr, the pride
heart. had begun seriously to turn her nttention to the ya
and. being truly alarmed at the runghnus of her manner
thinking it high time to work a reform, hid been mud ll
to exert her authority, and prohibited entirely the yank. s
kennels. and conch~house. Of course. she was not im]
obeyed; but. indulgent as she had hitherto been. when on
spirit was roused, her temper was not so gentle as she to
that of her govcmescs to be. and her will was not to be tin
with impunity. Aftrr many a scene of contention between t
and daughter. many a violent outbreak which I was Ishu
witnm, in which the father's authority was often called
conﬁrm with oaths and threats the mother‘s slighted prohi
—!or even it could see that " Tilly, though the would havt

AGNES GREY. '42;

I. ﬁne lndl was not quite what a young lady ought to be"—
Mntild: at length found that be! easiest plea wes to keep clear
of the forbidden regions : unlse she could mnnd then steala
visit without her watchful mother's knowledge.

Amid allthis. let it not be imagined that l escapedwithout
may a reprimand. and nanny an implied reproach. that lost
none of in sting ﬁ'ont not being openly warned,- but rather
wounded the more deeply: heme. from that way reason. it
sealed to preclude selﬁdefena. Frequently, I was told to
WM Mnﬁldnwith odierthings.nnd torm’ndherofher
motha’s peoepts end prohibitions. I did so to the but of my
power; but she would not he unused against her will. and
could not npinst her taste: end though I went ‘beyund mere
minding, sud: gentle runoustmees IS I could use wee ntla'ly
mutual.

"Dar M Grey! itis the Magus! thing. I suppme you
can't hlp Ix, if it's not in your nature—hut I wonder you can't
win the conﬁdence of that girl. and make your societynl lea!
as ngreuble to her as that of Robert ar Joseph I"

"Theycnntalkthe best nbontthethingsinwhinh she ismost
ingested." I replied. l

“Well! that is nsmge confusion. km to come from
Ewan! Who is to form a young lady's mtg. I wonder.
if the governess doesn't do it? I have known govuoesscs who
hm 8) completely identiﬁed themselvs with the reputation
d ﬂn'r young Indies for agent: and propriety in mind and
mus, that they wmxld Nut ta spak a word ngninsl than:
end a: hen- the slightut blame imputed to their pupils wns
worse than to he centred in their own persons—and I really
think it very natural. {or my part."

“Do you. mu'am?"

" Y5. of course: the yeung lady's proﬁciency and elegance
is ofuwre consequence to the governss than her own. as well
as to the world. If she w‘shs to prosper in ha vocation she
must devote all hu- energia to her husinas: nll ha- ideas and
all her Imbilion will tend to the nocamplishruent of that one
object. When we wish to decide upon the merits of a governess.
we naturally look I! the young Indie; she professes to have edu-
ated, and judge accordingly. The judia‘mu governess knows
this: she knows that. while she lives in obscurity herself. her
pupll's virtues And defects will be open to every eye: and that

424 AGNB GREY.

unless she loss sight of herself in their atltivation. sl
not hape form You see. Miss Grey. it 'u just d:
umyotherlmdeorprofesbn: lheylhnlwilhlo

musldevolelhemelves hodynnd soul to Malling:
they begin to yield to indolenee or self-indulgence t3
speedily dlstnnced by wiser competitors: the: B llttlek
hetweennpersonthatrninsher pupils byneglect,nndr
oomxptsthunhyhermmple. waillescusemyd:
these little hints; you know it is nll for your own good.
Indieswouldspakloyoumuchmotemngly; nndnnn;
not trouble themselves to spﬂk n! all. but quietly Mo
substitute. That. of amine, would he the min: plan
lmowthendvantngesofnplmelikethlsmnpason

simtion;nndlhnvenodesiretopu1with you.“ I I
you would do very well iiyou will only thinde
andtrytoexenymlselfnliaklnmeuheanmcot
you would run Inquire thnt delime tan which alone i
ingtoziveyaunproperinﬂmeeoverthemind-
Punk"

Iwnsnbolu to give the lndysome idea ofthefnllnc;
expectntions; but shenllednwnyusoonushehndw
bet-speech. Havingsnidwhatshewished.itwuno
her plan to nwnit mynnswer: itwasmyhusinaloh:
not to spat

However. as! have ssid. Matilda at length yielded i
degree 10 her mother: Authority (pity it but! not been
before); and being thus deprived of almost every so
amusement. the“: was nothing for it but to take long rir
the groom and long walls with the govemas. Ind 10'
collages and farm-houses on her father's Suite. to kill
chatting with the old men and women that inhibited thr
one of these walks, it was our chance to meet Mr. \
This was what 1 had long desired; but now. for n n
I wished either he or I were away: I felt my hmn't
violently that I dreaded lest some wtwnrd signs of t
should nppar; but I think he hardly gluned at me
was soon calm ough. Alla a. brief snlntntion to t
asked Matilda if she had Inter henrd from her sister.

" Yes," replied she. “ She was It Paris when she wn
very well. and very happy."

She spoke the last word emphatically. and with n

mm GREY. 42;

mpcrtinmﬂy sly. He did not seem to notice it. but replied.
vith equal emphasis, and very serioiuly—

"I bane she will continue to he so."

"Do you think it likely?" I ventured to inquire : for Matilda
had started 05 in pursuit of her dog, that was chasing a levetet.

"I mum tell." replied he. "Sir Thomas maybe a better
nut than I suppose; but.frum all 1 have hard and seen, it
teams a pity that one so young, and gay. and—and interesting,
to expats many things by one word—whose greatest. if not
In onlyjanlt, uppeats‘to he mmhtksnm—uo triﬂing fault
lobe sure, since it rendets the posessor liable to almost every
“.mm him to so many temptations: but it seems
Ipityth-tsheshould bethrownawnyon such a man. Itwas
lumuther's wish. I suppose?"

"Y; and her own too. I think, for she always laughed at
my lttempts to dissuade her from the step."

"You did attempt it? Then, at least, you will have the
Mount knowing Ihatitisnnfault of yours.ilanyhnnn
Ibuld meoflt. Ash Mrs. Murray, I don'tknowhowshe
anjnstlly her conduct: if I had sulﬁdent acquaintance with
he. I'd ask her."

"Itseemsuunntural: but some people thinknnknndwalth
lbeehiet‘good; and,ittheycan secure thatl'cr their children.
dry think they have done their duty."

" True: but is it not mange that persons of experience. who
have been married themselves. shauld judge so likely?"

Man‘khmmme punting back. with the haunted hodyol'
ll! young hate in her hand.

“Wuityour inlelttion to kill that hare. ortosave it, Mis
“my? " asked Mr. Weston. apparently pulled it her gleeful
antenna.

"1 txeteuded to want to save it," she answered. hanestly
W. “as it was so glarineg out of season: but 1 was better
lined to see it killed. However, yet: can both witnms that
lwuldn‘t help it : Prince was determined to have her; and he
clutched he! by the back, and killed her in I minute! Wasn't
it a noble chase? "

"Very l ﬁat a young lady after a leveret."

Thete was a quiet sarcasm in the tune of his reply which
m not lost upon her; she shrugged her shoulders. and.
turning away with a signiﬁmnt " Humpb ! " nskcd me hat

0 z

426 AGNES GREY.

l hld enjoyed the fun. I replied that I saw no fun
matter; but admitted that I had not observedthe tum
very narrowly.

" Didn‘t you see how it doubled-jut like an old but
didn't you henr it scream ?"

" I'm happy to say 1 did not."

" It cried out just like 9. child.”

" Poor little thing I What will you do with it?"

"Come along—I shall leave it in the ﬁrst house we on
I don't want to take it home, for fear page should scold
letting the dog kill it."

Mr. Weston was now gone, and we too went on out
but IS we returned. after hnving deposited the here in a
house, and demolished some syioe-cake and current I
exchange, we met him returning also from the execut
his mission, whatever it might be. He carried in his
a cluster of beautiful bluebells which he offered to me ; (
ing, with s smile. that though he incl seen so little of
the last two months. he had not forgotten that blueheli
numbered among my favourite ﬂowers. It was doni
simple act of goodwill. without compliment or rem
courtesy, or any look that could be construed into "rt
tini, tender admtion" (vii: Rosalie Murray): but 5
was something to ﬁnd my unimportant saying so well 1
bend: it was something that he had noticed so necurnt»
time I had cased to be visible.

“l’ was told,“ said he, "that you were a perfect book
Miss Grey: so completely absorbed in your studies th
were lost to every other pleasure."

“Yes. and it's quite true i " cried Matilda.

" No. Mr. Weston; don't believe it: it's a scandalou
These young ladies are too fond of making random as!
at the expense of their friends ; and you ought to be care!
you listen to them."

" I hope this assertion is groundless. at any rate."

“ Why? Do you particularly object to ladies studying

"No; but I object to any one so devoting himselh
self to study. as to lose sight of everything else. Except
peculiar circumstances. I consider very close and cc
study as a waste of time, and an injury to the mind i
as the body."

AGNES GREY. 427

" Well, I have neither the time not the inclination [or sud)
mnsgmions."

We ported again.

Welll what is there runnknhle in all this? Why have I
recorded it? Because. reader, it was important enough to give
me a cheerful evening. a night of pleasing drums. and n mom.
ing of feﬁdtou: hopes. Shallow-blamed cheerfulnes. foolish
dreams, unfounded hopes. you would say ; and I will not
venture to deny it : suspicions to that effect arose too frequently
in my own mind. But our wishes are like tinder: the ﬂint and
Iteel of cirmmstancu are continually striking out spark. which
vanish immediately, unless they chance to {all upon the tinder
of our wishes; then, they instantly ignite, and the ﬂame of hope
iskindled in a moment.

But alas i .that very morning. my ﬂickering ﬂame of hope was
dismnlly quenched by a letter from my mother. which spoke so
seriously of my father's increasing illnes, that I feared there
was little or no chance of his way; and. close at hand as
the holiday: were, I almost trembled lest they should come too
hte for me to meet him in this world. Two days after, a. letter
[mm Mary told me his life was despaired of, and his end seemed
fast approaching. Then, immediately, I sought permission to
anticipate the vacation, and go without delay Mrs Murray
ﬂared. and wondered at the unwontod energy and boldness with
which I urged the request, and thought there was no occasion
to hurry: but ﬁnally gave me leave: stating. however. that
there was “ no need to be in such agitation about the matter—
it might prove a false alarm after' all: and if not—why. it was
only in the common course of nature: we must all die some
time; and l was not to suppose myself the only aﬁlicted person
in the world : " and concluding with saying I might have the
photon to uke me to 0—. " And instud of reﬁning, Miss
Grey. he tinnklul ﬁor the friur‘legu you enjoy. There’s many
1 poor clergyman whose family would he plunged into min by
theeve'nt of his death: but you, you see, have inﬂuential friends
rady to continue their patronage, and to show you evay eon-
sidention."

I thanked her for her "wider-adorn.“ and ﬂew to my room
to unite some hurried preparations for my departure My henna
1nd shawl being on. und a few things hastily crammed into my
largesttrunk, I descended. But I might hztve done the work

‘418 AGNES GREY.

more leisurely. for no one d5: m in a. hurry: mi 1
a considemhle time to wait for the phaeton. A: lengt
to the door. and I was of: but. oh. what a drearyjor
that ! how utterly ditferent from my {WW hm
Beingtoolateforthelnstwuh to—. lhadtohire
tenmils,andthenacartotahcme over therngpd
washalt-pnst tenbet‘arelreachedhome. They‘ve
bed.

My mother and sister both met me in the pass;
silent—paid l was so much shodted And terror-5m
Ioould not speak, to Is): the informatinn I somlchh
dreaded to obtain.

"Agnes!" slid my mother. struggling torepres an
emotion.

"0h. Agnesi" cried Mary. and burst into tats.

" How is he?" l asked. gasping for the answer.

.. M g ..

It was the reply I had anticipated: but the shat)
none the leg tremendolu.

CHAPTER XIX.

THE LETTER.

Mir father’s mortal remains had been consigned to t
and we. with sad flea and sombre garments. sat lingt
the fntgal Mast-table. revolving pins for our fl
My mother‘s strong mind had not given my beneath
aﬂliction: her spirit. though crushed. was not broken
wish was that I should go back to Horton Lodge. ant
mother should come and live with her and Mr. Rich
the Vicarage: she aﬂinned that he wished it no less
self. and that such an arrangement could not fail to l
parties; {or my mother's society and experience we
incstilnzhle value to them, and they would do all tl
to make her hnppy. But no arguments or enueat
prevail: my mother was determined not to go. Not
questioned, for a moment, the hind wishes and ink

AGNES GREY. 429

er; butshenﬁmcdthntso long a: Godspmedher
strength, she would melt: use of them to an: her
toad. and be chargeable to no one; whether her
ewmtldhefeltasnburdenornot. Il'shewuld
aside :5 n lodge: in ~—- ﬂange. She would choose
beforenllothen nsthe plnoeof Ila-abode; bmnot
mummnoed, she would never come undu its roof.
an occasional visitor: “DIS status or calamity
uder her asistance really needful. or until age or
Me her incapable of maintaining base“.
lary.” said she. "if Richnrdson and you have any-
ere, you must lay it aside for your femin ; and Agra
t gather honey for ourselvs. Thqu to my having
tets to edntate, l have not forgotten my accomplish-
0d willing, I will check this vain repining."—she sold,
tenscoutsedone anotherdmmha-cheeksinspite
15; but she wiped them awny, and reolutdy shaking
wad, continued, “ I will exert myself. and look out
house, oommodiously situated in some populous but
ttrict. where we will take a few young indies to bond
te—it we can get them—and u loony day-pupilsns
or as we tan manage to instruct. Your father's
nd old friends will be able to send tn some pupils.
t us with their recommendations, no doubt: I shell
to my own. What say you to it, Agnes? will you
to have your prsent situation and try?“
willing. mm: and the money I have saved will
tishthchotue. ltshallbetnltenfwmthehonk

it is wanted: we must gs the house.undsettlean
ies ﬁrst."

to lend the little she passed: but my mother
. saying. that we must begin on an economist plan:
)pod that the whole or part of mine, added to what
getbythosaleotdwtmnimudwhntlitdeottr
had contrived to lay Iside for her since the debt:
would be sutﬁcient to inst u: till Christmas; when,
ed. something would accrue from our united labour].
ally settled that this should be our plan; and that
.nd preparation: should immediatdybe let on foot:
my mother busier! hetself with these. I should return

43o AGNES GREY.

to Horton Ludgeat the close ofmyfourweeks‘ u
give notice in: my ﬁnal departure when things were
the speedy commencement of our school.

We were discwing thse sﬂ‘airs on the morning ‘
tinned. Worm-might after my father‘s death, iv)
was brought in for my moths, on heholding which
mounted to her hoe-lately pd: enough with nation
and excessive sorrow. “ From my htherl“ mum-iv
she hutin toreoﬂ’the cover. It m many years si
heard from any of her on relations before. Narur:
ing what the letter might contain. I wutched ha (
while she read it. and was somewhnt surprised to
herlipnndknitherbmwsnsiiinnhger. Whensh
she someth irreverently mst it on the table. sa
scornful smile—-

"Your grandppa has been so kind as to write l
ays he has no doubt I have long repented of my '
marriage} and if I will only acknowledge this, and c
wrong in neglecting his novice. end that I have in
{or it. he will make llndy of me once again—if that
mar my long degradation—Ind remember my girl:
Get my duh. Agnes. and send these things away : I
the letter directly. But ﬁrst. as I may be deprivin
of a legacy. it is just that I should tell you whnt I r.
Ishall saythat he is misnken in supposing that l
the birth of my daughters (who have been the pride of
ale likely to be the comfort of my old age). or the u
have pissed in the oompanyof my best and dear:
that, had our misfortunes been three times as great :
(unlss they had been of my bringing on), I should 5
rejoice to have shared them with your father. and a
what consolation I was able; and. had his suffer-in
been ten timu what they were. I could not regret luv
over and lsboured to relieve them: that. if he has
richer wife, miebrtnnes and trials would no doubt
upon him still: while I am egotist enough to imag
other woman could have cheered him through 1h:
not that I am superior to the rest. but Iwas ma
nntl he for me; and I can no more repent. the 1
years of happiness we have spent together, and wi
could lnve had without the other. than I can the

AGNES GREY. 43:
1; beenh'snurseinsickness.nnd hisoomfutinaﬂin-

Will this do, childrunP—Qr shall I say we Ire all verysorry
vhat has happened during the Inst thirty years, and my
:hterswisbtheyhad never been born; but sinnetheyhave
that misfortune. they will be thankful fcr my triﬂe their
dpspn will be kind enough to baton?"

‘ course, we both Ipphuded our mothet‘s radiation: Mnry
ed away the hrukﬁst things; I hrwxht the risk; the
r was quickly written and despetched: and. from that day.
retard no more of our gnndtatba, till we nu his (lath
mneed in the newspaper I considerable time Ilia—ill his
dly possasions, of m, being left to our wealthy. un~
vn cousins.

CHAPTER xx.
nu yumwnu.

was: in A—. the fashionble wintering-pine. ms hired
m seminary; Ind I promise 0! two or three pupils was
ined to commune with I returned to Horton Lodge
it the middle of July, leaving my mother to conclude the
sin {or the house. to obtnin more pupils. to sell oﬂ‘ the
ture of our old abode, mid to ﬁt out the new one.

’e often pity the poor. beam they have no leisure to
rn their departed relerives, and necessity oblige them to
ur through their severest imitations: but is not active
loylnent the best remedy for overwhelming sorrow—the
it antidote for dapair? It may be a rough comforter: it
seem hard to be harassed with the cares 0‘ life when"
:no relish {or its enjoy-meats: to he seeded to labour when
heart is mdy to break. and the vexed spirit implore: (or
onlyto weep in silence: but is not labour better than the
we covet? and are not those petty. tormenting cars 145:
int than a contimnl brooding over the great afﬂiction that
use: us? Besides. we cannot hnve ears, and anxieties.
toil, without hope—if it be but the hope of fulﬁlling our

432 AGNB cm.

juylss task. accomplishing some needful project. or m
some further annoyance. At my rate, I was glad my mils
had so much employment {or every {malty of her union-loving
frame. Our kind neighbours lamented that she. onesoenltdl
iu watlth and station, should he reduced to such emetnityin
hatimeofsorruw; but I am pasundnl thatshewould lute
suEered thrice as much had she been left in afﬂuence, with
liberty to remain in that house. the scene of her curly happiw
and late aﬂliction, and no stern necesity to prevent he from
inessuntly brooding over and lamenting her hetelnenieut.

I will not dilate upon the feelingsvithwhich I letttheuld
house. the well-known garden, the little village church—then
doubly dear to me. bemuse my lathe. who. for thirty yars. had
taught and prayed within its walls. lay slumberiug now heath
its ﬂags—and the old hare hills. delightful in their very dach-
tion, with the narrow voles between. smiling in green wood and
spurltliugwater—the housewherelwus born. the scene ofa'J
my arly minions. the place where throughout life my ennth
nﬂmhnshadheencentret—md leﬁthemtoreturnnomore!
True, I was going back to Horton lodge. where. amid many
evils, onesourceofpleusure yet remained: hutitwasplasu:
mingled with exocssive pain; and my my. alas! was limited
to six weeks. And even or that precious time. day on: day
slipped by and 1 did not see him: except at chumh. [ne'er
sawhimfornl’ortnighul’tennyretum Itseemednlougtine
to me: and. as l wasnﬁen out with my rambling pupil. cl
course hope would keep rising, and disappointments would
ensue: and. then, I would say to my own hart, " Hue k I
coovineingproul—il'youwould but have the saisctosceit.¢
the andour to acknowledge it—that he dos not cure for you.
1! he only thought My as much about you as you douhotlt
him, he would have contrived to meet you many times ere this:
you must know that. by consulting your own feelings. The:-
fore. have done with this nonsense: you have no ground for
hope: dismiss, at once, these hurtful thoughts and foolish
wishes from your mind. and turn to your own duty. and the
dull blank life that lies before you. You might have bur-It
such happiness “as not {or you."

But l saw him at last. He came suddenly upon me as l was
erasing a ﬁeld in returning from a visit to Nancy Brown. which
I had taken the opportunity of paying while Matilda Murray

mm Gun. 43;

“ridingth He must Int-ehmdoﬂhg
havylmslhadsnﬁnined: heupresed no sympathy. oﬁered
nomdolmoe: bnznlmosttheﬁrstwordsheuttemdwere—
"How is your mother?" And this was up mount-course
question, {or I never told him that I Add: mother: he must
hvelearnuithefactfmmolhastheknewitstnllzand.
besides. them was sinoece good-will. and even deep. touching,
unobtrusive sympthy in the tone and manner of the inquiry.
I thanked him with due civility. and told him she was as well
uoonldbeezpected. "WlntwillshedoP" wart-cum
quadan. Many would have donned it an impenineul one,
nudgiven In evesivereply; bulwanideanevermmedmy
had, “dig-nubile! but plain statementof mother’s plans
and prospects.

“Then you will leave this place shortly?" saidbe.

" Yes, in a month."

He paused Iminute. asifin thought. Wharhespokeaglin,
.I hoped it would be to upren his oonmnmydeputnre;
but it was only to sly—"l should think yon will be willing
mulch In go?"

" Yes—{or some things." I replied.

"For me things only—I wonder who! should nuke you
regret it I "

I mmqadnuhisinsomedcgree; beanse ll embarrassed
me: I had only one reason for regretting it; and thath
profound seuu.whichhehadnobusinmnomthlcme
shout.

" Why." aid I~—" why should you suppose Ila! I dislike the

plane?"
. "You told me so ymirself," was the decisive reply. "You
aid. at least. thM you could not live contentedly. without a
friend; end that you had no friend here. and no possibility of
making one—and buida. I know you mu! dislike it."

"But if you remember rightly. I said. or man: to say. I
could not live maternally without a friend in the world .~ I was
not so unreasonable u to require one llwoys near me. I thlnk
I could be happy in a house full of enemies. if"~—— but no:
that sentence must not be continued—4 paused. and hnsﬁly
added—"And beides. we unnot well leave a plan where
we have lived for two or three yam, without some feeling of

We“ "

434 AGNES cm.

“Willyou regrettopnrtwith Mi§Mnmy,yausnleramin-
ing pupil and companion?" :

“I dannylshtdlin somedegree: itwas notwithonuonw
I puned with her sister."

"'I can imagine that."

“ Wall, Miss Mntildn is quite as good—ham, in one raped.”

“What is that?"

" She's honut."

"And theolheris not?”

" I should not all her dixhouest; but it mmbeconlmsed.
she‘s a little nrtfuL"

"Artful is sheF—I saw she m giddy and Iain-and nut,"
headded, aftaap-nse. “Ianwdlbdieverhcwnsnrtfultoo:
but so excessively so as to asume an aspect of extreme sin-
plicity and unguarded opennesx Yes." continued he musingly.
“ that accounts for some little things that path! me n triﬂe
before."

Anathn,hemedtheconvemtionmmgenanlnb-
jects. Hedidnotluvemetillwehndmlymm
park gates: he had certainly stepped a little out of his wayh
accompanyme so far. for he nowwent back and dknppured
down Mosshnetheentnneeofwhichwehnd Mannie
time More. Assuredly I did not regret this dictum: if
sorrow had anyplace in myheandtwnsththeiugucn
last—that he was nu lmgn’walking bymyside. 1nd the: that
shonintuvalofddightﬁxlintereoursewasar anmd. Hem
not breathed a ward of love, ar dropped one hint of tendm
or emotion. and yet I had been supremely happy. To be nut-
him. to hear him talk as he did talk; and to feel that he thught
me worthy to he so spokm m—apuble of nndustnnding and
duly appreciating such discounts-4v“ slough.

“Ya, Edward Wm. I could indem‘l be 11-min.”
full of enemies. it I had but one friend. who truly. deeply, Ind
faithfully lmzd me; and if that friend were you—though we
might be far apart—seldom to hm from each other. still more
seldom to meet—though toil. and trouble, and vention might
surround me. still—it would he too much happincs for me to
drum of I Yet who an tell." snid 1 within myself. Is I pro-
ceded up the park—"who an tell what this one month may
bring forth? I have lived mﬂy three-aud-twenty years. and
I have snﬁered much, and tasted lirtlepleasureyet: isitlilrdy

AGNES GREY. 43;

my life all through will be so clouded? I: it not possible that
God may hear my prayers, disperse these gloomy shadows. and
grant me some beams of heaven's sunshine yell Will He a:-
tirely deny to me those hlmings which are so freely given to
others, who neither ask them nor acknowledge them when
received? May I not still hope and mm?" I did hope and
trust for: while: but. alas. alas! the time ebbed away: one
week followed another, and. excepting one distant glimpse and
two transient meetings—during which scarcely anything was
said—while I was walking with Miss Matilda, I saw nothing
of him: except, of course, at church.

And now. the last Sunday was come, and the last service.
I was often on the point of melting into tests during the sermon
-—-the last I was to hear from him: the best I should hear from
any one, I was well assured. It was over—the congregation
were departing; and I must follow. I had then seen him. and
hard his wine, too, probably for the last time. In the church-
yard. Matilda wu pounced upon by the two Misses Great.
They had many inquiries to make about her sister. and I know
not what besides. I only wishrsi theywould have done. that
we might hasten hack to Horton Lodge: I longed to seek the
retiremmt of my own room, or some sequestered hook. in the
smooth, that I might deliver, myself up to my ﬁndings—to weep
my last farewell. and lament my false hopes and vein delusions.
Only this once. and then adieu to fruiting dreaming—thawe-
fnrth, only sober. solid. sad reality should occupy my mind.
But while I thus resolved, n low voice close huide me said-—
“I suppose you are going this week, Mix Grey?" "Ya." I
replied. I was very much startlai; and had I been at all
hysterially inclined. I certainly should have commith myself
in some way then. Thank God. I was not.

"Well." suid Mr. Weston. "I want to bid you good-hyedit
is not likely I shell see you again before you go."

"Good-bye. Mr. Watch." I said. Oh. how I struggled to
ﬂy it ulmlyl I gave him my hood. He retained it n few
reconds in his

"It is posible we may meet again," said he: " will it be of
any oonsequenoe to you whether we do or not?"

"Ya. I should be very glad to see you again."

I mld say no las. Ho kindly pressed my hand, and went.
Now, I was happy again-though more inclined to burst into

436 AGNES our.

tarsthanever. Iflhadheenforeedtospeakatthatmomem.
:l succession of sohs would have inevimblyensued; and as it
was,1oonldnotkeepthewamontofmyeyus.lnlhl
along with Mis Murray. turning aside my thee. and neglecting
to notice several streeessive remarks. till she bnwled out that
I was either deaf or stupid; and then (having Ieooverai my
self-possession), as one awakened from I ﬁt of abstracting
I suddenly looked up and asked what she had been swing.

CHAPTER xxL
THE SCHOOL.

1 Lin Horton Lodge. and went to join my rum in our
new nbode at A—. I found herwell in hulth, rsignerl it
spirit. and even cheerful. though subdued and sober. in III
general demeanor. We had only three boarders and hall:
damn day-pupils to commence with; but by dim are Ind
diligence we hnped ere long to ihotmse the number of both.

I set myself with beﬁtting energy to discharge the duties of
this newmodeollit'e. lull it new. farthereus. indad.
a considerable diﬂ’aenoe between working with my moths
in a school 0! our Own. and working as a. hireling among
strangers, despised and trampled upon by old and young: and
for the ﬁrst {ewwedu I w“ by no means unhappy. "It is
possible we may meet again." and “will it be of my eon-
sequena: to you whether we do or not?"—Those words sill
rang in my er and nsted on myhurt: theywue myseetet
solace and support. "I shall see him again—Kevin cone;
or he will write." No promise. in fact. was too bright or too
extravagant tor Hope to whisper in my ar. I did not believe
half or what she told me: I pretended to laugh at it m; but
[was far more credulous than I myself supposed; otherwise.
why did my heart leap up when a knock was heard at the front
door. and the maid, who opened it, came to tell my mother;
gentleman wished to see her? and why was I out of humour for
the rest of the day. because it proved to be a music.an
come to offer his services to our school? and what stopped my

AGNES GREY. 437

breath for a moment. when the postman having brought a
wuple of letters. my mother stid. "Here. Agnes. this is for
you," and threw one of them to anand what made the
hotbloodnlsh into myfneewhenlsaw it was directed in
a gentleman's hand? and whyP—ch! why did tint cold,
Sir-itching seme of disappointment {all upon me, when I had
ten open the cover and hound it was only a letter from Mary,
which. for some reason or other. her husband had directed
for her. -

Was it then come to this—that I should he diman to
receive a letter from myonly sister: and beats: it was not
written by a comparative stranger? Dar Mary! and she had
written it so kindly—Ind thinking I should he so pleased to
haveitl—Iwu notworthyto read it! And I believe. in my
indignation ngninst myself. I should have put it aside till I had
schooled myself into a better frame of mind. and was become
more daerving of the honour and privilege of its pet-uni: but
there was my mother looking on. and wishful to km what
news it contained; so I read it and delivered it to her. and
then went into the schoolmom to attend to the pupils: hut
midst the cares of copies and mots—in the intervals of earl-eu-
ing error: here. and repmving derelictions of duty were. 1
its inwurdly “king myself to task with far sterner severity.
"What nfool you must he." said my haul to my heart, or my
sternerto mynofter selfz—"hawcould youeverdrearnthathe
wouldwrlte tony What grounds hnveywi'orsuchnhope
—orthathewlnseeyou. orgivehinuelfany troubleaboutyou
—or even think ofyou again?" “What grounds?"—nud then
Hope set before me that last. short interview. and repeated the
words I had so faithfully treasured in my memory. "Well,
and whnt vml there in that P—Who ever hung his hopes upon
so frail a twig? What was there in those words that any
common munintnnoe might not my to another? Of coune,
it vms possible you might meet ugnln: he might have slid so if
you had been going to Newlenhnd: hut that did not imply
my intention of seeing you—Ind then. as to the question that
followed. any one might ask that: and how did you mm?
—Merely with a stupid. eomnwnplnoe reply. sueh us you won“
have given to Master Mumy. or any one else you had been
ontolemhly civil terms with." "But, then," persisted Hope.
“the tone and manner in which he spa ." “Oh. that is

438 AGNES GREY.
nonsense! he always spaks impraively: and at that moment
there were the Greens and Mix Matilda Murray just bite.
and other people posing by. and he was obliged to stand dine
beside you, and to speak very low. unless he wished everybody
to has! what he said; which—though it Ins nothing at all
particular—of amuse. he would rather not." hit that. above
all, that emphatic. yet gentle prwsxue of the bond. which
sound to say.“ Thu! 12,-" and many other things hesida—
too delightful, almost too ﬂattering. to be repeated. ever In
ono's all. "Egregiaus lolly—too absurd to require conun—
diction—mere inventions of the imagination, which you ought
to he ashmedof. If youwould but consider your own an-
attractive exterior. your unamiahle reserve. your foolish diﬁ-
dame—which must make you appear cold. dull, awkward. and
perhaps ill-tempered too 7—“ you had but rightly now
these from the beginning. you would never lave harhunei
such prsumptuous thoughts: nnd now that you have been
so foolish, pray repazt and Amend. and let us have no man
of it 1 "

I cannot say that I implicitly obeyed my own injunctions: bin
snchrusom'ngas this became morennd more al'ectivemn‘me
wore on, and nothing wns seen or heard of Mr. Weston: until
at inst. I gave up hoping. [or even my heart acknowledged it
wasnllin vnin. But still. I would think of him: I would
cherish his image in my mind: and treasure every word, look.
and gesture that my memory could retain : and brood ova-his
omellences and his peculiarities. and. in fun. all I houses.
heard. (I imagined mpeeting him.

"Agnes. thissenairandclnngeoi soeue do)». no good.l
think: I neverslwyou iooksowrelched. itmusthethotyol
sit too much. and allow the cares of the schoolroom to worry
you. You must learn to take things asy. and to he mm
active und cheerful; you must take exercise whenever you an
get it. and leave the most tiresome duties to me: they will only
serve to exercise my patience, and. perhaps. try my temper s
little."

So said my mother, as we sat at work one morning during the
Easta holidays. I assured her that my employments were not
at all oppressive; that I was well; or. if there was anything
unis, it would be gone as soon as the trying months of spring
were over: when summermne I should bensstrong Ind hearty

AGNES GREY. 439

as she could wish to see me: but inwardly her ohservntion
startled roe I knew my sumgth wns declining, my appetite
had foiled. and I wu grown listlessand dsponding ;—and if,
Mead. he cottld never care for me. and I could nevusee him
map—if I was forbidden tominister to his happiness—forbidden,
forever. to taste the joy: of love. to bias and to he blasted—
then, liﬁe must be 1 burden. and if my Heavenly Father would
alluenwny, Ithould begladtorut. But itwould not dnto
die and lave my mother. Selﬁsh. unworthy daughter, to forget
be for n momentl- Was not he hnppinas committed in n
greet measure to my chargede the welfare of our young
pupils too? Should I shrink from the work that God had set
More me. beans: it was not ﬁtted to my taste? Did not He
know best wint I should do. and wha'e I ought to labour? and
should I long to quit His service before I had ﬁnished my task.
and expect to enter into His rest without having laboured to earn
it? “ No; by H'u help Iwill nrise and nddrss myself diligently
to my nppointed duty. Khnppiness in this world is not for me,
Iwillendmvmxrtoprnmotethewelmeofthosearound memnd
myrmrdnhnllbehereafter." Sosaidlinmyheart; and
ion: that hour I only pamitted my thoughts to wander to
Mind Weston—ant least to dwell upon him now and then—
u n trat for rare melons: and. whether it wns really the
Ippmnch of sum. or the ed'ect of these good resolutions.
1: the hpoe of time. or all together, tranquillity of mind we:
Inon tutored; end bodily halth end vigour began likewise.
slowly, but sandy, to return.

Enrly in June, I received a letter from Lady Ashby. late
Mk- Murny. She had written to me twice or thrice before.
from the diﬁtmnt stages of her bridal tour. always in good
sit-its, and profssing to be very happy. I wondered evuy
than that the bid not forgotten me, in the midst of so much
glloty nnd variety of some. At length. however. there was I
pnnse: and it seemed she hnd forgotten me. for upwards of
nevus moths passed away and no letter. Of amine, I did
not I:er my hart shoot «at. though 1 often wondered how
she wns getting on ; and when this last epistle so unexpectedly
arrived. I was glad enough to receive it. It was dated Iron
Ashby Pnrlt. where she was come to settle down at last.
luring previously divided her time between the Continent and
the metropolis. She made my npologia for having neglected

44° AGNES GREY.

me so long, assured me she had not forgotten me,
often intended to write. the. kc" but had always been
by something. she acknowledged that she had be
a verydissipnted lite. and I should think her very u
very thoughtless; but. notwithstanding that. the t
great deal. and. among other things. that the shot
liketoscente. "Wehavebeenseveraldayshere
wrote she. "We have not a. single friend with “5‘
likely to be very dull. You know I never had a fancy
with my husband like two turtles in a nest, were he
delightful mutt: that ever wore a com; so do take
me and come. I suppose your Midsummer holidays c
in June. the some as other people's, therefore you can
want 04' time: and you must and shall come—in fa:
die if you don't. I want you to visit me as nfrt‘emi. I
long time. There is nobody with me. as I told you b
Sir Thomas and old LodyAshlxy: butyouneedn'tn
—they'll trouble us but little with their company.

shallhnventoorntoyourself. whenever you like to rt
and plenty of book to reed when my company is not s
amusing. I forget whether you like bnhis: if you do,
have the plusure of seeing mine—the most Charmin
the world. no doubt; and all the more so, that I
troubled with nursing it—l was determined I my
bothered with that. Unfortunately, it is a girl. and Sit
has never forgiven me: but. however. if you will onl;
promise you shall be its governess as soon I: it can sp
you shall bring it up in the my it should go. and lush
woman of it than its momma. And you shall see in
too: a splendid little charmer imported from Paris:
ﬁne Italian paintings 01'th value—I forget the artist.
less you will be able to discover prodigious bands
which you must point out to me. as I only admire by
nnd many elegant curiosities hesidﬁ. which I put!
Rome and elsewhere: and, ﬁnally. you shall see my r
—-the splendid house and grounds I used to covets
Alas! how far the promise of anticipation exceeds the
of possessionl There's a ﬁne sentiment! I assure ;
become quite a grave old matron: pray come, il' in
witnus the wonderful change. Write by return of 1
tell me when your vacation commutes. and say that

AGHES GREY. 44!

kayoﬂa.udmyﬁllthedayheﬁnreitdou—ln
my to “Ymaﬁectionately.
"Rosana Axum."

I showed this Stan‘s epistle to my mother, and mosulwd
honwhulought lode. Sheadvisedmezogo;nndl
jaw—willing mongh u: see Lady Ashby. Ind herbaby too. and
tdouyﬂlinglcwldlohcneﬁthu. byoonsolatinnar advice;
hiimnginedlhgmustbeunhnppy.orshewouldnmhnve
Ipﬂled to me amp—but feeling. as may rudin be conceived,
as, in Ming the invitation, I made 2 gm! sacriﬁce for
In. ad did violence to my feelings in may ways. instmd of
Ida; ddighled with the honourable distinction of belng en-
‘r-nd by Lh W’s lady on visit her a: a friend. Howe-zen
I ddermined my visit should he only for I {:11 days at most;
Indlvillnotdaoylhalldeﬁwd solnecmrsolaﬁonfmmthe
IbM.uAshbyParkwunotveryfnfmm Hmon.l
night pnu‘bly see Mr. Weston. or, a: last. bar somexhing
whim.

CHAPTER XXII.
THE VISIT.

Ann! Pm was certainly a very delightful raidznce. The
union m staler without. oommodious md elegnnt within;
lb: pork m spacious and beautiful, chicay on account of its
m‘niﬂnentokl trees. its slat.er herds 0! that. its broad sheet
of was. and the ancient woods that stretched beyond it: for
1h!” no broken ground to give variety!» the hndsmpe.
and but very little of that undulating swell which adds so
My to the china of park scenery. And so. (his was the
M Roadie Murray had so longed to call her own, ﬁnish:
m In": I shue of it. on whatevzr terms it might be offered
Myriam lo be paid for the titleofminnsmnd
mebeherponmrinlhebonourandblissofsuchn
mica! Well! lam nctdisposedtooensmhernw.
Shoresdvedmeverykindly: and,xhoughlwasapoor
mum's dluzhur. I gum-nest, 1nd I schoolmistnsm she

443 AGNES GREY.

wdwndmwithmﬁeetedplmsmewhehome; and—
what surprised me reﬁner—took some pains to make myvﬂ '
agreeable. I could See, it is true, that she expected metabe
greatly struck with the magniﬁcence that surrounded her; and.
Imfss. l was rather annoyed at her evident eﬁorts to re-
asme me. and prevent me from being overwhelmed by in
much grandeur—too much awed a: the idea of ennountzing
her husband Ind mother-in-law. or too much ashamed of Iry
own humbleappearance. I was not aslnmed of it It ell; Er.
thoughplain,lhadtalrengoodcarenottobeﬂnhbyor
man. and should have been pretty considerably at my as.
if my oondwaending bostus had not taken such minis: peint :
tornakemeso: and,as forthe magniﬁcent: MW
her, nothing that met my eyu struck me or eEected me hall'n
muchasbcrmaltercd appearance. Whetherﬁontheil—
ﬂnenee of fashionable dissipation, or some other evil. I spec
of little more than twelve months had had theeﬂ'cct that might
be expected from as many ya“, in reducing the plumsz
her (arm, the freshness of her complexion, the vivau'ty d 1-:
movements, and the urnberance of her spirits.

I wished to know it' she was unhappy: but I felt it “snot
my province to inquire: I might endeavour to win her conﬁ-
dence; but. if she chose to conceal her matrimonial cares from
me, I would trouble her with no obtrusive questions. I thee-
fore. at ﬁrst, conﬁned myself to a few general inquiries about her
health and welfare, and a few oommendations on the beauty of
the park. and of the little girl that should have been a boy: a
small delicate intent of seven or eight weds: old, whom its
mother seemed to regard with no remarkable m of in-
terst nraﬁectlon. thoughﬁzll es muchas lapeetedherto
show.

Shortly after my arrival, she commissioned her maid to new
duet me to my room and See that I had everything I wentd:
it was it small. unpretendinz. but suﬁciently counter-table Inert-
mellL When I dacendcd thence—having divested nysdi‘ 0!
all travelling Enc‘mnbﬁmces, and arranged my toilet with due
nonsidmtiou far the feelings of my lady hosth W .
rne herself to the room I was to occupy when I chose to Del
alone. or when she m mgazed with visitors. or obliged to
he with her malher-in-law. or othawise prevented. as she lid.
from enjoying the pleasure of my society. It III: I. quiet, lily

l

AGNES GREY. " 443

little sitting-room; and I was not sorry to be provided with
ml: I harbour of refuge.

"And some time." said she. " I will slam: you the libnry:
1 never mined in shelves. but, I due say. it is full of wise
boob; andyoumnygolndhw‘rawammgtbanwhenuayau
plum. And now you shall have me (ﬂ—‘il will soon he
dinner-time. but I thought. as you were suntan-3d to dine at
me. you would perhaps Ilka bate tohma cupof team
thllﬁmlnd tndinewhenwe lunch; and atme Imamyuu
wheyourluinthisroom.md1hntvilluvayoufrm
haviugtodiuwith IadyAsibyand Sir'ﬁnnu: whidtwanld
be nther awkward—at km. not l'k'll'd. but ruther—a—ytm
know what I man. I thught you mightn’t like it so well—
spednlly :5 we may have other Mia and pm to dine
with In occasionally."

"Catninly." said I. “I would much atlas lmve it as you
my: ud.5l'ymhve no objection..[ should [adult-wing all
my an]: in this room."

.. Why mr.

“Begum! imagine, It waddbemuengmalhlem my
mm Sir Thamu."

" Nothing ohhz ldncL”

"At uynxc. ix mldbemozengmhla tame."

She made same faint objections. but soon conxzded: Anal I
could a: that the prepaid was a considenble relic! to her.

"Now. come into the drawing-room." s‘d she. "Thais
(heireslingbdl; mlmn'tgoyer: it'smunedrusiugwhen
thae'nnamatoaeeyou; Ind l wantmhoe-llulcdiscome."

The dnwingq'room was certainly tn inpuing mammal“!
my may (unkind; but 'I saw its young mistress glut:
wmdl mauve entered,uiftoncticehowl~usimpraad
by the Ipoctnde. and seemingly I deumined to press-Venn
upendstmy indlﬂ'ereme, Is it I av nothing at Ill remarkable.
But this was only for l. mament: imnndialely conscience
whispeted. "Why should I diu‘ppuint ba- tc save my pride?
No—nther let m sacriﬁce my pride to give her I little innmt
gutiﬁuﬁon.” And I hollme loom round. and told bcr it
w Aaobl: norm, and very “challny Eh: mid little.
but 1 m sh: w-s plased.

She IhOIIEd II: he {at French poodle. tint lay curled up an
a silk cushion, and lb: two ﬁne Italian paintings: which. how-

.444 AGNES GREY.

ever. she would not give me time to examine. but. mying I must
look at them some other day. insisted upon my admiring Iht
little jewelled watch she had purchased in Geneva; and then she
took me round the room to point out sundry articles of var-
she hnd hmught {torn Italy: an elegant little timepiece. Ind
semi busts. small graceful ﬁgures. Ind vases, all bml‘m'hll]
carved in white marble She spoke of thse with nninulinn.
and heard my admiring comments with a. smile 0! plane:
that soon. however. vanished. and was followed by I meluchdy
sigh; as if in consideration of the insuﬁciency of III sndl
baubles to the happinas of the human heart, end their wodi
innbiiity to lupply its insatinte demands.

Then. stretching herself upon I conch. she motioned me to I
capacious easy—chair that stood opposite—not More the the.
but before a wide open window; for it was summer, be it re-
membered; a sweet, warm evening in the latter half 0! June.
I sat far a moment in silence, enjoying the still. ptnenir. sndtll
delightful prospect of the park that lay before me. rich in radar:
and foliage, and basking in ydlow mnshine. relieved by the
long shadows of declining day. But I must take advantnge of
thispause: Ihndinquirles tomke.uld.like thesuhsunetof
a. lady': postsn'ipt. the most important must come inst So i
begun with taking after Mr. and Mn. Murray. and M'Es Manila
and the young gentlemen.

I was told that papa. had the gout. which made him very
ferocious ; and that he would not give up his choice wines, Ind
his substantial dinners md suppers. and had quandled with his
physician. because the latter had dared to say tlut no rnedidne
could cure him while he lived so freely; that mmrnn nnd the
rest were welL Mntildnwnsstillwild and reddm,butshehld
got a fuhionnhlc was, and was considerably improved
in humannets. and soon to he introduced to the world; and
John and Charles (now at home for the holidays) were, by 5“
accounts. “ﬁne, bold. unruly. misdiievous boys."

“And how/are the other people getting on?" said l—"the
Greens. for instance?"

"Ah! Mr. Green is heart-broken. you lmcw." replied she.
wilhnlanguid smile: " he hnsn‘t got over his disappointment
yet. and never will, I suppose He's doomed to be an alt}
bachelor; and his sisters are doing their but to get nun
rind."

AGNES GREY.

" And the Melthnms? "

"0h. they're jogging on as usual, I suppose: but I know
Very little about myol' them—except Hurry." said she, blushing
slightly. and smiling egnin. “ I saw :1 gm: deal olhim while
vewerein Undongformssoonnshehenrdwewerethete.
he mine up under pretence of visiting his brother. Ind eithu'
followed me. like-shadow. wherevetlwent.m-metme. like:
Mattie . at every turn. You needn‘t look so shocked. Miss
Grey; 1 m verydiscreet, I assure you: but. you know.one
un't help being idnlited. Poor fellow 1 He was not my only
worshipper ; though he was certainly the most conspicuous. and,
I think, themes! devoted among them In. And thnt detest-hie
ma Sir Thomas chose to take oﬁenoe a! him—or my
mfnse expenditure, or something—I don't exactly know what
—end hurried me down to the country It a munent‘s notice;
‘here I‘m to play the hermit, I suppose, for life."

And she hit her lip. 8nd lrnwned vindictively upon the fair
domainshehndonoesooovetedtoullherown.

“And Mr. Hatﬁeld." snid I, "what is become of him?“

Again she brightened up. and mod pity—-

"Ohl he rnsde up to an elderly spinner. and married her,
not long since; weighing her heavy purse agninst her faded
dams. Ind expecting to ﬁnd that solace in gold which was
dutiedhimin love. in, he!"

“ Well, Ind I think that's all—unepl Mr. Weston: what ishe
thing?"

" I don't know. I‘m sure He's gone from Harlan."

" How long since? nnd whet! is he gone to?”

" I knownothing about him." replied she, yawning—W except
that he went about a moth ago—I never asked what" (I
would have Asked whether it was to a living or merely mother
wary. but thought it better not). " and the people mule a great
rout shout his leaving," continued she. “ much to Mr. Hatﬁeld's
displeasure; for Hatﬁeld didn't like him. beam he had too
much inﬂuenee with the common people. and beam hewns
not mﬁciently tremble Ind submisive In him—and for some
other nnpnrdouuble sins. I don't know what. Ru now I
positively must go and dras: the senond hell will ring directly.
Ind if I name to dinner in this guise. I shall never hear theend
n! it from Lady Ashby. It‘s a strange thing one can't he
mistress in one's own house! Just ring the hell, and 1'“ sad

44$

446 AGNES GREY.

for my maid. and tell them to get you some he. Only thinkof
that intolereble women "—

" Who—your ﬂuid P "

“ No ; my mother-ianw—ond my unlu'lunﬂe minke! II-
srmd oflenlng hertake herself of to some otha house. no:
oﬂ‘eredtodowhen Inurried, Insfeolamughmnskheru
liveherestill. anddirectthealﬁirsonhehousefonne; hams,
inthcﬁrst place, I hoped we should spend the gruterprt‘
theyear in town, and in the second place, heingso young .1
inexperienced. I was frightened at the ida ofhnving : hornet!
of servants to manage. and dinners to ads, and misc
min, Ind all the rest of it. and I thought she lighted!
mewith herexperienee: never dreamlngshewonldprowl
uni-per. aryrxnt, an incubus..n spy, nod evaything dse M
detestable I wish she was dead 1 "

She then turned to give ha orders to the footrnan, who”
been standing bolt upright within the door for the ins belt
minute. and had heard the latter part of her mm;
and. of course. made his own reﬂections upon them, outwith
standing the inﬂuihle. wooden countenance he thought props
to preserve in the drawing-rm On my rem-king nl‘tuunls
that he must have heard he. she replied—

"Oh, no matter! 1 neve- utre ahontthe room; Mil
mere automatons: it‘s nothing to them what their supa'iasl]
ordo: theywon‘tdatetorepmt it; and as to what tlzythinl
—if they presume to think at all—of course, nobody mint
thaL It would be a pretty thing indeed, if we wee in be
tongue-lied by our serum: l "

Sosaying. she ran oﬂ‘tornnlre herhuty toilet, leavlng new
pilot my way back to my sitting-mom. where. in due lime.‘
was served with a. cup oi ten. After that, I at musing on
Luly Ashby's post and present condition: and on what little
information I had obtained respecting Mt. Wam. and the
small chance there was of ever seeing or baring anything we
of him throughout my quiet. drab-colour life: which. hence-
{orth, seemed to 01hr no ulternative between potion all]
days. and days of dull grey clouds without downfall. AI
length. hawever. I began to wary of my thoughts. nod [0
wish I knew where to ﬁnd the llbrarymy hostss had spoken
or; and to wonder whether I was to remain there doing nothina
till bedtime

muss any. 447

' As I was not richenoughto Munichlmldnot
tell how time was pming. eimept by observing the slowly
lengthening shadows from the window; which presented 5 side
view. including a corner of the park. a clump of trees. whose
topmost branches had been oolonised hynn innumenble corn.
pony ofnoisy rocks,and ahigh wall with nmnssivewooden
gene: no doubt communicating with the stable-yard, as a broad
“triage-road swept up to it from the park. Thede of this
wensommokpossasinnofthewholeot‘thegroimdashnsl
could see, farting the golden sunlight to retrat inch byinch,
Ind at last the reluge in the very tops of the tres Ere long,
even they were left in shadow—the shadow of the distmt hills.
or of the earth itself: and, in sympathy for the busy citizens of
the rocket-y, l regretted to see their hibilation. to lately bathed
in glorious light, reduced to the sombre. wurk—aday hue of the
Iowa: world, or of my own world within. For a moment. such
birds as soured above the rest might still receive the lustre on
their wings. which imparted to their sable plumge the hue and
brilliance of deep red gold ; at last. that too departed. Twilight
came stealing an; the rocks became more quiet; I became
more weary. Ind wished I were going home tomorrow. At
length it grew dark; and I was thinking of ringing fora candle.
and banking myself to bed. when my hostes nppared. with
many apologis for having neglected me so long. and laying all
the blame upon that " nasty old woman." as she called her
mother-in-lnw.

" It’ I didn't sit with her in the drawing-room while Sir
Thomas is taking his wine," said she. “ she would never forgive
me: and, then. if X lave the room the instant he comes—as I
have done once or twice—it is In unpardonahle oﬁenoe ngainst
her dear Thomas. Slat never showed such disrespect to lier
w: and as for aﬂection. wives never think of that now-:—
dlys, she supposes: but things were different in Iter {link-IS it
than was any good to be done by staying in the room. when he
dos nothing but grumble and Scold when he's in ahgtd humour,
Mk disgusting nonsense when he's in a good one, and go to
sleep on the sofa when he's too stupid for either: which is most
Mandy the case now. when he has nothing to do but to sot
over his wine."

“ But cmld you not try to occupy his mind with some
thing better; and engage him to give up such habits} I'm.

443 mm cm.

mywhavepowersofpumsion.udquali&aﬁouh
Inning : gentleman. which my ladies would be ghd I:
possess.’

"And soyou think I would lay myselfout {chum
meat! No: that's not an] idea of I wife. It’s the hush-nil:
pantopleusethewife,nothasw plusehim; and il'heisu’l
sadsﬁedwithherassheis—andthnkmltopowhaun-k
isn't worthyot'hgr. that's all. And as for pelsunsiou, Insult
you 1 shu‘t trouble myself with that: I've enough lode labor
with him as he is. without attempting towark Inform. ﬂ
l‘msorry I left yousn long alone, Miss Grey. Howhnve yul
passedthe time?"

" Chieﬂy in watching the mob"

"Macy,de you unsthaveheul Irenllymuslshﬂ
youthelibrary;nndyoumtringforcvsythingyuuwm
juslnsyouwouldinnuinn. undunkeyourselt‘commﬂt.
l have selﬁsh won: {or wishing to make you h-ppy. bean
lwnnlyou wsuywith me,unrl not fulﬁl yourhon’idthiul
of naming away inadayortwo."

“Well. don't let me keep you out of thednwingmury
longerto—night,forntpr=utlnmtimd.ndwishwgota
bed...

CHAPTER XXIII.
THE PARK.

I CAME down A little before eight, next morning, as l he!
bythe striking of a distant clock. There wu no uppunu!
of brukfust. I waited above nu hour More it came. still niul)
longing for m to the libtlry: Ind. ma- that lonely repﬂ
was concluded. I waited again about an hour and : bull's
gmt suspense and dlscomfort, uncertain what to do. At length
lady Ashby came to bid me good-morning. She informed ll
she had only just breakfasted, and now wanted me to take ll
early walk with her in the park. She asked how long l I!!!
been up. and on receiving my uswa'. expressed the deep:
regret. and again promised to show me the library. 1 sugar-

AGNES our. 449

Lhehdhutudomumnndthenthaewmddhem
"urther trouble either with remembering or forgetting. She
mﬂied. oneonditionthnt Iwouldnotthinkol'rading. or
Dotheringwiththehnohnow: forshe wanted to showmethe
W.nndtnkenwdk inlheparkwilhlnc,beloreitbe-
zany: too hot for enjoyment: which. indeed, wu narly the
caulk-end; Ofemnse. I readilyassenml; nndwe took our
walk noondingly.

AI we wete strolling in the park, talking at whnt my non:-
p‘nionhdseennndhmd durinzhn'unvellingupaienoe,
ngentlemannnhotsehmkrodeupnndpanedus. Ashe
tuned.inpusing,audstnredmefnllinthefaee,1hnda
good opportunity of seeing what he us like. He was toll.
thin. nnd wasted, with a slight sloop in the shouldm, n pale
hoe. but somewhat blotchy. and dile red about the
eyelids. phln futures. and a genenl apparent: of langunr
andﬂntnus. relieved by: sinister expression in the nlouthand
the dull. soulless eys.

“I detest thnt man!" wh'spesed IAdy Ashby. with hitter
emphasis. as he slowly trotted by.

“Who is it?" Inked. unwilling to suppose that sheshould
Inst of her husband.

"Sir Thomas Ashby." she replied. with dreary composure.

“And do you decal him. Mia Murray?" aid 1, for I was

ho much shocked to remember her name at the moment.

“Ya. I do, Mia Grey. and dupise him too; and if you

knew him you would not blnme Inc.

" But you knew what he was before you untried him."

"No; I only thought so: I did not hnlt'knorw him rally.

1 know you warned nae ngninst it. and I wish i had listened
‘0 you: but it's too late to regret that now. And besides.
Inmrna ought to have known better than either of us. and
the never said nnything Igoinst it—quite the contrary. And
then I thought he ndaled me. and would let me have my own
my: hedidptetendtodoso It ﬁrst. lutnawhedoetnot
(are n bit about me. Yet 1 should not care [or that: he might
douhe plased, if I might only be free to amuse myself and
to stay in London, or have n few friends down here: but M
u‘lldansheplensa,nnd I must hen prisoner nndnslnve.
The mt hesnw I could enjoy mysell'witbout him. nnd that

«he! knew my vnlue better than himself. the selﬁsh wretch
l.

450 AGNES cm.

began to mined mquetry Incl magma; udt
abuse Harry Melthm, whose shoes hem notwtmhyt
clan. And then, he must needs have In: elm in the may
toladthelil'eol'anun. lastlshonlddishannnr hit-r
bring himtonlin:lsifhehadnothecnlmtimesvux
every wly. with his betting-book. And his guningAabh, a.
his opera-girl; and his Lady Thk Ind Mn. Thu—ya
and his bottlm of wine. and glam of brandy Ind vana- m
Oh, I would give ten thousand worlds to be Miss Mm)
again! It is»: bad to feel life, hulth. and bunny wash;
away, um‘eIt sud unenjoyed. {or such abrute as time”:
claimed shg, fairly harming into “I! in the hing-um a“!
nation.

Ofcoutse, I pitiedha- exceedingly; Iswdlforbaﬁhaidn
of happiness and disregard of duty, as far the wretched guru!
hith whom her fate was linked. 1 said Whit I could to new
by, and oﬁ‘emd such counsels as I thought she must requiml:
advising her, ﬁrst, by gentle reasoning, by kindness. ennph
and pasnasion. to try to ameliorate ha husband; And that
when she had done all she could. if she gill found him i-
corrlgible, to endeavour to abstruu haself from him—tom!
herself up in her own integrity, and unable hasell’ as link
about him as possible. I aborted her to seek consolarion in
doing her dulyto God and man. to put her trust in Helm.
udsohoehasdlwiththecare Indmtureofhuliﬂk
daughter; assuring her she would be amply renrded bywit-
nessing its progrnss in strength and wisdom. tad reedvingiu
genuine aﬂection.

" But I ain't devotc merll'entirely to a child,“ said she: “i!
may die—which is not at all improbih ."

" But, with care. my a deﬂate inflnt has become a SEW!
m or woman."

" But it may grow so lntolcrlbly like its lather that I sbl
hate lL"

“ That is not likely; it is a little girl, and strongly resemble
its molher,"

“No matter; I should like it better if it were a boy—ml:
that is father will leave it no inheritance lhll he can posihl
sqmnder away. What pleasure can I have in seeing 1 xi:
gmwuptoeclips: me. And Enjoyme thn I unfa
ever deharred from? Em suppodng I could be so gen“

m cm. 4;:

:‘buhﬁhiﬂmhiub-ﬁﬂ:ndlmi

“anginahaw:midymmm
thndeuxin‘mdhosdog. Andafaraﬂxhctisdonm
mmhnbeawﬁugminsﬁlinmm—dntbaﬂmy
ﬁghtandpupaldaxesay,andiflwatsomenutyyears
tamlmigmfmdybyit: butpnplzmanjoythanselns
vhenlhqaxeymg;ndifochasm’zlavhm~vhy,¢hq
mmmhk!"

"‘I'hehlszwayloaaioyyowsdf mtbwhzt Bright and
hunched; mmdwgbnismwrechnshawm
.ie.-h¢bvioive:ndlheadirymmwiseandgwd.

Iﬂ-aﬂmk:mlhﬂghedhhﬁa¢hmid
Idmhhaguﬂalmnndmmcﬁngin
kwdhchsmmhmwhom
nab:ud.¢an¢hmuindlynncbdwham.sheis

“mmmuwwumgm

Niacin-nihﬁnglanﬂmdermpdfsoﬁnkm
auc.-yluidmnAshbyPukhmmdonﬂyp-iufd But
ﬂJ-mllymdmhyudlhefolb-ingongulhad
Wmdvn:ﬁugh,udsinganmmm-
“mph-(minim. Imwm
them-mincaﬁnﬁnngyI-uhzmldbemly
mummmimpnﬁamyapeadmym.
Wﬁmlﬂhahvylﬂnmlhﬂadhm
maladyMby,u|dld1bsinheptincdyhuglxm
nmwwdummmsm
Ineﬁngwlhemsdaﬁuofmymandamesﬂydcs'n
hmpﬂyd‘mmmmmmmw
littleemwhltobcro'n—Ihom shehadmpledyfagum

4s: AGNES our.

lnhahonrso‘prweritydndwhneeprueneewould bent!
nuulsancetlnnapleunreﬁﬂhecouldhthanhnﬂhahu
dtsire.

..—

CHAPTER XXIV.
'nr: suns.

Ounschoolwasmsituatedintheheutofthem:
entering A— from the north-west than is n row chap
nhle-lookinghouses. anachsidconhehro-d.whiterud,t
narrvw slips of garden-ground before then. Venetinn blind
the windows, md a ﬂight of mp9 lending to ugh trim, ll
handled door. lnoneofthehrgsoftheselnhiuﬁonstb
my mother and Lwith such young India: as our friends
the public chose to commit to our ehuge. Consequently.
wacnwnsidemﬂedistancehmtbesaanddividedf
it by n labyrinth nlstrem and boom. Dot theseswls
delight; and I would often gladly place the town to oh
the pleasure of I “W haide it. whether with the pupils
alone with my mother during the vmtion; It was delightfl
mentnlltimesnndseasans,hutapeciallyinthewildcommo
ofa tough sea-Mme. and in the brilliant ﬁeshnes of: sum
morning.

I awoke early on the third manning alter my return f
Ashby Park—Abe sun was shining through the blind. I!
thought haw pleasant it would be to pass through the q
town and take a salitnry ramble on the smith while hall
world was in bed. I wns not long in forming the realm
norslowtoactuponit. Ofmmlwouldnotdisturb
mother. so I stole noiselwa downstairs. and quietly unfast:
the door. I was dressed and cut. when the chard: dock st!
9. quarter to six. There was a feeling of ﬁshnets and rig
in the very streets. and when I got free of the town. when
foot was on the sands and my face towards the broad, hr
bay. no language can describe the effect of the deep. c
azure of the sky and ocean. the bright morning sunshine
the semicimllar barrier of craggy cliffs surmounted by gt
swelling hills. and an the smooth, wide sands. and the

mummy-I: “harm”

layde Mymmelbﬁnmmdnh
hobsndsk—nuh'nghduuhduuqﬂdhs‘m

mm‘uﬂdmmmdhmm

E
E.
E

minmeorlvo,dudinanthuhing-mdlineswwﬂtqinln
mandihatheddgﬂygmthnmdlqﬂarmnd
mwmmmumingmmmm
Walk: Bub!“me m
hlwuunuvaitwvimiubrlhem
mmmhmﬁm,ﬂmlmﬂ one
glance:-ndlhulunednpinloddightmysdtrhhthe
ghtmdlhesounddtheseadﬂﬁngupinsmypmm
Wmmfmfuzhenﬂmhdm
ungkdwmmemmdsm;ml

s
5?

454 AGNES cum:

should soon have been deluged with spay. But the tide!
camingin; the wane! was rising: the gnlﬁ end khan
ﬁlling: the strain were widening, it in: Line to seek an
other faxing; so lwallced. shipped, and stumbled but to d
smooth. widesnnds. nndresolved to pmueed to n mini-aha
pmjeclion in the chili. and then return.

Presently. I head I summing smmd behind me, and than
dog ulna frhking and wriggling tn my feet. It v.15 uron
Sup—the little, duh, wire-haired ta'rierl Wham I spoh h
me, be lap! up in my lice and yelled Su- joy. Almdx
much delighted IS himself, I caught the little «chime in 1!
arms. Ind kissed him repeatedly. But howmme heal
there? He cmddnothnvedmpped {min the Iky.orumea
that way alone: it must be either his master. ihe Md:
or somebody else the: had hrvnght him; In, xeptessin‘ n
emvngnm aliases. Ind endavmxring to repress his kiwi:
I looked round. and beheld—Mr. Wamn I

" Year dog remember: you well. M'us Grey," said hem
gnspingthe hnnd I «ﬂexed hinwithnntduﬂyknuwingvi
I was ebont. " Yen rise any."

" Not men so early as this." I mplied. with amazingom
pawn, considering all the drcnmstance: of III: use.

"How tar do you purpose to extend yum- walk?“

"I was thinking of returning—it must he almost time,
think“

He mulled his watch—s. gold one now—Ind told main:
only ﬁve minutes past seven.

“ But. doubtlus, you have had a. long enaugh walk," aldh
turning towards the town, to which I now proceeded leisme
retrace my steps; and he walked beside me.

“ln what pert of the lawn do you live?" axial he. "
never could discovet."

Neva could discover P Had he endeavoured to do so that
I told him the place of aux-abode. He asked haw we pm
pet-ed in our mils. I told him we were doing very well
that We had had an eonsidenble addition-to our pupils all
the Christmas vacation. and expected a still {unhu inmase
the close of ibis.

“ Yen must be an aecompl‘nhed instructor." he observed.

" No, it is my mother." I replied 7 "she manages things
well, Ind is in naive, and clever. and kind."

1mm our. "45;.

“I shouldlilretoknow-yourmotha.‘ Willyouintroduoune

to her some time. if I all?“

""Ys, willingly."

"And wnl you nllow me the privileged In old friend. of
lacking in upon you now and then? "

" Ya, if—I suppono so."

'l‘hiswunveryfoolishnnswu.butthomtthvns.lcon—
sidered that I had no right to invite my one to my mothu'n
use without her knowledge; and if I had said, "yes, if my
mother does not objnct." it would upper as if by his question
I understood more then won apected ; Io "mm; the would
not. I added. "I euppooe 30:" but of ooune 1 should lave
mid something more msihle and more polite. if I had had
my wits about me. We continued our walk for a minute in
silenoe: which, however. was shortly relieved (no small relief
to me). by Mr. Weston commenting upon the brightness of the
morning and the beauty of the lay. and than upon the advan-
tages A— possessed over many other fashionable places 0
mt. -

" You don't ask what brings me to A—," said he. “ You
tan't suppose l'm rich enough to oorne for my own plasma."

"1 hard you land lea Horton." 

" You didn’t hear. m , lhlt 1 had got the living of
F—?"

F— m u villnge about two miles distant from A—u

"No." aid 1; "we live so completely out of the world,
even have. thnt new: seldom reaches the through any quarter;
except through the medium 0! the -——- Gaunt. But. i hope
ymxlikeyournewpurish; nodthat I muyoongmmlateyouon
the acquisition 7 "

"I expect to like mypnrish better: yurar two hence,
when l have worked certain reforms l have set my heart upon
—or, nt lent. progressed some steps towards such an achieve-
I. But you mny eongntuiate me now: {or I ﬁnd it very
unable tobm a parish all to mysdf. with nobody to inter-
fere with rue—to thwart my plans or cripple my exertions:
and besides. I have u rupoctnhlo house in 1 ntth plenum
na'ghbourhood. and three hundred pounds a year: and. in fact,
I have nothing but solitude to complain of, and nothing but a
.compnnion to wish for."

He looked at me as be ooncluded: and the ﬂush of his dork

456 AGNES GREY.

eyaseemed to set myfnceonﬁre: Mytornyowndis
ﬁtnre. for to evince confusion at such I juncturewns intnler
I made III effort. therefore. to remedy the evil, and dirt
nil personal lpp‘iution of the rel-lurk by n hmy. m-upn
repiy. to the eﬁect tint. if-he waited till he wu wdl h
in the neighbourhood. he might have numerous oppcrtn:
for supplying his want Among the ruideuts of F——- In
vicinity. or the visitors of A—-—, if he required so In;
choice: not considering the compliment implied by sud
assertion, till his answer made me aware of it.

“I am not so presumptuous as to believe that," aid
"thoughyoutell it me; but if it mm to. I unntherpnr
lar in my notions of a companion for life. and perhaps I u
not ﬁnd one to suit me among the ladis you mention.”

“ I! you require pa-fection. you never will." '

"I do not—I have no fight to require it, as being st
from perfect myself."

Here the conversation in: interrupted by a mter-art'
bering past us. for we were now come to the busy put 01
sands; and, for the next eight or ten minutes. between:
and horses. Ind ass. and men. there was little room for s
intu'oourse, till we had turned our hacks upon the sa,
begun to ascend the precipitous road leading into the In
Here my companion offered me his arm, which I none]
though not with the intention of using it as a support.

“You don't olien come on to the sands, I think." slid
" for I hnve walked there many times, bath morning Ind a
ing. sinue I came, and never seen you till now; Ind 59
times. in passing through the torn. too. I hnvn looked I
for your school-hut I did not think of the —— Road:
once or twice I made inquiries. but without obtaining
requisite information."

When we had surmounted the acclivity. I was about to I
draw my arm [mm his. but by: slight tightening of the el
was tacitly informed that such was not his will. Ind emrdi
desisted. iDisconrsing on diﬂerent subjects, we entered
townv end pased through several streets I saw that he
going out of his my to mommy me. notwithstanding
long wall: that ms yet before him ; lnd. fearing that he
be inconveniencing himsel! from motives of politeness, I
served—-

AGNES GREY. 457

" 1 {en I am taking you out of your way. Mr. Wston—l
believe the mud to F— lia quite in moths direction."

"I'll Inveymnttheeudotthenensm."snidhe.

“And when will you come to see minim?"

“ To-mnnmv—Gnd willing."

'I‘bemddthenm street-as nearlythe conclusion ofmy
journey. He stopped them. however. bid me good-morning.
“dulled Snap, wholemednlittledmibtﬁdwhethermfoﬂow
his old minus: or his new master. but trotted away upon being
summoned by the lntter.

‘ "I won‘t oﬁ'et to ram him to you. Miss Grey." said Mr.
“'eston. smiling. " beanie I like him."

" Oh. I don't want him." replied I. " new that he has a good
runner ; I'm quite ntisﬁed."

"Youtnke it for noted that I an n good one. then?"

The mom! thedagdepnmsd. and I returned home. mile!
gratitude to Haven for so much bliss, nnd playing that my
hopes might not main be mulled.

C HAPT E R XXV.
CONCLUSION.

“ Wl':u.. Agog. you mist nottnkesnchlongvlnlksngainbefom
breakfast, sold my mother. observing till I drunk inextra cup
of coffee and ate nothing—pleading the bent of the wathet. and
the fatigue of my loogwnlk as an excuse. I certainly did feel
feverish and ﬁnd too.

"Yunnlvvays dolhlngs bym: now. if you had taken
I .nlor! walk every morning. and would continue to do so. it
would do you good."

" Well. munmn. I will."

" But this is worse than lying in bed or bending over your
books: you have quite put yourself into n fever."

“ I won't do it again," slid I.

I WIS tucking my brain: with thinking how In tell her nbout
Mr. Weston, for she must know he was coming tomorrow.
However, woman the mum: thingIm removed. Ind

458 AGNES Gm.

Immaculm and and; and themha'ingsnt dawn to my
drawing. I began—

"I mnenoldﬁ-lendcnthenmisbdsy. mm"

"An old friend! Whoeould ith?‘

“Two old friends. indeed. One In: I dog" and then I
reminded h: of Sean-hose history I hd recounted helore.
andrelaled the incident ofhis sudden appurlnee end lunati-
able rewgnilion; "end the other.” continued I. "Ins Mr.
Weston, the mile of Horton.“

“ Mr. Weston ! I never hard of him before."

“Ya, you have: I've rnenh'mmed him Ievanlﬁnm. I believe:
but you don't remember."

" I've hard you week of Mr. Hntﬁeld."

"Mr. Hatﬁeld was the rector. and Mr. Wanna the entire:
I used to mention him sometims in to Mr.
Hatﬁeld. as being I more eﬁcient clergyman. Hm. he
m on the sends this morning with the dog—he lead hunch
it. I suppose, from the rat-ratchet: and he knew me an id
as it did-probably through its means: and I had rt little eon-
versation with him, in the com of which. as he asked ehont
our school, I was led to say something about you end your
good management: and he said he should like to know yon.
and asked if I would introduce him to you. if he should take
the liberty of calling to-mm'row; so I said I would. Was I
right?"

"Ofeourse. What kind ofa man is he?"

"A verynvfnddk nun, I think: but you willsee himto‘
marrow. HeisthenewvicarofF—.andnshehsuly
heenlheren fewweeks, Isupposehehns made no triadsya.
and vents n little society."

The marrow came. What a fever of Anxiety nnd expeuntim
I m in from hmkfast till noon—at which time he nude his
appearance! Having introduced him to my mother. I took my
work to the window, and sat down to await the result of the
interview. They got an extremely well together: greatly to
my sntisteerion, {or I had felt very anxious about what my
mother would think of him. He did not any long that
time: but when he roSe to take leave, she said she should be
happy to see him. whenem he might ﬁnd it convenient to
cell again; and when he was gone, I was gratiﬁed by hearing
her say-—

AGNES Gm. 459

“ Weill 1 think he's a very sensible men. But why did you
sit back there, Agnes." she added, " and talk so little."

“ Because youtnlked sowell. mammi. I thought you required
no assistance from me: nd. bsides, he was your visitor, not
mine."

After that. he often ﬁlled upon ne‘meral times in the
course of o week. He generally addressed most of hil eon-
vautinn to mymother:undnowondu,[orshecwldeon-
verse. I» almost envied the unfettered, vigorous ﬂuedey of hu‘
discourse. and the strong sense evinced byeverything she said
—and yet, I did not; for. though I occasionnlly regretted my
own deﬁcienciu {or h‘usnke, it gnve me very greet plasure to
sit md henrthetwoha'ngl I loved Ind honoured above every
one else in the world. disuourxing together so amicably, so
wisely, and towel). I was not alwnys silent, however: nor
waslnzallnegleeted. Iwnsqniteumuchnotieednolwould
w‘nhtobe: therewnnohek nfkindwords and kinder looks.
no end of delicate nttentions. too ﬁne end subtle to be grasped
by words, and thee!“ indescribable—hut deeply {elt at heart.

Ceremony was quickly dropped between us: Mr. Warm
umensanexpemdguesbweleomentﬂllim.nndm
damaging the economy of an household nﬂ‘airs. He «at
alled rue "Agn::“ the name had been timidly :polren at
ﬁrst, but, ﬁnding it gave no cdznee in my quarts, he seemed
greatlytopreﬁuthatappelhu‘onto “Min Grey;" and lo did
L Haw tedious and gloomy we those days in which he did
not camel And yet not miserable: for I had still the remem-
brmofthehstvisitnndthehopeofthenentncheerme.
But when two or three day: passed without my seeing him, I
ceruinly felt very anxinnp—chsurdly. le :0; for.
ofeourse,hehadhilownhnsinesnndthenﬂ‘aiaofhll
parkhtouttmd to. And. I drmded thecloenofthehnlidnys,
when my minus also would begin, and I should be some-
timeslmabletoseehim.nnd sometima—whenmymother
was in the sehoolroom—ohliged to be with him alone: I
positionldidnotnlall desire. in the house; though romeet
him out of doors. and well: beside him, had proved by no
man: din-green”:

Oneevening.hmlevu'. in the in: week 0! the mica. he
arrived-Impededly: for l hmvy and protruded thum-
showerdnrbgthembddmut damned myhopes

460 nouns GREY.

ofseeinghim that day; hutnnwthestormwas over,“th
sun wns shining brightly. ’

"A beautiful evening. Mrs. Grey!" said he. as he entered.
"Agnes. I mt you to taken walkwith me to"—— (he named
a catnin part of the coast—n hold hill on the land side, and
towards the suaswep precipice,me then-mix dwhidu
gloriamview‘ntohehnd). “Therain his kid the dust,and
molednndclmredthenir,nndthepfospectwillbemagniﬁ-
cent. Will you come?"

"Can I go. manna?"

" Y5; to be sine."

i went loge! ready. nndwnsdownagain insfevlminnts:
though, of course, I took a little more pdns with my attire than
if I had merely been going out on some shopping expedition
alone. The thunder-shower had certninly had a mist benﬁdul
ﬂeet upon the rather. and the evening was most delightinl
Mr. Watcn would have me to take his arm: hesnidliule
din-i113 our pass-3e through the crowded streets, but walked
va'ytut, and nppearedgmvenndaheumed. Ivondaed
what was the malts. end felt an indeﬁnite died that some
thing Implusant was on his mind; and vague Meno-
oerning what it might be. troubled me not I little. and nude
me give and silt enough. But these fantasies ﬁnished
upon reaching the quiet outskirts of the town: for as soon A:
we came within eight of the venerable old church. and lb:
-—- hill. with the deep blue see. beyond it. Hound my eon—
punion was cheerful enough.

"I'm amid I've been walking too fast for you,
said he: "in my impatience to be rid of the town. I W
to consult your convenience; but now, we’ll wnlk as slowly as
you please I see. by those light clouds in the wet. there will
henhn'ilinntsunsetmndweshnllheintimetowitnessitsﬁed
upon the sea, 3: the most moderlte rnte of progression."

When we had got about half-way up the hill. we fell into
silence again ; which. as usual. he was the first to halt.

" My house is desolate yet. Mis Grey." he smilineg observed.
"and I am acquainted now with all the ladi in my perish.
and several in this [own too; and my olhens 1 know by sight
and by report; but not one of them will suit me {a a coin—
panion: infant. thereisonlyonepenon inthewoﬂd thntwill:
mdthatlsymselt‘; udlmttolmavyonrdecisim?"

AGNES GREY. 461

"Are you in earnest. Mr. Wm?“

“Incarnestl Howonuldyouthinklnhmtldjstonlunhn
subject P "

Helnidhishandonminetlmtrenedonhisnrm: hemist
have felt it tremble~hut it was no gmt matter now.

" I hope I have not been too precipitate,” he said. in a serious
met " You must have known thnt it was not my my to letter
and talk soil: nonsense. or even to speak the admiration that I
felt ; and that eningle ward or glance of mine meant more duo
the honied phrues Ind fervent protestations of most other men."

I slid something than: not liking to lave my mother. end
doing nothing without her consent.

"I settled everything with Mrs. Grey. while you were putting
on your bonnet." replied he. " She said I might hnve her con.
sent. it Ioonldobninyoun: and lukedher. inuselshould
bemhappy. Income-rad livewlth Ins—for Inssmyouwould
like it ballet. Butxhe refused. saying she could now afford to
employ an assistant, end would continue the school till she could
purchase In Innuin suﬁcient to maintain ha in wmforuble
lodgings: tpd. maritime. she would spend her vacations ulter-
nnlely with us Ind your sister. and should be quite contented if
you were hnppy. And :0 now I have ovemtled your objectians
on her mount. Have you any other?"

“ No—none."

" You love me then?" said he. fervently pruning my hand.

” Yes."

Here I name. My diary, from which I hive compiled these
man. goes hutlittle further. I could go on for years: but I
will content mysdi‘ with adding, that I shall never forget that
glorious summer evening, and always remember with delight
that steep hill. and the edge of the precipice where we stood to-
gether, wnxching the splendid sunset mirrored in the restless
world of waters at our feet—«with hearts ﬁlled with gratitude to
Henven, and happinss, and love—almost too full {or speech.

A few weeks After thnt, when my mother had supplied herself
with an nss'mnnl. I beanie the wife of Edwnrd Watch; and
never have found muse to repent it, and em eennln that I never
shall. We have had trials, and we know that we must heve

‘53 mm Gm.

xhgnapin;huzwebeardun'ellw.mdwdam
mﬁnifywnalvsudadiuherlglimmﬁlnlmm
m( maggot all micﬁonslolhe survivor. But, ilwehaep
ill-indng hambeymivhaebom laymen
again.nndﬁutndmueukm, snmlylhat loome
hebuu:md.mn&ne.weadumlolivem the gloryof
iﬁnvbohssmnaedsomyua’ugsinomp‘lh.

Edward. by his m m. his walked surprising
mmhkparih.lndismlndwbyilsinhaﬁ
unis—15km: Iawhmhisfnlumyheuum
(Ind none ‘5 eotildy vim), lddyulyhodym blame him
asapnstor.ahusband.orafuha.

0am. Edvard.A¢°S.tndlilne "II-y. promise wall;
www.mmcdmehting.kdidymminedwme:
andtbeyﬁhaﬂmtnogoodlhinghllmhu’s areal:
gin Wmhmcismplysﬁdmthmnquimw
nudbypncﬁs'ngtheeeonomy'ehminhuderﬁmeand
mampﬁngwimimmﬁchsndghboun. “mung!
mmlytomjoymﬁnudmmmlmlmmw
havemyymxmhingwkybyhtmchildlu.and
somehhgtoginhmoawhomdil.

Andnowlminklhxvenidinﬁdm

TEEN“.

 

1'an 3W. "Anson . co.
., 5mm,» «1 Lani-I.

\\]\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

