 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS

EDITED BY

REGINALD BRIMLEY JOHNSON

IN TEN VOLUMES

VOL. V111.

EMMA.

VOL. ‘11.

 

 

 

 

 

95174-17¢¢tud7ndalérnnz
(

Mala

18H’7HII7L8)

 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

Hanna-r BWNG THE Palm. . . Fmtixpim
A ern Urn-nu- VULGAR Bum . um: 3!

Mn Kman-ruv’s PROPOSAL . . ,, :93

:.. .

 

 

 

 

Chart" #9331

HE appearance of the little sitting-room as they
entered was nan uillity itself; Mrs Batu, de-
prived of her employment, slumbering on

one side of the ﬁre, Frank Churchill, at a table, near
her, most deedily ’ occupied about her spectacles, and
Jane Fairfax, nanding with her hack to them, intent
on her pianofcne. .

Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet
able to show a most happy countenance on seeing Emma
a In.

“ This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice,
“coming at last ten minutes earlier than I had calcu-
lated. You ﬁnd me trying to be useful; tell me if you
think I shall succeed.”

“ What! ” said Mrs Weston, “ have not you ﬁnished
it yet ? you would not earn a very good livelihood as a
working Silversmith at this rate."

“I have not been working uninterru tedly,” he re-
plied, “I have been assisting Miss Fai ax in trying to
make her instmment stand steadily; it was not quite
ﬁrm; an unevenness in the ﬂoor, I believe. You see

‘Aetlvely, diligently. Wm. Halliwell‘l Didhury of
Arthur} udme me. and ed. x853.

2 EMMA.

we have beat wedging one leg with papa“. This was
verykindofyoutobepenuadedtocome. Iwal
almost afraid you would be hurrying home."

He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and
was sulﬁciently employed in looking out the best baked
apple for her, and trying to make her help or advise
him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit
down to the pianoforte again. That she war not
immediately ready Emma did suspect to arise from the
sure of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the in-
strument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she
must reason herself into the power of performance ; and
Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their
origin, and could not but resolve never to expose them
to her neighbour again.

Atlast Jane began, and though the ﬁrst bars were
feeny given, the powers of the instrument were gradu-
ally done full juttice to. Mrs Weston had been de-
lighted before, and was delighted again ; Emma joined
her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every
proper discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether
of the highest promise.

“ Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ,’ ' said
Flank Churchill, with a smile at Emma, “ the person has
not chosen ill. I heard a good deal of Colonel Camp-
hell’s taste at Weymouth ; and the softness of the upper
notes I am sure is exactly what he and all [bar part]
would particularly prize. I dare say, Miss Fairfax,
that he either gave his friend very minute directions,
or wrote to Broadwood himself. Do not you think
.0 ? 1)

Jane did not look round. She was not obliged to
hear. Mrs Weston had been speaking to her at the
same moment.

“ It is not fair," said Emma, in a whisper; “ mine
was a random guess. Do not distress her.’

sun. 3

He shook his bad with a smile, and looked as if he
had very little doubt and very little mercy. Soon
aftemrds he began again—

" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoy-
ing your pleasure on this ocmlion, Miss Fairfax. [ dare
say they often think of you, and wonder which will be
the day, the precise day, of the instrument’s coming to
hand. Do you ima 'ne Colonel Campbell knows the
business to be going rward just at this time? Do you
imagine it to be the consequence ofan immediate commis-
sion from him, or that he may ham sent only a general
direction, an order indeﬁnite as to time, to depend upon
contingencies and conveniencies ?"

He paused. She could not but hear; she could not
avoid answering—

" Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell,” said
the, in a voice of forced calmness, “ I can imagine
nothing with any conﬁdence. It must be all conjecture.”

“ Conjecture! aye, sometimes one con'ecturea right,
and sometimes one conjectures wrong. I' wish I could
conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite ﬁrm.
What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hard
at work, if one talks at all ; your real workmen, I sup-
pose, hold their tongues; but we, gentlemen labourers,
if we get hold of a word—Miss Fairfax said something
about conjecturing. There, it is done. I have the
pleasure, madam (to Mrs Bates), of restoring your
Ipectaclel, healed for the present.’

, He was very warmly thanked both by mother and

daughter ; to esca a little from the latter he went to
the pianoforte, an begged Miss Fairfax, who was still
sitting at it, to play something more.

“If you are very kind," said he, “it will be one of
the waltzei we danced last night ; let me live them over
again. You did not enjoy them as I did: you a peared
tired the whole time. I believe you were g we

4 extra.

danced no longer ; but I would have given worlds—all

the world: one ever has to give—for another half-hour.”

She layed.

“ What felicity it is to hear a tune again which by

made one happy ! If I mistake not, that was danced at

Weymouth."

She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply,
and played something else. He took some music from
a .Ehair near the pianoforte, and turning to Emma,
sax —-

“ Here is something quite new to me. Do you
know it? Cramer. And here are a new set of
Irish melodies. That, from such a quarter, one might
expect. This was all sent with the instruan Very
thoughtful of Colonel Campbell, was not it? He knew
Miss Fairfax could have no music here. I honour that
part of the attention particularly; it shows it to have
been so thoroughly from the heart. Nothing hastily
done, nothing incomplete. True affection only could
have prompted it."

Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not
help being amused ; and, when, on glancing her eye to—
wards Jane Fairfax, she caught the remains of a smile;
when she saw that, with all the deep blush of conscious-
uess, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had
less scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction
with respect to her. This amiable, upright, perfect
Jane Fairfax, was apparently cherishing very reprehen-
sible feelings.

He brought all the music to her, and they looked
it over together. Emma took the opportunity of
whis ring—

“ ou speak too plain. She must understand
u.”
“I hope she does. I would have her understand

me. I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning.”

ms. 5

“ But, really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had
never taken up the idea.”

“ I am very glad you did, and that you communicated
it to me. I have now a key to all her odd looks and
ways. Leave shame to her. If she does wrong, she
ought to feel it."

“ She is not entirely without it, I think.”

“I do not see much sign of it. She is playing
‘ Robin Adair’ at this moment—«bi: ﬁvourite."

Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the win-
dow, descried Mr Knightley on horseback not far off.

" Mr Knightley, I declare! I must speak to him,
if possible, just to thank him. I will not open the
window here; it would give you all cold; but I can
go into my mother’s room, you know. I dare sa he
will come in when he knows who is here. uite
delightful to have you all meet so ! Our little room so
honoured!”

She was in the adjoining chamber while she still kc,
and, opening the casement there, immediately call Mr
Knightley’l attention, and eve syllable of their con-
versation was as distinctly hea by the others as if it
had passed within the same apartment.

“How d’ye do? How d’ye do? Very well, I
thank you. So obliged to you for the carriage last
night. We were just in time; my mother ready
for us. Pray come in; do come in. You will ﬁnd
some friends here.”

So began Miss Bates; and Mr'Knighdey seemed
detemlined to be heard in his turn, for most resolutely
and commandineg did he sa —

“How is your niece, iss Bates? I want to
inquire after you all, but particularly your niece. How
is Miss Fairfax? I hope she caught no cold last
night? How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss
Fairfax is.”

6 emu.

And Mire Bale- wan obliged to give a direct never
before he would hear her in any1hing elle. The Iimenen
Were amuled; and Mn Weston gave Emma a look of
particular meaning. But Emma nill ohook her head in
Itead ac n'cism.

“ o obiged to you !—|o much obliged to you
for the carriage,” resumed Min tee.

He cut her short with—

“I am going to Kingrton. Can I do anything for

on P "
y “Oh, dear! Kingston—«are you? Mn Cole VIII
ing the other day she wanted something from
ﬁngm."

“ Mrl Cole has nervan to lend; can I do anything
for you P ”

“ No, I thank you. But do come in. Who do you
think in here? Min Woodhouoe and Mia- Smith; so
kind at to call to hear the new pianoforte. Do put up
your hone at the Crown, and come in.”

“ Well," said he, in a delibemn'ng manner, “ for ﬁve
minutes, perhape.”

“And here in Mr! Weston and Mr Frank Churchill
too! Quite delightful! I0 many friends! ”

“ No, not now, I thank you. I could not my two
minutes. I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can.”

“ 0h, do come in ! They will be so very happy to
see you."

“No, no; your room is full enough. I will call
another day and hear the pianoforte."

“ Well, I am no sorry! Oh, Mr Knightley, what a
delightful party laet night! how extremely pleasantl
Did you ever Ice Inch dancing? Was not it delightful?
Min Woodhouae and Mr F rank Churchill; I never
saw anything equal to it.”

“ Oh, very delightful, indeed! I can say nothing
less, for I suppose Mia: Woodhouee and Mr Frank

emu. 7

Churchill are hearing everything that passes. And
gaining his voice still more) I do not see why Miss

alrfax should not he mentioned too. I think Miss
Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs Weston is the very
best countrydance player, without exception, in Eng<
land. Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they
will say something pretty loud about you and me in
return; but I cannot my to hear it.”

“Oh, Mr Knightley, one moment more; something
of consequence—so shockedl Jane and I are both so
shocked about the apples! "

“ What is the matter now 2”

“ To think of your sending us all your more applesl
You said you had a great many, and now u have not
one left. We really are so shocked! rs Hodges
may well he angry. William Larkins mentioned it
here. You should not have done it, indeed you should
not. Ah, he is off! He never can hear to he thanked.
But I thought he would have staid now, and it would
have been a pity not to have mentioned—well (retum-
ing to the room), I have not been able to succeed. Mr
Knightley cannot stop. He is going to Kingmn. He
asked me if he could do anything ”

“ Yes,” said Jane, “ we heard his kind offers; we
heard everything.”

“ Oh, yes, my dear, I dare say you might; because,
you know, the door was open, and the window was
open, and Mr Knightley spoke loud. You must have
heard everything, to he sure. ‘Can I do anything for

u at Kingston?’ said he; so I mentioned—0h,

is: Woodhouse, must you he going? You seem but
just come; so very ohliging of you.”

Emma found it really time to he at home; the visit
had alread lasted long; and, on examining watches,
so much oil the morning was perceived to be gone, that
Mrs Weston and her companion, taking leave also,

 

8 mm.

could allow themselves only to walk with the two
young ladies to Hardield gates before they set off for
Randalls.

that"! ﬁﬁiﬁ.

T may be pouible to do without dancing entirely.
Instances have been known of young people
ing many, many months successively wrthout ing
at any hall of any description, and no material injury
accrue either to body or mind; but when a beginning is .
made—when the felicitieo of rapid motion have once
been, though slightly, felt—it must be a very heavy set
that does not aak for more.

Frank Churchill had danced once at Highhury, and
longed to dance again; and the last half-hour of an
evening which Mr Woodhouse was persuaded to spend
with his daughter at Randalll was passed by the two
young pea le in ochemes on the subject. Frank’e was
the ﬁrst i , and his the greatest zeal in rauing it;
for the lady was the best judge of the di culties, and
the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance.
But still she had inclination enough for showing peo le
again how delightfully Mr Frank Churchill and hiias
Woodhouee danced—for doing that in which uhe need
not blush to compare herself with Jane Fairfax—4nd
even for simple dancing itself, without any of the wicked
aids of vanity—to wrist him ﬁrst in pacing out the room
they were in to see what it could be made to hold—-
and then in taking the dimensions of the other parlour,
in the hope of discovering, in rpite of all that Mr
Wenon could say of their exactly equal tile, that it
was a little the largest.

His ﬁrst pro 'tion and request, that the dance
begun at Mr Coils:I Ihould be ﬁnished there—that the

was. 9

nme party should be collected, and the same musician
en ged—met with the readith acquiescence. Mr
erton entered into the idea with thorough enjoy-
ment, and Mrs Weston most willingly undertook to
playas long as they could wish to dance; and the in-
teresting employment had followed, of reckoning up
exactly who there would be, and portioning out the in-
dispensable division of space to every couple.

“You and Miss'Smith and Miss Fairfax will be
three, -and the two Miss Coxes ﬁve," had been
repeated many times over. “ And there will be the
two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides
Mr Knightley. Yes, that will he uite enough for
pleasure. You and Miss Smith and is: Fairfax will
be three, and the two Miss Coxes ﬁve, and for live
cou le there will be plenty of room.”

at soon it came to be on one side—-

" But will there be good room for ﬁve couple P—I
really do not think there will.”

On another—

“ And, after all, ﬁve couple are not enough to make
it worth while to stand up. Five couple are nothing
when one thinks seriously about it. t will not do to
invite live couple. It can be allowable only as the
thought of the moment.”

Somebody said that Min Gilbert was expected at
her brother‘s, and must be invited with the rest. Some-
body else believed Mn Gilbert would have danced the
other evening if she had been asked. A word was put
in for a second young Cox! and at last, Mr Weston
naming one family of cousins who must be included,
and another of very old acquaintance who could not be
left out1 it became a certainty that the live couple would
be at least ten, and a very interesting tpeculation in
what possible manner they could be disposed of.

The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each

I 0 EMMA.

other. “Might not they me both room, and dance
acrou the punge ? ” It Ieemed the beat ethane; and

it was not I0 good but that many of them wanted a

ter. Emma said it would be awkward ; Mn
Weston was in dim-en about the upper; and Mr
Woodhouae oppoeed it earnertly on the ecore of health.
It made him to very unhappy, indeed, that it could not
be peraevered in.

“Oh, no,” laid he, “ it would he the extreme of
imprudence. I could not bear it for Emma !—--Emma is
not mong. She would catch a dreadful cold. 50 would
poor little Han-iet. So you would all. Mn Wenon,
you would be quite laid up; do not let them talk of
ouch a wild thing; pray do not let them talk of it.
That young man (speaking lower) in very thoughtless.
Do not tell his father, but that young man in not quite
the thing. He has been opening the doon very often
this evening, and keeping them open ve inconsiderately.
He does not think of the draught. do not mean to
let you against him, but indeed he in not quite the
thing.”

Mn Weston was sorry for ouch a charge. She knew
the importance of it, and said everything in her power
to do it away. Every door wan now'cloaed, the par
age plan given up, and the Em scheme, of dancing only
in the room they were in, resorted to again; and with
such goodwill on Frank Churchill’s part, that the space
which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed
barely sufﬁcient for live couple was now endeavoured to
be made out quite enough for ten.

“ We were too ma ' cent," said he. “ We allowed
unrileceuary” room. en couple may stand here very
we .

Emma demurred. " It would be a crowd—a sad
crowd; and what could be wone than dancing with-
out Ipace to turn in?"

EMMA. I l'

“Ve true," he vel lied; “ it wuvery bad."
But atillyhe went on and still he ended with—

“I think there will be very tolerable room for ten
couple.”

“ No, no,” said she, “ you are quite uureaoonable.
It would be dreadful to be otanding so close. Nothing
ran be farther from plenaure than to bedancing in a
crowd—and a crowd in a little room.”

“ There is no denying it," he replied. “I agree
with on exactly. A crowd in a little morn—Min
Wootﬁrouue, you have the art of giving pictures in a
few wordn. Exquisite, quite exquisitel Still, how-
ever, having proceeded to far, one is unwilling to give
the matter up. It would be a disappointment to my
Father—and altogether—l do not know that—I am
nthe; of opinion that ten couple might stand here very
well.

Emma rceived that the nature of his gallantry was
a little eel -willed, and that he would rather oppone than
lose the pleuure of dancing with her; but the took the
compliment, and forgave the rent. Had the intended
ever to man-J him, it might have been worth while to
plause and conrider, and try to understand the value of

'u preference, and the character of his temper; but for
all the purposes of their acquaintance he was quite
amiable enough.

Before the middle of the next day he was at Hart-
ﬁeld; and he entered the room with such an agreeable
mile as certiﬁed the continuance of the echeme. It
soon appeared that he came to announce an improve-
ment.

“ Well, Min Woodhou-e,” he almoatjmmediately
began, :‘your inclination for dandng has not been quite
fri hten away, I hope, by the terror: of my father’e
lit e rooms. I bring a new proposal on the subject: a
thought of my father’s, which wait! only your appro-

l 2 EMMA.

bation to be acted upon. Ma I hope for the honour
of your hand for the two ﬁrst dance: of this little pm-
jected hell, to be given, not at Randalla, but at the
Crown Inn 2 ”

“ The Crown 1 ”

“Yes; if you and Mr Woodhouee see no objection,
and I trust you cannot, my father ho hi- friends will
be so kind as to visit him there. Iggter accommoda-
tion: he can promise them, and not a lean gmeful
welcome than at Randallt. It is his own idea. Mn
Weston sees no objection to it, provided you are latit-
ﬁed. This is what we all feel. Oh, you were perfectly
right! Ten couple. in either of the Randalls’ rooms,
would have been inmﬂ'emble—dreadﬁtl! I felt how
right you were the whole time, but was too anxious
for securing anything to like to yield. Is not it a good
exchange? You content—I hope you consent?"

“ It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to,

if Mr and Mrs Weston do not. I think it admirable;
and, as far as I can answer for myself; ahall be
most happy—it seems the only improvement that could
be. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improve-
ment 2 ”
. She was obliged to reput and ex lain it before it
wa- fully comprehended; and then, ing quite new,
ﬁmher representations were neceaury to make it accept-
able.

“No; he thought it very far from an improvement
—a very bad plan—much worse than the other. A
room at an inn wan always damp and dangerous. never
properly aired, or ﬁt to be inhabited. If they must
dance, they had better dance at Randall; He had
never been in the room at the Crown in his life—did
not know the people who kept it by sight Oh no—a
very bad plan. hey would catch worae colds at the
Crown than anywhere.”

mum r3

“ I was going to observe, sir," mid Frank Churchill,
“ that one of the great recommendations of thin change
would be the very little danger of anybody’s catching
cold—so much less danger at the Crown than at Ran-
dallsl Mr Perry might have reaoon to regret the
alteration, but nobod else could.”

“ Sir,” said Mr oodhouee, rather warmly, “ you
are very much mistaken if on mppose Mr Perry on be
that sort of character. Mr gerry is extremely concerned
when any of us are ill. But I do not understand how
the room at the Crown can be ﬂfﬂ' for you than your
father'a house.”

“ From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir.
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all—
not once the whole evenin ; and it is that dreadful habit
of opening the windows, letting in cold air upon heated
bodice, which (as you well know, sir) don the mischief."

“ Open the windows! but surely, Mr Churchill, no-
body would think of opening the windows at Randalls.
Nobody could he so imprudent! I never heard of much
a thing. Dancing with open windows I I am sure
neither your father nor Mrs Weuton (poor Miss Taylor
that was) would suffer it.”

“ Ah ! sir—but a thoughtless young peroon will some-
time: step behind a window-curtain, and throw up a
mh, without its being suspected. I have often known
it done myself.”

“ Have you, indeed air ? Bless me ! I never could
have supposed it. But I live out of the world, and am
often amniehed at what I hear. However, this does
make a difference ; and perhape, when we come to talk
it over—but these sort of things require a good deal of
consideration. One cannot resolve upon them in a
hurry. If Mr and Mrs Weston will be so obliging an
to call here one morning we may talk it over, and see
what can be done.”

II. B

:4 man.

“ But, unfortunately, air, my time is to limited—"

“0h,” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of
time for talking everything over. There is no hurry at
all. If it can be contrived to be at the Crown, papa, it
will be very convenient for the home. They will he
so or their own ttable."

“So they will, my dear. That in a great thing,
Not that Jamel ever complains; but it is right to spare
our horsee when we can. If I could be lure of the
room: being thoroughy aired—but is Mn Shekel to
be minted? I doubt it. I do not know her, even by
eight."

“I can anrwer for everything of that nature, sir,
became it will be under Mr: Wenon’n care. Mn
Weeton undertaken to direct the whole.”

“ There, pa ! now you must be ntielied—onr
own dear Mn Gleam, who in carefulneu iteclf. Do
not you remember what Mr I’e said, I0 many years
ago, when I had the measlee.’ ‘ f Min Taylor under-
taken to win Min Emma u , you need not have any
fears, Iir.’ ow often have heard you [peak of it as
Iuch a compliment to her | "

“ Aye, very true, Mr Perry did my lo. I shall never
forget IL Poor little Emma! You were very bid
with the measles; that in, you would have been very
bad, but for Perry’s great attention. He came four
times a day for a week. He aid, from (he lint, it wal
a very good cart—which was our great comfort; but
the measles are a dreadful complaint. I hope whenever
poor Isabella’s little ones have the measles the will send
for Perry.”

“ My father and Mn Weston are at the Crown at
thin moment,” said Frank Churchill, “examining the
capabilities of the houue. I left them there and came
on to Hardield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping
you might be persuaded to join them and givelyour

suns. r5

adviceonthespot. Iwasdesiredtosaysnfrornbath.
It would be the greatest pleasure to them if you could
allow me to attend you there. They can do nothing
satisfactorily without you."

Emma was most happy to be called to such a council:
and, her father engaging to think it all over while she
was gone, the two young people set off to ether without
delay for the Crown. There were r and Mrs
Weston; delighted to see her and receive her appro-
bation, very busy and very happy in' their different way:
she, in some little distress; and he, ﬁnding everything

rl'ecr.

P2" Emma," said she, " this paper is worse than I
expected. Look! in places you see it is dreadfully
dirty: and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than
anything [I] could have imagined."

" My dear, you are too particular," said her husband.
“ What does all that signify ? You will see nothing of
it by candle-light. It will be as clean as Randalls by
candle-light. We never see anything of it on our club-
nights."

The ladies here probath exchanged looks which
meant, “ Men never know when things are dirty or
not ; ” and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to him-
self, “ Women will have their little nonsenses and
needless cares.”

One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen
did not disdain: it regarded a supper-room. At the
time of the ball-room’s being built suppers had not been
in question; and a small card-room adjoinin was the
only addition. What was to be done? 'Ighis card-
room would he wanted as a card-room now; or, if
cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four
selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
supper? Another roompf much better size might be
secured for the purpose ; but it was at the other end of

16 EMMA.

the house, and a long awkward passage must be gone
through to get at it. This made a difﬁculty. Mrs
Weston was afraid of draughts for the young peo le in
that passage; and neither Emma nor the gen emen
could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded
at an per.

rs Weston proposed having no regular supper;
merely sandwiches, &c., set out in the little room ; but
that was scouted as a wretched suggesﬁon. A private
dance without sitting down to supper, was pronounced
an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ;
and Mrs Weston must not speak of it again. She then
took another line of expediency, and looking into the
doubtful room, observed—

" I do not think it i: so very small. We shall not
be many, on know.”

And r Weston at the nme time, walking briskly
with long steps through the ge, was calling out.—

“ You talk a great deal the length of this passage,
my dear. It is a mere nothing after all; and not the
least draught from the stairs."

“I wish,” said Mrs Weston, “one could know
which amngemeut our guests in general would like
best. To do what would be most generally pleasing
must be our object—if one could but tell what that
would be.”

“ Yes, very true,” cried F rank, “very true. You
want your neighbours’ opinions. I do not wonder at
you. If one could ascertain what the chief of them—
the Coles, for instance, they are not far off. Shall I
call upon them? Or Miss Bates? She is still nearer.
—And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as
likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the
people as anybody. I think we do want a larger
council. Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join
us .9

nuns. r7

“ Well,—i.f ou plase," said Mrs Weston, [rather
hesitating. “ f you think she will be of any use": "

“ You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss
Bates,” said Emma; “ she will be all delight and
gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. She will not
even listen to your questions. I see no advantage in
consulting Miss Bates.”

“ But she is so amusin , so extremely amusing! I
am very fond of hearing iss Bates talk. And I need
not bring the whole Family, you know.”

Here Mr Weston joined them, and on hearing what
was proposed gave it his decided approbation.

“ Aye, do, Frank; go and fetch Miss Bates, and let
us end the matter at once. She will enjoy the scheme,
I am sure; and I do not know a properer non for
showing us how to do away difﬁculties. etch Miss
Bates. We are owing a little too nice. She is a
standing lesson thow to be happy. But fetch them
both. Invite them both.”

“ Both, sir?” Can the old lady ?"

“ The old lady! No, the young lady, to be sure!
I shall think you a great blockbead, Flank, if you bring
the aunt without the niece.”

“ Oh! I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immedi-
ately recollect. Undoubtedly, if you wids it, I will
endeavour to persuade them both.” And away he ran.

Long before he re-appeared, attending the short,
neat, brisk-moving aunt, and her elegant niece—Mrs
Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman and a good
wife, had examined the passage again, and found the
evils of it much less than she had supposed before—in-
deed, very triﬂing; and here ended the diﬁiculties of
decision. All the rest, in ulation at least, was per-
fectly smooth. All the minor arrangements of table
and chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made them-
selves ; or were left as mere triﬂes, to be settled at any

 

:8 ma.

time between Mn Wenon and Mn Stokes. Even}-
body invited wan certainly to come; Frank had alrea y
written to Entcombe to propose Itaying a few day. be-
yond his fortnight, which could not pottiny be refused.
And a delightﬁil dance it was to be.

Most cordially, when Mira Bate. arrived, did the
agree that it mun. At a counsellor the wan not
wanted; but u an approveréa much safer character)
the was only welcome. er approbation, at once
genenl and minute, warm and incessant. could not but
plate; and for another half—hour they were all walking
to and fro between the ditferent rooms, come In
ing, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment o the
future. The party did not break u without Emma’-
being positively secured for the two at dance: by the
hero of the evening, nor without her overbearing Mr
Weston whisper to his wife, “ He has asked her, my
dear. That ’I right. I knew he would ! ”

chapm assess;

NE thing only was wanting to make the prorpect
of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma-—
its being ﬁxed for a day within the granted

term of Frank Churchill’a stay in Sorry; for, in spite
of Mr Weston’t conﬁdence, the could not think it to
very impossible that the Churchill: might not allow their
n hew to remain a day beyond his fortnight. But
this was not judged feasible. The preparation mutt
take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the
third week were entered on, and for a few days they
must be planning, proceeding, and hoping in uncertainty,
at the rick—in her opinion, the great rink—of its being
all in vain.

mm. :9

BEnscombe, however, was gracious—gracious in fact,
if not in word. His wish of ﬂying longer evidentl
did not please; but it was not opposed. All was a}!
and prosperous; and as the removal of one solicitude
generally make; way for another, Emma being now
certain of her ball, began to adopt as the next vexan'on
Mr Knightley’s provoking indilferenoe about it. Either
because he did not dance himself, or because the plan '
had been formed without his being consulted, he seemed
resolved that it should not interest him, determined
against its exciting any present curiosity, or affording him
any future amusement. To her voluntary communica-
tions Emma could er no more approving reply than——

" Very well. I the Westons think it worth while
to be at all this trouble for a few hours of noisy enter-
tainment, I have nothing to lay against it, but that they
shall not chuse pleasures for me.-—-Oh, yell I must be
there; I could not refuse; and I will keep as much
awake as I can ; but I would rather be at home, look-
ing over William Larkins’s week’s account; much
rather, I mules—Pleasure in seeing dancing l—not I,
indeed—I never look at it—I do not know who does.
—Fine dancing, I believe, like virtue, must be its own
reward. Those who are standing by are anally
thinking of something very different."

This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her
quite angry. It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax,
however, that he was so indilferent, or so indignant; he
was not guided by ber feelings in reprobating the ball,
for :5: enjoyed the thought of it w an extraordinary
degree. It made her animated—open-hearred; she
voluntarily Iaid— '

" Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen
to prevent the hall! What a disappointment it would
be . I do look forward to it, I own, with my great
pleasure.”

20 EMA.

It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax, therefore, that he
would have preferred the society of William Larkine.
No l—she was more and more convinced that Mrs
Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. There
was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate
attachment on his side—but no love.

Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with
Mr Knightley. Two days of joyful security were
immediately followed by the overthrow of everything.
A lener an-ived from Mr Churchill to urge his
nephew’s instant return. Mrs Churchill was unwell—
far too unwell to do without him; she had been in a
very suffering state (so mid her husband) when writing
to her nephew two days before, though from her usual
unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never
thinking of herself, she had not mentioned it; but now
she was too ill to triﬂe, and must entreat him to set of
for Enscombe without delay.

The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma,
in a note from Mrs Weston, instantly. As to his going,
it was inevitable. He must be gone within a few
hours, though without feeling an real alarm for his
aunt, to lessen his repugnance. e knew her illnesses;
they never occurred but for her own convenience.—

Mrs Weston added, “ that he could only allow him-
self time to hurry to Highbury, after breakfast, and take
leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose
to feel any interest in him; and that he might be ex-
pected at Hartﬁeld very soon.”

This wretched note was the ﬁnalé of Emma’s break-
fast. When once it had been read there was no doing
anything but lament and [exclaim]. The loss of the
ball—the loss of the young man—and all that the young
man might be feeling! It was too wretched! Such
a delightful evening as it would have been! Every-
body so happy ! and she and her partner the happiest!
—" I said it would be so," was the only consolation.

EMMA. 21

Her father‘s feelings were Fire distinct. He thought
principally of Mrs Churchil s illness, and wanted to
know how she was treated; and as for the hall, it was
shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but they
would all be safer at home.

Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he
appeared; but if this reﬂected at all upon his impa-
tience, his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when
he did come might redeem him. He felt the going
away almost too much to speak of it. His dejection
was most evident. He sat really lost in thought for the
ﬁrst few minutes; and when musing himself it was only-
to 33 -—-

“ Of all horrid things leave-taking is the worst."

“But you will come again,” said Emma. “This
will not be your only visit to Randalls."

“ Ah I— shaking his head)—the uncertainty of when
I may he a le to return ?—I shall try for it with a
zeal! It will be the object of all my thoughts and
cares l—and if my uncle and aunt go to town this-
spring—hut I am afraid—they did not stir last spring
—I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever."

“ Our poor ball must be quite given up.”

“ Ah ! that ball !—why did we wait for anything P
—why not seize the pleasure at once ?—How often is
happiness destroyed by tion, foolish reparation !
—You told us it won d so.——Oh! Jiss Wood- '
house, why are you always so right ? ”

“ Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance.
I would much rather have been merry than wise.”

' " If I can come again, we are ﬁll so have our ball.
My father depends on it. Do not forget your
engagement.”

Emma looked graciously.

. “ Such a fortnight as it has been! ” he condnued;
“ every day more precious and more delightful than the

22 “HA.

day beforel—every day making me lea: ﬁt to bear
an other place. Happy those who can remain at
Highbury ! ”

“ As you do us such ample justice now,” aid
Emma, laughing, “ I will venture to ask whether you
did not come a little doubtfully at ﬁrst? Do not we
rather surpass [your] expectations? I am sure we do.
I am sure you did not much expect to like no. You
would not have been so long in coming if you had had
a pleasant idea of Highbury.”

He laughed rather consciously; and though denying
the sentiment, Emma was convinced that it had been so.

“ And you must be off this very mnming .’ "

" Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk
back together, and I must be of immediately. I am
almost afraid that every moment will bring him."

“ Not live minutes to spare even for your friends Miss
Fairfax and Min Batu? How unlucky ? Miss Bates’s
powerﬁil, argumentative mind might have strengthened

ours.’ ’

" Yea—I have called there; passing the door, I
thought it better. It was a right thing to do. I went
in for three minutes, and was detained by Miss Batcs’s
being absent. She was out; and I felt it im-
possible not to wait till she came in. She is a woman
that one may, that one mm laugh at; but that one
would not wish to slight. It was better to pay my
visit, then—”

He hesitated, got up, walked to a window. .

“ In short,” said he, “perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—
I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion ”

He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts.
She hardly knew what to tay. It seemed like the
forerunner of something absolutely serious, which she
did not wish. Forcing heroelf to speak. therefore, in
the hope of putting it by, the calme said—

 

Inns. :3

“You are quite in the right; it was most natuml to
pagour visit, then ”

e was silent. She believed he was looking at her;
probably reﬂecting on what she had and trying to
understand the manner. She heard him sigh. It was
natural for him to feel that he had cam: to sigh. He
could not believe her to be encouraging him. A few
awkward moments passed, and he sat down again ; and
in a more determined manner said—

“It was something to feel that all the rest of my
time might be given to Hartﬁeld. My regard for
Hartﬁeld is most warm ”

He sto t again, rose again, and seemed quite embar-
rassed.— e was more in love with her than Emma
had su ; and who can say how it might have
ended, 1 his father had not made his appearance? Mr
Woodhouse soon followed; and the necessity of
exertion made him composed.

A very few minutes more, however, completed the
present trial. Mr Weston, always alert when business
was to be done, and as incapable of procrastinating any
evil that was inevitable as of foreseeing any that was
doubtful, said, “It was ﬁme to go;" and the young
man, though he might and did sigh, could not but
agree, and rise to take leave.

"I shall hear about you all," said he; “that is my
chief consolation. I shall hear of eve thin that is
going on among you. I have engaged an eston to
correspond with me. She has been so kind as to ro-
mise it. Oh! the blessing of a female conespon ent,
when one is really interested in the absent l—shc will
tell me everything. In her letters I shall be at dear
Highbury again.”

A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest,
“Good-bye,” closed the speech, and the door had
soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short had been the

 

 

24 emu.

notice—short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma
felt so sorry to pan, and foresaw so great a loss to their
little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid
of being too sorry, and feeling it too much.

It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost
every day since his arrival. Certainly his being at
Randalls had given great spirit to the last two weeks—
indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of seeing
him which every morning had brought, the assurance of
his attentions, his liveliness, his manners! It had been
a very happy fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking
from it into the common course of Hartﬁeld days. To
complete every other recommendation, he had ulnar!
told her that he loved her. What strength or what
constancy of affection he might be subject to was
another point; but at present she could not doubt his
having a decidedly warm admiration, a conscious pre-
ferenCe of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the
rest, made her think that she mu! be a little in love
with him, in spite of every previous determination
against it.

“I certainly must,” said she. “This sensation of
listlessness, weariness, stu idity, this disinclination to
sit down and employ myse f, this feeling of everything's
being dull and insipid about the housel—I must be in
love; I should be the oddest creature in the world if
I were not—for a few weeks at least. Well, evil to
some is always good to others. I shall have many
fellow-moumers for the ball, if not for Frank Church-
ill ; but Mr Knighlley will be happy. He may spend
the evening with his dear William Larltins now if he
likes."

Mr Kni htley, however, showed no triumphant hap-
piness. ng could not say that he was sorry on his
own account; his very cheerful look would have con-
tradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily,

:smn. : 5

that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others,
and with considerable kindness added—

“You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of
dancing, you are really out of luck; you are very
much out of luck! " '

It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to
judge of her honest regret in this woeful change; but
when they did meet her composure was odious. She
had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
headache to a degree which made her aunt declare
that, had the hall taken place, she did not think Jane
could have attended it; and it was charity to impute
some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health.

that" ﬁﬁ].

MMA continued to entertain no doubt of her being
in love. Her ideas only varied as to the how
much. At ﬁrst she thought it was a good deal;

and afterwards but little. She had great pleasure in
hearing Flank Churchill talked of ; and, for his sake,
greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr and Mrs Weston ;
she was very often thinking of him, and quite impatient
for a letter, that she might know how he was, how were
his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance
of his coming to Randalls again this spring. But, on
the other hand, she could not admit herself to be un-
happy, nor, after the ﬁrst morning, to be less di

for em loyment than usual; she was still busy and
cheerfn ; and, leasing as he was, she could yet imagine
him to have fa ts ; and farther, though thinking of him
so much, and, as she sat drawing or working, forming a
thousand amusing schemes for the progress and close of
their attachment, faneying interesting dialogues, and in-

26 ’ nuns.

venting elegant letters ; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she rgfuud Linn. Their
affection was always to subside into friendship. Every-
thing tender and charming was to mark their parting;
but still they were to part. When she became sensible
of this, it struck her that she could not be very much in
love ; for, in spite of her previous and ﬁxed deten'nina-
tion never to quit her father, never to marry, a strong
attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle
than she could foresee in her own feelings.

“ I do not ﬁnd myself making any use of the word
:unfcs,” id she. “ In not one of all my clever
replies, my delicate negatives, is there an allusion to
making a neriﬁce. I do suspect that he Is not really
necessary to my happinea. So much the better. , I
certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I
do. I am quite enough in love. I should be sorry to
be more.”

Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her
View of his feelings.

“H: is undoubtedly very much in love—everything
denotes ib—very much in love indeedl—and when he
comes again, if his affection continue, I must be on my
guard not to encourage it. It would he most inexcus-
able ta do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up.
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encourag-
ing him hitherto. No; if he had believed me at all to
share his feelings he would not have been so wretched.
Could he have thought himself encouraged, his look-
and language at parting would have been diiferent. Still,
however, I must be on my guard. This is in the sup-
position of his attachment continuing what it now is;

ut I do not know that I expect it will; I do not look
upon him to be quite the sort of man—I do not alto-
gether build upon his steadiness or constancy. His feel-
ings are warm, but I can imagine them rather changeable.

mum. 7 27

Every conideration of the subject, in abort. makea me
thankful that my happinea: in not more deeply involved.
I shall do very well again after a little while—and then,
itwillbeagoodthingover;fortheynye in
inloveonceintheirlivesandIahallhavebeeu let oﬂ
eaIil .”
henhilleuerto MnWeIton arrived Emma had
thepenlnl ofit;andeheruditwithadegreeof
planar! and admiration which made her at lint Ihake
her head over her own notations, and think the had
undervalued their strength. It was a long, well written
letter, giving the particulars of hi. journey and of hie
jeelingc, expressing all the aﬂ'ecn'on, gratitude, and respect
which was natrual and honourable, and describing every-
thing exterior and local that could be supposed attractive,
with spirit and precin'on. No nwiciouc ﬂourith now
of apology or concern ; it via: the language of real
feeling toward: Mn Weston; and the transition from
Highbury to Enocombe, the contract between the
lace: in some of the that blean'ngs of social life, was
jut enough touched on to show how keenly it wan felt,
and how much more might have been mid but for the
restraints of propriety.—The charm of her own name
was not wanting. Mia Woodbine up red more than
once, and never without a something 0 pleating connec-
h'on, either a compliment to her taste, or a remembrance
of what she had said; and in the very last time of its
meeting her e ,unadomed as it was by any such broad
wreath of gal try, she yet could discern the effect of
her inﬂuence, and acknowledge the greatest compliment
rhapi of all conveyed. Compreued into the very
owest vacant corner were then: wordn—“ I had not a
re moment on Tuesday, as you know, for Miss
oodhouae’c beautiful little friend. Pray make my
excuaeu and adieu: to her.” Thin, Emma could not
doubt, vial all for her-elf. Harriet um remembered

28 min.

only from ba'ng bar friend. His information and pros-
pects, as to Euscombe, were neither wane nor better
than had been anticipated; Mn Churchill was recover-
ing, and he dared not yet, even in his own imaginau‘on,
ﬁx a time for coming to Randalls again.

Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter
in the material part, its sentiments, she yet found, when
it was folded up and returned to Mrs Weston, that it
had not added any lasting warmth—that she could still
do without the writer, and that he must learn to do
without her. Her intentions were unchanged. Her
resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by the
addition of a scheme for his su uent consolation and
happiness. His recollection of arriet, and the words
which clothed it—the “ beauu'ful little friend,"—sug-
gested to her the idea of Han-let’s succeeding her in
his affections. Was it impossible P—No. Harriet un-
doubtedly was greatly hiI inferior in understanding; but
he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her
face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and all
the probabilities of circumstance and connection were
in her favour. For Haniet it would be advantageous
and delightful indeed.

“ I must not dwell upon it," said she; “ I must not
think of it. I know the danger of indulging such
speculations. But stranger things have happened; and
when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it
will be the means of conﬁrming us in that sort of true
disinterested friendship which I can already look for-
ward to with pleasure.”

It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet’s
behalf, though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it
neldom; for evil in that quarter was at hand. As
Frank Churchill’s arrival had succeeded Mr Elton’n
engagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the
latest interest had entirely born down the ﬁrst, so now,

.EKKA. :9

upon Frank Churchill’s disappearance, Mr Eltou’s con-
cerns were assuming the most irresistible farm—Hie
wedding-day war named. He would soon be among
them again—Mr Elton and his bride. There'wae
hardly time to talk over the ﬁrst letter from Enscombe
before “ Mr Elton and his bride” was in everybody's
mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten. Emma
grew sick at the sound. She had had three weeks'of
happy exemption from Mr Elton; and Harriet’s
mind, she had been willing to hope, had been lately
gaining strength. With Mr Welton’a hall in view, at
least, there had been a gmt deal of insensibility to
other things; but. it was now too evident that Ihe had
not attained auch a state of composure as could stand
against the actual approach—new carriage, bell-ringing,
and all.

Poor Harriet wae in a ﬂutter of Ipirits which re-
quired all the reaaonings, and wothings, and attention!
of every kind that Emma could give. Emma felt that
she could not do too much for her, that Harriet had
a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience; but it
was heavy work to be for ever convincing without pro~
ducing any effect; for ever agreed to, without being
able to make their opinions the me. Han-iet listened
aubmiuively, and said. “ It was very true; it was just
a! Miss Woodhouoe described—it waa not worth while
to think about them—and she would not think about
them any longer." 'But no change of subject could
avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and
restless about the Eltons as before. At last Emma
attacked her on another ground.

“ Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so
unhappy about Mr Elton’s marrying, Harriet, is the
strongest reproach you can make me. You could not
give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into.

t waa all my doing, I know. I have not forgotten it,

II. C

3o emu.

I assure you. Deceived myself, I did very miserably
deceive you; and it will be a painful reﬂection to me
for ever. Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it.”

Han-iet felt this too much to utter more than a few
words of eager exclamation. Emma continued— '

“I have not said, exert yourself, I-Ian-iet, for my
sake; think less, talk less of Mr Elton for my sake;
because, for your own sake rather, I would wish it to be
done, for the sake of what is more imponant than my
comfort—a habit of self-command in you, a considera-
tion of what it your duty, an attention to propriety, an
endeavour to avoid the suspicious of others, to save your
hlth and credit, and restore your tranquillity. These
are the motives which I have been pressing on you.
They are very important, and sorry I am that you can-
not feel them suthcicntly to act upon them. M being
saved from pain is a very secondary consideration. I
want you to save yourIelf from greater pain. Perhaps
I may sometime! have felt that Harriet would not
forget what was due—or rather, what would be kind by
me.”

This appeal to her affections did more than all the
met. The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration
for Miss Woodhou-e, whom she really loved extremely,
made her wretched for a while; and when the violence
of grief was comforted away, still remained powerful
enough to prompt to what was right, and support her in
it very tolerably.

“ You, who have been the best friend I ever had in
my lifel—Want gratitude to you !—Nobody is equal
to you! I care for nobody as I do for you! Oh,
Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been! ”

Such expressions, assisted as they were by everything
that look and manner could do, made Emma feel that
she had never loved Harriet so well, nor valued her
affection so highly before.

 

 

AJAY/4,1; mam,- 4m/7M4/w;?

(ma/my

emu. 31

“There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart,”
said she afterwards to herself. “ There is nothingto be
compared to it. Warmth and tenderness of heart, with
an alfectionate, open manner, will beat all the clearness
of head in the world, for attncn'on : I am sure it will.
It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so
generally beloved—which gives Isabella all her popu-

rity. I have it not; but I know how to prize and

t it Harriet is my superior in all the charm and

all the felici it gives. Dear Harriet !—I would not

change you r the clearest-haded, longest-sighted, best-

‘ judging female breathing. Oh, the coldness of 2 Jane

Fairfax! Harriet is worth a hundred such: and for a

wife—a sensible man’s wife—it is invaluable. I mention

no names; but happy the man who changes Emma for
Harriet l ”

Cluster iii];

RS ELTON was ﬁrst seen at church : but
though devotion might be interrupted, curiosity
could not be satisﬁed by a bride in a pew, and

it mustbe left for the visits in form which were then to
be paid, to settle whether she were very pretty indeed,
or only lather retty, or not prett at all.

Emma had Feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or
propriety, to make her resolve on not being the last to
pay her respects: and she made a point of Harriet's
going with her, that the worst of the business might be
gone through as soon as possible.

She could not enter the house again, could not be
in the same room to which she had with such vain
artiﬁce retreated three months ago, to lace up her boot,
without rem/luring. A thousand vexatious thoughts
would recur. Compliments, charades, and horrible

32 nuns.

blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor
Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved
very well, and was only rather pale and silent. The
Visit was of course short! and there was so much em-
barrassment and occu tion of mind to shorten it that
Emma would not alow herself entirely to form an
opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one, be-
yond the nothing-meaning terms of being “ elegantly
dressed, and very leasing.”

She did not rea ly like her. She would not be in a
hurry to ﬁnd fault, but she suspected that there was no
elegance ;—ease, but not elegance. She was almost
sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there
was too much ease. Her person was rather good ; her
face not unpretty ; but neither feature nor air, nor voice,
nor manner were elegant. Emma thought, at least, it
would turn out so.

As for Mr Elton, his manners did not appear—but
no, she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from
herself about his manners. It was an awkward cere-
mony at any time to be receiving wedding visits; and
a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well
through it. The woman was better off; she might
have the assistance of ﬁne clothes, and the privilege of
bashfulness ; but the man had only his own good sense to
d nd on : and when she considered how peculiarly
un ucky poor Mr Elton was in being in the same room
at once with the woman he had just man-ied, the woman
he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the
right to look as little wise, and to be as much alfectedly,
and as little really, easy as could be.

“ Well, Miss Woodhousc," said Harriet, when they
had quitted the house, and after waiting in vain for her
friend to begin; “well, Miss Woodhouse ” (with a gentle
sigh), “ what do you think of her? Is not she very
charming ?"

EMMA. 33

There wa- a little heeilation in Emma’s answer.

“ Oh I yes—very—a very pleasing young woman."

“ I think her beautiful, quite bautifirl.”

“ Very nicely dreued, indeed ; a remarkably elegant
gown.”

. “ I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen
in love.”

“Oh! no; there in nothing toeurprize one at all; a
pretty fortune, and she came in his way.”

“I dare nay,” retumed Harriet, uighing again, “I
dare nay she was very much attached I!) him."

“ Perhaps the might; but it in not every man’s fate to
marry the woman who loves him best. Mina Hawkins,
perhaps, wanted a home, and thought thin the best offer
the was likely to have."

“ Yes," aaid Han‘iet, meatly, “ and well she might ;
nobody could ever have a better. Well, I wish them
happy with all my heart. And now, Mile Woodhoune,
I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. He
is just as nuperior as ever; but bein married, you
know, it is quite a different thing. 0, indeed, Miss
Woodhouse, you need not be afraid ; I can sit and
admire him now without any grmt misery. To know
that he has not thrown himself away in such a com-
fort! She does seem a charming young woman, just
what he deserves. Happ creature! He called her
‘A‘rligrma.’ How delighttill ! ”

hen the visit was returned Emma made up her
mind. She could then see more and judge better.
From Harriet’a happening not to be at Hartﬁeld, and
her father’l being present to engage Mr Elton, she had
a quarter of an hour of the lady's conversation to her-
self, and could com eedly attend to her; and the
quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs Elton

‘ waa a vain woman, extremely well deﬁed with herself,
and thinking much of her own importance; that ahe

34 suns.

meant to shine and be very superior, but with manners
which had.been formed in a bad school; pert and
familiar; that all her nations were drawn from one set
of people, and one style of living; that, if not foolish,
she was ignorant, and that her society would certainly
do Mr Elton no good.

Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise
or reﬁned herself, she would have connected him with
those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it might be fairly
supposed, from her any conceit, had been the best of
her own set. The rich brother-in-law, near Bristol,
was the pride of the alliance, and his place and his
carriages were the pride of him.

The very ﬁrst subject, after being seated, was Maple
Grove, “My brother, Mr Suckling’s seat; ” a com-

rison of Hartﬁeld to Maple Grove. The grounds of

artﬁeld were small, but neat and pretty; and the
house was modern and well-built. Mrs Elton seemed
most favourably impressed by the size of the room, the
entrance, and all that she could see or imagine. “ Very
like Maple Grove indeed! She was quite stmck by
the likeness l—That room was the very shape and size
of the morning-room at Maple Grove; her sister’s
favourite room.” Mr Elton was appealed to. “ Was
not it astonishingly like ?—-She could really almost
fancy herself at Maple Grove.

“And the staircase.—You know, as I came in, I
observed how very like the staircase was; placed
exactly in the same part of the house. I really could
not help exclaiming! I assure you, Miss Woodhouse,
it is very delightful to me to be reminded of a place I
am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove. I have
spent so many happy months there!" (with a little
sign of sentiment.) “ A charming place, undoubtedly.
Everybody who sees it is struck by its beauty; but to
me it has been quite a home. Whenever you are trans-

EMMA. I 3 5

planted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will understand
how very delightful it is to meet with anything at all
like what one has left behind. I always say this is
quite one of the evils of matrimony."

Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it
was ﬁilly sufﬁcient for Mrs Elton, who only wanted to
be talking herself.

“So extremely like Maple Grove! And it is not
merely the house; the grounds, I assure you, as far as I
could ohnrve, are strikingly like. The laurels at Maple
Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand very
much in the same way—just across the lawn; and 1 had
a glimpse of a line large tree, with a bench round it,
which put me so exactly in mind! My brother and
sister will be enchanted with this place. People who
have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased
with anything in the same style.”

Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment. She had
a great idea that people who had extensive grounds
themselves cared very little for the extendve grounds of
anybody else; but it was not worth while to attack an
error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply—

“ When you have seen more of this country I am
afraid you will think you have ovenated Hartﬁeld.
Surry is full of beauties."

“ 0h ! yes, I am quite aware of that. It is the
garden of England, you know. Surry is the garden of
England.”

“ Yes ; but we must not rest our claims on that dis-
tinction. Many counties, I believe, are called the garden
of England, as well as Sony.”

“ No, I fancy not,” replied Mrs Elton, with a most
satisﬁed smile. “ [I] never heard any county but Surry
called so.”

Emma was silenced.

“ My brother and sister have promised us a visit in

36 arms.

the spring, or summer at farthest," continued Mrs
Elton; “and that will be our time for exploring.
While they are with us we shall ex lore a great deal, I
dare say. They will have their rouche-landau, of
course, which holds four perfectly; and therefore, with-
out saying anything of our can'iage, we should be able
to ex lore the different bauties extremely well. They
would, hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that
season of the year. Indeed, when the time draws on,
I shall decidedl recommend their bringing the barouche- '
landau; it will, he so very much preferable. When
people come into a bautiful country of this sort, you
know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see
as much as possible ; and Mr Suckling is extremely fond
of exploring. We explored to King’s-Weston twice
last summer, in that way, most delightfully, just after
their ﬁrst having the barouche-landan. You have many
parties of that kind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse,
every summer ? "

“ No; not immediately here. We are rather out of
distance of the very striking beauties which attract the
sort of parties you speak of; and we are a very quiet
set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at home
than engage in schemes of leasure.”

“ Ah ! there is nothing like staying at home for real
comfort. Nobody can be more devoted to home than
I am. I was quite a proverb for it at Ma le Grove.
Many a time has Selina said, when she has n going
to Bristol, ‘ I really cannot get this girl to move from
the house. I absolutely must go in by myself, though
I hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without a
companion : but Augusta, I believe, with her own good
will, would never stir beyond the park paling.’ Many
a time has she said so; and yet I am no advocate for
entire seclusion. I think, on the contrary, when people
shut themselves up entirely from society, it is a very bad

um. 37

thin ; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the
wor d in a proper degree, without living in it either too
much or too little. I perfectly understand your situa-
tion ; however, Miss Woodhouse” (looking toward: Mr
Woodhouse), “ your father’s state of health must he a
great drawback. Why does not he try Bath ?—Indeed
he should. Let me recommend Bath to you. I
mnyou I have no doubt of its doing Mr Woodhouse

“ My father tried it more than once, formerly, but
without receiving any beneﬁt; and Mr Perry, whose
name, I dare say, is not unknown to you, does not
conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful
now."

“Ah! that’s a great pity; for I assure you, Miss
Woodhouse, where the water: do agree, it is uite won-
derful the relief the give. In my Bath life I have
seen such instances ofyit ! And it is so cheerful aplace
that it could not fail of being of use to Mr Woodhouse’s
spirits, which, I understand, are sometimes much de-
pressed. And as to its recommendations to you, I fancy
I need not take much pains to dwell on them. The
advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally
understood. It would be a charming introduction for
you, who have lived so secluded a life: and I could
immediately secure you some of the best society in the
place. A line from me would bring you a little host of
acquaintance; and my particular friend Mrs Partridge,
the lad I have always resided with when in Bath,
would be most happy to show you any attendants,
and would be the very person for you to go into public
with."

It was as much as Emma could bear, without being
impolite! The idea of her being indebted to Mrs
Elton for what was called an introduction—of her going
into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs

38 EMMA.

Elton’t—probably some vulgar dashing widow, who,
with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live!
The dignity of Miss Woodhouse, of Hartﬁeld, was
lunk indeed !

She restrained herself, however, from any of the re-
proofa the could have given, and only thanked Mrs
Elton coolly; “ but their going to Bath was quite out
of the question; and the W not perfectly convinced
that the place might suit her better than her father."
And then, to prevent further outrage and indignation,
changed the subject directly.

“I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs Elton.
Upon these occasions a lady’s character generally pre-
cedes her; and Highbury has long known that you are
a superior perfonuer.”

“Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such
idea. A superior perfonnerl—very far from it, I
assure you: contider from how partial a quaner your
information came. I am doatingly fond of music—-
paseionately fond; and my friends say I am not entirely
devoid of taste; but as to anything else, upon my
honour my performance is main”: to the last degree.
You, Mina Woodhouse, I well know, play delightfully.
I assure you ithasbeen the greatest satisfaction, comfort,
and delight to me to hear what a musical society I am
got into. I absolutely cannot do without muc; it in
a necessary of life to me; and having always been used
to a very musical society, both at Maple Grove and in
Bath, it would have been a most serious sacriﬁce. I
honestly said as much to Mr E. when he was speaking
of my future home, and expressing hie fears lest the re-
tirement of it should be disagreeable; and the inferiority
of the house too—knowing what I had been accustomed
to—of courle he was not wholly without apprehension.
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly
said that the world I could give up—parties, balls, playu

EMMA. 39

—for I had no fear of retirement Blessed with so
many resources within myself, the world was not neces-
sary to m. I could do very well without it. To
those who had no resourch it was a different thing;
but my resources made me quite independent. And as
to Hadleer rooms than I had been used to, I really
could not give it a thoughL I hoped I was perfectl
equal to any sacriﬁce of that description. Certainly,
had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove;
but I did assure him that two carriages were not neces-
sary to m happiness, nor were spacious apartments.
‘ But,’ mi I, ‘ to be quite honest, I do not think I can
live without something of a musical society. I condi-
tion for nothing else; but, without music, life would be
a blank to me.’ "

“ We cannot suppose,” said Emma, smiling, “ that
Mr Elton would hesitate to assure you of there being a
very musical society in Highbury; and I hope you will
not ﬁnd he has outstepped the tmth more than may be
pardoned, in consideration of the motive.”

“ No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head.
I am delighted to ﬁnd myself in such a circle: I hope
we shall have many sweet little concerts together. I
think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a
musical club, and have regular weekly meetings at our
house, or ours. Will not it be a good plan? I we
exert ourselves, I think we shall not be long in want of
allies. Something of that nature would be particularly
desirable for me, as an inducement to keep me in prac-
tice; for married women, you know—there is a sad
story against them, in general. They are but too apt
to give up music.”

“ But you, who are so extremely fond of it——there
can be no danger, surely ? ”

“ I should hope not; but really when I look around
among my acquaintance, I tremble. Selina has entirely

4o . Elna.

giVen up music ;-——never touches the instrument, though
she played And the same may be said of
Mn eﬁ'ereys—C ra Partridge that was—and of the
two ilmans, now Mrs Bird and Mrs James Cooper;
and of more than I ran enumerate. Upon my word,
it is enough to put one in a fright. I used to be quite
angry with Selina; but, really, I begin now to compre-
hend that a married woman has many things to call her
attention. I believe I was half an hour this morning
shut up with my housekeeper.”

“ But everything of that kind,” said Emma, “ will
soon be in so regular a train "

“ Well,” said Mrs Elton, laughing, “ we shall see."

Emma, ﬁnding her so determined upon neglecting her
music, had nothing more to say; and, after a moment’s
pause, Mrs Elton chose another cubject.

“ We have been calling at Randalls,” said she, “and
found them both at home; and very pleasant ple
they seem to be. I like them extremely. Mr eston
seems an excellent creature—quite a ﬁrst—rate favourite
with me already, I assure you. And :5: appears so
truly good— there is something so motherly and kind-
heaned about her, that it wins upon one directly.—She
was your governe, I think ?"

Emma was almost too much astonished to answer;
but Mrs Elton hardly waited for the aﬂimlative before
she Went on.

“ Having understood as much, I was rather aston-
ished to ﬁnd her so very ladylike. But she is really
quite the gentlewoman.”

“ Mrs Weston’s manners,” mid Emma, “ were
always particularly good. Their propriety, aim licity,
and elegance would make them the safest m l for
any young woman."

“And who do you think game in while we were
there 2 "

 

turn. 4!

Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some
old acquainunce, and how could she podbly guess?

“ Knight] I ” continued Mrs Elton 3—“ Knightley
himself! as not it luck ? For, not being within
when he called the other y, I had never seen him
before; and of course, as so particular a friend of
Mr E’s, I had a great curiosity. ‘ My friend Knight-
ley’ had been so often mentioned, that I was really
impatient to see him; and I must do my calf space
the justice to say that he need not be ashamed 0 his
friend. Knighdey is quite the gentleman; I like him
Very ,much. Decidedly, I think, a very gentlemaulike
nan.

Ha il ,itwasoow time to be ne.
oll', anlflgmma could breathe. go

“Insulferable woman!” was her immediate ex-
clamation. “Worse than I had sup Abso-
lutely insufferable! Knightleyl—I could not have
believed it. Knightleyl—never seen him in her life
before, and call him Knightleyl and discover that he
is a gentleman. A little upstart, vulyr being, with
her Mr E. and her can a, and her resources,
and all her airs of pert pretention and underbred linery.
Actually to discover that Mr Knightley is a gentleman I
I doubt whether he will return the compliment, and dis-
cover her to be a lady. I could not have believed it!
And to propose that she and I should unite to form a
musical clubl One would Fancy we were bosom
friends! And Mrs Weston! Astonished that the
person who had brought me up should be a gentle-
womanl Worse and worse! I never met with her
equal. Much beyond my hopes! Harriet is dis-
graced b any comparison. Ohl what would Frank
Churchil say to her if he were here? How angry and
how diverted he would be! Ahl there I am drinking
of him directly. Always the lint person to be thought

They were

0/

4a urns.

of ! How I uteh myself out! Frank Churchill
comes as regularly into my mind ! "

All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by
the time her father had arranged himself, after the
bustle of the Eltons’ departure, and was ready to speak,
she was very tolerably capable of attending.

“ Well, my dear,” he deliberately began, “ consider-
ing we never saw her before, she seems a very pretty
sort of young lady; and I dare sa she was very much

leased with you. She speaks a 'ttle too quick. A
ittle quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the
ear. But I believe I am nice; Ido not like strange
voices; and nobody speaks like you and poor Miss
Taylor. However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-
behaved oung lady, and no doubt will nuke him a very
good wig. Though I think he had better not have
married. I tirade the best excuses I could for not
having been able to wait on him and Mrs Elton on this
happy occasion: I said that I hoped I lbw/d in the
course of the summer. But I ought to have gone
before. Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss. Ah I
it shows what a and invalid I am! But I do not like
the corner into Vicarage Lane.”

“I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr
Elton knows you."

“Yes; but. a young lady—a bride—I ought to have
paid my respects to her if possible. It was being very
deﬁcient."

“ But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony ;
and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your
respects to a bride ? It ought to be no recommenda-
tion to you. It is encouraging people to marry if you
make so much of them.”

“ No, my dear, I never encouraged anybody to
marry, but I would always wish to pay every proper
attention to a lady—and a bride especially, is never to

 

mun. 43

be neglected. More is avowedly dueto ber. A bride,
you know, my clear, is always the lint in company, let
the others be who they may.”

“ Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry I
do not know what is. And I should never have ex-

ted you to be lending your sanction to such vanity-

'ts for poor young ladies.”

“ My dear you do not understand me. This is a
matter of mere common politeness and good-breeding,
and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people
to many."

Emma had done. Her father was growing nervous,
and could not understand hr. Her mind retumed to
Mn Elton’s offences, and long, very long, did they
occupy her.

Cblvttr 3555333.

MA was not required, by any su uent dis-
covery, to retract her ill opinion of rs Elton.
Her observation had been pretty correct. Such
as Mrs Elton appeared to her on this second interview,
such she appeared whenever they met again: self-
important, presuming, familiar, ignorant, and ill-bred.
She had a little beauty and a little accom lishment, but
so little judgment that she thought hersel coming with
superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and imlplrove
a country neighbourhood; and conceived Miss aw-
kins to have held such a lace in society as Mrs
Elwn’s consequence only coulli'l surpass.

There was no reason to suppose Mr Elton thought
at all differently from his wife. He seemed not merely
happy with her, but proud. He had the air of con-
gratulating himself on having brought such a woman to
Highhury, as not even Mina Woodhouae could equal ;

44 ms.

and the greater part of her new acquaintance, di

to commend, or not in the habit of judging, following
the lead of Miss Bates’s good-will, or taking it for
granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable
as she profeued herself, were very well satisﬁed; so
that Mrs Elton’s praise paused from one mouth to an-
other as it ought to do, unimpeded by Miss Wood-
house, who readily continued her ﬁrst contribution, and
talked with a good grace of her being “very pleasant,
and very elegantly dresoed.”

In one respect Mrs Elton grew even worse than she
had appeared at ﬁrst. Her feelings altered towards
Emma. Oﬂ‘ended, probably, by the little encourage-
ment which her proponls of intimac met with, she
drew back, in her turn, and gradually became much
more cold and distant; and though the effect waa
agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was necessarily
increasing Emma’s dislike. Her manners, too—and
Mr EImn’s—were unpleasant towards Harriet. They
were sneer-ing and negligent. Emma hoped it mun
rapidly work Harriet’s cure; but the sensations which
could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very
much. It was not to be doubted that poor Han'ietl
attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreterve,
and her own share in the story, under a colouring the
least £1vourable to her, and the most soothing to him,
had in all likelihood been given also. She Wu, of
course, the object of their joint dislike. When they
had nothing else to ﬂy, it must be always easy to begin
abusing Miss Woodhouse ; and the enmity which they
dared not show in open disrespect to her found a broader
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.

Mrs Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax ; and
from the ﬁrst. Not merely when a state of warfare
with one young lady might be supposed to recommend
the other, but from the very ﬁrst; and she was not

EMMA; 45

satisﬁed with expressing a natural and reasonable admi-
ration, but without solicitation, or plea, or privil e, she
must be wanting to assist and befriend her. efore
Emma had forfeited her conﬁdence, and about the third
time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs Elton’s knight-
en'antry on the mb‘ect.

“Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Wood-
housc. I quite rave about Jane Fairfax. A sweet,
interesting creature. So mild and ladylike—and with
such talents !—I assure you I think she halvery extra-
ordinary talents. I do not scruple to say that she plays
extremely well. I know enough of music to speak
decidedl on that int. Oh! she is absolutely chann-
ingl Jon will augh at my warmth, but, upon my
word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax—and her
situation is so calculated to all‘ect one l—Miss Wood—
house, we must exert ourselves and endavour to do
something for her. We must bring her forward. Such
talent as hers must not he suffered to remain unknown.
I daresay you have heard those charming lines of the
Poet—

‘ ‘ Full runny : ﬂower ls born to blush unseen
And waste its fragrance on the desert nir.’
We must not allow them to be veriﬁed in sweet Jane
Fairfax.”

“I cannot think there is any danger of it,” was
Emma’s ealrn answer; “ and when you are better

uainted with Miss Fairfax's simau'ou, and under-
stand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs
Campbell, I have no idea that you will suppose her
talents can be unknown.”

“ Oh! but, dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in
such retirement, such obscurity, so thrown away.
Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed with the
Campbells are sopalpably at an end! And I think she
feels it. I am sure she does. She is very timid and

H. D

46 1 Exam.

ailent. One can nee that the feel: the want of en-
couragement. I like her the better for it. I must
confeu it lI a recommendation to me. I am a great
advocate for timidity—and I am sure one does not often
meet with it. But in thoae gho are at all inferior,Jit in
extreme] repose-sing. h! I assure ou, ane
Fairfax i! anery delightful character, and inlereeta me
more than I can express.”

“You appear to feel a t deal i but I am not
aware how you or any of '3 Fairﬁix’a acquaintance
here, any of those who have known her longer than
yourself, can [how her any other attention than—"

“ My dear Miu Woodhonse, a vast deal may be done
by those who dare to act. You and I need notbeafmid.
If we set the example, many will follow it a far at they
ran; though all have not our situations. W: have
can-iages to fetch and convey her home; and we live
in a style which could not make the addition of Jane
Fairfax at any time the lent inconvenient. I should
be extremely dilpleaaed if Wright were to send u up
such a dinner at could make me regret having asked
more than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. I have no ida
of that sort of thing. It in not likely that I 350111;],
considering what I have been used to. My greatest
danger, perhaps, in haulekeeping, may be quite the other
way, in doing too much, and being too careless of ex-
penae. Maple Grove will probably be my model more
than it ought to be—for we do not at all affect to equal
my brother, Mr Suckling, in income. However, rn
resolution ll taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax. I aha
certainly have her very often at my houae, shall intro-
duce her wherever I can, shall have musical parties to
draw out her talenu, and shall be conmntly on the
watch for an eligible situation. My acquaintance is an
very extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of
aomething to suit her shortly. I shall introduce her, of

arms. 47

coune, very particularly to my brother and sister when
they come to us. I am sure they will like her ex-
tremely; and when she gets a little acquaian with
them, her fears will completely wear 06', for there really
is nothing in the manners of either but what is highly
conciliating. I shall have her very often, indeed, while
they are with me; and I dare say we slull sometimes
ﬁnd a seat for her in the barouche-landau in some of
our exploring parties.”

“ Poor Jane Fairfax ! " thought Emma, “ you have
not deserved this. You may have done wrong with
regard to Mr Dixon ; but this is a punishment beyond
what you can have merited. The kindness and roteC<
tion of Mrs Elton !—‘ Jane Fairfax and Jane Farrﬁx! ’
Heavens! let me not suppose that she dares go about
Emma Woodhouseing me! But, upon my honour,
there seems no limits to the licentiousuess of that
woman’s tongue! ”

Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to
any so exclusively addressed to herself—so disgustin ly
decorated with a “ dear Miss Woodhouse.” he
change on Mrs Ellen’s side soon afterwards appeared,
and she was left in peace—neither forced to be the ve
particular friend of Mrs Elton nor, under Mrs Elton s
guidance, the Very acu've patroness of Jane Fairfax, and
only sharing with others in a general way, in knowing
what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.

She looked on with some amusement. Miss Ham's
gratitude for Mrs Elton's attentions to Jane was in the

m ster of guileless simplicity and warmth. She was
ﬁnite one of her worthies—the most amiable, aﬂable,

elightﬁrl woman—just as accomplished and condescend-
ing as Mn Elton meant to be considered. Emma’s
only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept thok
attentions, and tolerate Mrs Elton as she seemed to
do. She heard of her walking with the Eltons, sitting

48 EMMA.

with the Elmns, spending a day with the Eltons!
This was astonishing! She could not have believed it
possible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax
could endure snch society and friendship as the Vicarage
had to offer.

“ She is a riddle, quite a riddle," aid she —“ To
chuse to remain here month after month, under priva-
tions of every sort. And now to chuse the mortifica-
tion of Mrs Elton’s notice, and the pennry of her
conversation, rather than return to the superior com-
panions who have always loved her with such real,
generous alfection."

Jane had come to Highbury pmfmedly for three
months; the Campbells were gone to Ireland for three
months; but now the Cam bells had promised their
daughter to stay at least till idsummer, and fresh in-
vitations had an'ived for her to join them there. Ac- ‘
cording to Miss Bates—it all came ﬁom her—Mrs
Dixon had written most pressingly. Would Jane but
go, means were to be found, servants sent, friends con-
trived—no travelling difﬁculty allowed to exist; but
still she had declined it.

“ She must have some motive, more powerful than
a for refusing this invitation,” was Emma’s con-
: usion. “She must be under some sort of penance,
inﬂicted either by the Campbells or herself. I‘hcre is
great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.
She is no! to be with the Dixm. The decree is
issued by somebody. But why must the consent to be
with the Eltons? Here is quite a separate puzzle.”

Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of
the mbject, before the few who knew her opinion of
Mrs Elton, Mrs Weston ventured this apology for
Jane.

“ We not suppose that she has an great enjoy-
ment at the Vicarage, my dnr Emma— ut it is better

nuns. 49

than being always at home. Her aunt is a good
creature; but, as a constant companion, 'must be very
tiresome. We must consider what Miss Fairfax ouim,
before we condemn her taste for what she goes to. ’

“ You are right, Mrs Weston,” aid Mr Knightley
warmly; “Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of
forming a opinion of Mrs Elton. Could she have
chosen with whom to associate, she would not have
chosen her. But " (with reproachful smile at Emma)
“she receives attentions from Mrs Elton, which nobody
else pays her.”

Emma felt that Mrs Weston was giving her a
momentary glanoe, and she was herself struck cl? his
warmth. With a faint blush, she presently repli —

“ Such attentions as Mrs Elton’s, I should have
imagined, would rather disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax.
Mrs Elton’s invitations I should have imagined anything
but inviting." .

“ I should not wonder,” said Mrs Weston, “if Miss
Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own
inclination, by her aunt’s eagerness in accepting Mrs
Elton’s civilities for her. Poor Miss Bates may very
likely have committed her niece, and hunied her into a
greater appearance of intimacy than her own good sense
would have dictated, in spite of the very natural wish of
a little change.”

Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again;
and, after a few minutes silence, he said—

“ Another thing must be taken into consideration too
—Mrs Elton does not talk to NIiss Fairfax as she
speaks of her. We all know the dilference between
the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken
amongst us; we all fch the inﬂuence of a something
beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with
each other—a something more early implanted. We
cannot give anybody the disagreeable hints that we may

50 um.

have been very full of the hour before. We feel things
diﬂ'erendy. And besides the operation of thin, as a
general principle, you'may be sure that Miss Fairfax
awe: Mrs Elton by her superiority/[both of mind and .
manner; and that, face to face, rs Elton treats her
with all the respect which she has a claim to. Such a
woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs
Elton’t way before—and no degree of vanity can pre-
vent her acknowledging her own comparative litdeneu
in action, if not in consciousness.”

“ I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,”
mid Emma. Little Henry was in her thoughts, and a
mixture of alarm and delimcy made her irrecolute what
else to ta .

“ Yes, ' he replied, “anybody my know how highly
I think of her."

“ And yet,” said Emma, beginning hactily, and with
an arch look, but soon stopping—it was better, however,
to know the wont at once—the hurried on, “ and yer,
perhaps, you may hardly be aware youraelf how highly
It it. The extent of your admiration may take you by

rize some day or other."

r Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons
of his thick leather gaiteni, and either the exertion of
getting them together, or some other cause, brought the
colour into hit face, as he amwered—

“Oh! are you there? But you are miserably be-
hindhand. Mr Cole gave me a hint of it six weeks ago.”

He Itopped. Emma felt her foot preued by Mrs
Weston, and did not herself know what to think. In
a moment he went on—

“That will never be, however, I can awure you.
Mis- Fairfax, I dare my, would not have me if I were
to ask her; and I am very sure I shall never ask her.”

Emma returned her friend’n pressure with interest;
and was pleased enough to exclaim—

Runs. 5:

“You are not vain, Mr Knightley. I will say that
for you.”

He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful,
and, in a manner which showed him not pleased, soon
afterwards said—

“ So you have been settling that I should many Jane
Fairfax ?" -

“ No, indeed, I have not. You have scolded me too
much for match-making for me to resume to ﬁlm such
a liberty with you. What I said now meant
nothing. One mys those sort of dings, of course, with-
out any id of a serious meaning. h 1 no; upon my
word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying
Jane Fairfax, or Jane anybody. You would not come
in and sit with us in this comfortable way if you were
marri ”

Mr Knighdey was thoughtful again. The result of
his reverie was——-“ No, Emma, I do not think the
extent of my admiration for her will ever lake me by
' surprize. I never had a thought of her in that way, I
assure you.” ~

And soon afterwards, “ Jane Fairfax is a very cham-
ing young woman—but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect.
She has a fault. She has not the open temper which a
man would wish for in a wife.”

Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a
fault.

“Well,” said she, “ and you soon silenced Mr Cole,
I su l”

“ es, very soon. He gave me a quiet hint; I told
him he was mistaken; he asked my pardon, and said no
more. Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than
his neighbours."

“In that respect how unlike dear Mrs Elton, who
wants to be wiser and wittier than all the world! I
wonder how she speaks of the Colts—what she calls

52 mm.

them. How can the ﬁnd any appellation for them,
deep enough in familiar vulgarity? She calla you
Knightley; what can she do for Mr Cole? And to
I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax ace in her
civilitiel, and consents to be with her. Mn econ,
your argument weighs most with me. I can much more
readil enterinlo the temptation of getting away from
Min ates, than I can believe in the triumph of Min
Fairfax’a mind over Mrs Elton. I have no faith in
Mrs Elton't acknowledging herself the inferior in
thought, word, or deed; or in her being under any
restraint beyond her own acanty rule of good breeding.
I cannot imagine that Ihe will not be continually insult-
ing her visitor with praise, encouragement, and offers of
service; that she will not be continually detailing her
magniﬁcent intentions, from the procuring her a per-
manent aituation to the including her in those delightful
exploring parties, which are to take place in the harouche-
landauJ'

“ Jane Fairfax has feeling,” said Mr Knightle ; “ I
do not accuae her of want of feeling. Her eeneihi idea, I
suspect, are mng, and her temper excellent in its power
of forbearance, patience, aelf-contmul; but it wanu
opennees. She u reserved; more reserved, I think,
than ehe used to be: and I love an open temper. No;
till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment, it had never
entered my head. I aw Jane Fairfax, and convened
with her, with admiration and pleasure alwaya ; but
with no thought beyond.”

“ Well," Mn Weston,“aaid Emma, tliumphantly,
when he left them, “ what do you any now to Mr

‘ Knightley’e marrying Jane Fairfax ? "

“ Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very
much occu ied by the idea of not being in love with her,
that I the d not wonder if it were to end in his being
aoatlast. Donotheatm”

EMMA. 53

Charm ##53‘9.

VERYBODY in and about Highhury, who had
E ever visited Mr Elton, was disposed to pay him
attention on his marriage. Dinner parties and
~ evening parties were made for him and his lady; and
invitations ﬂowed in so fast that she had soon the
pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a dis-
engaged day.
“ see how it is,”saidshe; “I seewhatalife I am
to lead among on. Upon my word we shall he abso-
lutely dissipa We really seem quite the fashion. If
this is living in the country, it is nothing very {omnid-
able. From Monday next to Saturday I assure you
we have not a disengaged day] A woman with fewer
.resources than I have need not have been at a loss.”
No invitation came amiss to her. Her Bath habits
made evening parties perfectly natural to her, and Maple
Grove had given her a taste for dinners- She was a
little shocked at the want of two drawing-rooms, at the
poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in
the Highbury card-parties. Mrs Bates, Mrs Perry, Mn
Goddard, and others, were a good deal behindhand in
knowledge of the world, but :5: would soon show
them how everything ought to be arranged. In the
course of the spring she must return their civilities by
one very superior party; in which her card-tables should
be set out with their separate candles and unbroken
packs in the true style, and more waiters en for
the evening than their own establishment could mish,
to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper
hour, and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisﬁed
without a dinner at Hartﬁeld for the Eltons. They
must not do less than others, or she should be exposed

54 mum.

to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of itiful
resentment. A dinner there must be. After mma
had talked about it for ten minutes, Mr Woodhouse
felt no unwillingness, and only made the usual stipula-
tion of not sitting at the bottom of the able himself,
with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should
do it for him.

The persons to be invited required little thought.
Beside! the Eltons, it must be the Weatons and Mr
Kni htley; so far it was all of course: and it was

y leu inevitable that poor little Harriet must be
asked to make the eighth ; but this invitation was not
given with equal satisfaction, and, on many accounts,
Emma was parﬁcularly pleased by Harriet’n begging
to be allowed to decline it. “ She would rather not be
in bi: company more than she could help. She was
not yet quite able to see him and his charming happy
wife together, without feeling uncomfortable. If Miss
Woodhouse would not be displeased, she would rather
stay at home.” It was precurer what Emma would
have wished, had she deemed it possible enough for
wiehin . She was delighted with the fortitude of her
little riend—for fordtnde she knew it was in her to
give up being in company, and stay at home; and she
could now invite the very person whom she mall wanted
to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax. Since her at con-
vemtion with Mrs Wetton and Mr Knightley, she was
more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than the
had often been. Mr Knightley’s words dwelt with her.
He had aid that Jane Fairﬁx received attentions from
Mrs Elton which nobody else paid her.

“This is very true," said the, “at least as faras
relates to me, which was all that was meant, and it is
very shameful. 0f the same age, and always knowing
her, I ought to have been more her friend. She will
never like me now. I have neglected her too long.

EMMA. I 55

But I will show her greater attention than I have
done."

Every invitation was successful. They were all dis-
engaged and all happy. The preparatory interest of
this dinner, however, was not yet over. A circum-
stance lather unlucky occurred. The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grand 1pa and
aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring and err papa
now pro bringing them, and sta 'ng one whole day
at H eld—which one d: would the very da of
this y. His professio engagements did not a low
of his being put off, but both father and daughter were
disturbed by its happening so. Mr Woodhouse con-
sidered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost
that his nerves could bear—and here would be in ninth
—and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninthvery
much out of humour, at not being able to come even to
Hartlield for forty-eight hours, without falling in with
a dinner party.

She comfon her father better than she could com-
fort herself, by representing that though he certainly
would make them nine, yet he always said so little,
that the increase of noise would be very immaterial.
She thought it in rnlity a sad exchange for herself, to
have him, with his grave looks and reluctant conversa-
tion, opposed to her instead of his brother.

The event was more favourable to Mr Woodhouse'
than to Emma. John Knightley mme; but Mr
Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town, and
must be absent on the very day. He might'be able to
{in them in the evening, but certainly not to dinner.

r Woodhonse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him
so, with the arrival of the little boys, and the philo-
sophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate,
removed the chief of even Emma’s vexation.

The day came, the party were puncmally assembled,

56 min.

and Mr John Knightley seemed early to devote himself
to the business of being agreble. Instead of drawing
his brother olf to a window while they waited for
dinner, he was talking to Miss Fairfax. Mrs Elton,
as elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked
at in silence—wanting only to observe enough for
Isabella’s information—but Miss Fairfax was an old
acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could talk to her.
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning
from a walk with his little boys, when it had been
beginning to rain. It was natural to have some civil
hopes on the subject, and he said—-

“I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax,
this morning, or I am sure you must have been wet.
We scarcely got home in time. I hope wu turned
directly.”

“ I went only to the post—oﬂice," said she, “ and
reached home before the ruin was much. It is my
daily errand. I always fetch the letters when I am
here. It saves trouble, and is a something to get me
out. A walk before bmkfast does rne g ."

“ Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine."

“No; but it did not absolume rain when I set
out."

Mr John Knightley smiled, and replied——

“ That is to say, you choee to have your walk, for
you were not six yards from your own door when I
had the pleasure of meeting you ; and Henry and John
had seen more drops than they could count long before.
The post-ofﬁce has a grest charm at one period of our
lives. When you have lived to my age, you will begin
to think letter! are never worth going through the rain
for.”

There was a little blush, and then this answer—

“ I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in
the midst of every dearest connection, and therefore I

mass. 57

cannot expect that simply growing older should make me
indifferent about letters.”

“ Indifferent I 01: no —— I never conceived you
could become indifferent. Letters are no matters of
indifference; they are generally a ve positive curse.”

“You are king of letters of usiness; mine are
letters of frien ip."

“ I have often thought them the worst of the two,"
replied he, coolly. “ Business you know, may bring
money, but friendship hardly ever does.”

“ Ah ! youare not serious now. I know Mr John
Knightley too well—I am very sure he understands the
value of friendship as well as anybody. I can easily
believe that letters are very little to you, much less than
to me; but it is not your being ten years older than
myself which makes the diﬁ'erence ; it is not age, but
situation. You have everybod dearest to you always
at hand, I, probably, never sh again; and therefore,
all I have outlived all my affections, a post-oﬂice, I
think, must always have power to draw me out, in worse
weather than to-day."

“ When I talked of yourheing altered by time, by the
pro of yrs,” said John Knightley, “I meant to
imp y the change of situation which time nsuall brings.
I consider one as including the other. Time ' l gener-
ally lessen the interest of every attachment not within
the daily circle—but that is not the change I hadin
view for you. As an old friend, you will allow me to
hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years hence you may have
as many concentrated objects as I have."

It was kindly said, and very far from giving oﬁ'ence.
A pleasant “ thank you ” seemed meant to laugh it off;
buta blush, a quiverin lip, a tear in the eye, showed
that it was felt beyon a laugh. Her attention was
now claimed by Mr Woodhouse, who being, according
to his custom on such occasions, nuking the circle

58 MIA.
of

Ho and 'n his rticular complimmu to
the in, wu eli'laolilugg withpaher—and With all h'u
mild“ whnity, aid—
Im very aorry to her' Min Fairfax, of your
loin out thin morning in the rain. Young ladie-
dmjd take care of themnelvee. Young ladies are
delicate plants. They thould take care of their health
Md their complexion. My dear, did you change your
ﬂocking: I "

“Yen, air, I did indeed; and I am very much
obliged by your kind lolicitude about me.”

“My dear Mill Fairfax, young ladier are very lure
to he cared fan—I hope your good grandmanuna and
not are welL They are tome of my very old ﬁiendn.
I with my health allowed me to be a better neighbour.
You do u a great dal of honour to-day, I am sure.
My daughter and I are both highly neurible of your
podium, and have the grate“ utiafaction in Ieeing you
n Hartlield.”

The kind-hearted, polite old man might then nix
down and feel that he had done his duty, and made

fair lady welcome Ind euy.
"'17, thio time thewalk in the rain had reached Mrs
Elton, and her remonurancen now opened u n Jane.
“ g dear Jane, what in this I hear ?— ing to the
cc in the min l—Thin must not be, I nwure you.
on Id p'l‘l, how could on do ruch a thing? It in:
I")! I Wu not there to [a e care of'you.”

Jane very patiently snared her that she had not
caught my co d.

“Ohl do not tell me. You reallyare avery sad
*3.“ do not know how to take care of yourself.

9 the puboﬂice indeed ! Mrs Weston, did you ever
hear the like? You and I must positively exert our
authority.”

“ My advice,” aid Mn [Weamm] kindly and

EMMA. 59

ﬁnuasivcly, “ I certainly do feel tempted to give.—
iss Fairfax, you must not run such risks. Liable as
you have been to serene colds, indeed you ought to be
particular] careful, especially at this time of year. The
I ring I aiways think requires more than car-runon care.

ter wait an hour or two, or even half: day for your
letters, than run the risk of bringing on your cough
again. Now do not you feel that you had? Yes, I
am sure you are much too reasonable. You look as if
you would not do such a thing again.”

“ 0h ! she 1M not do such a thing again," eagerly
rejoined Mrs Elton. “ We will not allow her to do
such a thing again : "—-and nodding signiﬁcantly—
“ there must be some arrangement made, there must
indeed. I shall speak to Mr E. The man who fetches
our letters every morning (one of our men, I forget his
name) shall inquire for yours too and bring them to ou.
That will obviate all difﬁculties, you know; and mm
m I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple
to accept such an accommodation.

“You are extremely kind,” said Jane; “ but I can-
not give up my early walk. I am advised to be out
of doors as much as I an; I must walk somewhere,
and the post-ofﬁce is an object; and, upon my word,
I have scarcely ever had a bad morning before.”

“ My dear Jane, say no more about it. The thing
is determined, that is ” (laughing aﬁ'ectedly) “ as far as I
can presume to dent-mine anything without the concur-
rence of my lord and master. You know, Mrs Weston,
Em and I must be cautious how we express ourselves.

ut I do ﬁrmer myself, my dear Jane, that my inﬂuence
is not entirely worn out. If I meet with no insuperable
difﬁculties, therefore, consider that point as settled.”

“ Excuse me,” said Jane earnestly, “ I cannot by
any means consent to such an arrangement, so needlessly ,
troublesome to your servant. If the errand were not a

6° nun.

magi:de hdn-idnpivhl
mmhgbynyghh—I's—'

“Oh! ugh; hn-ial‘ltyhmthl—
Andilisammaqiyuln”

“The aﬁceisa‘mdufd edit-nun!”
taiddle. “mltgnhrizyadﬁqmdiofi! [fun
thinhofdldnzixlmmdqndallthtibam
deizilmH’mHing!"

“Iliteuulnl’vu'y'dlltgnhnd.”

“SoddomrhnanyneglimorhI-Ibw!
Solddomthzaldtu.amgthethmdadnlm
mainly pingwmeﬁngdonyhmmied
mg—idmomhanilﬂuylmmﬂy
lot!
mdofhdhmdqudncmmhdcdphuﬁh
incmuthewondcr."

“Thedahgmvexpmﬁomluhit. 1127mm
beginwinhmqlnckneaofighadlnnd,and
cxerdaeimpmmdm Ifyonnntanyﬁmhcrex-
mien,"cnnﬁnmdhe,lniling,“lhqm ' ﬁbrin

iatbekeymagmu‘halofcapcity.
paylandnnmbelenedvdl"

The vuiet'tsofhandwriting mﬁnherhlkedof,
andlheunulobunn'onlmade.

“I have bani it mull“ John Knighdey,
“dntthemnnofhandwriﬁngnﬂmpnnihina
family;andwbmtheumcmtacba,itianamnl
enough. Bu: for thatruaon,1 should imagine the
likene-mnnbechicﬂyconﬁnedmthefunalegfu
boyl have vary little Inching after an arlyageﬂnd
mmble intoanyhanddryan get. lubelhand
Emmldminh do writeverymuch alike. [havch
alwayi known their writing apart."

“Yen,” aid hi: brother, hesiutingly; “then in a

‘ EMMA. 6 r

likeness. I know what you mean—but Emma’s hand
is the strongest.”

“ Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said
Mr Woodhouse ; “ and always did. And so does poor
Mrs Weston "—with half a sigh and half a smile at her.

“ I never saw any gentleman's handwriting "—Emma
began, looking also at Mrs Weston ; but stopped, on
perceiving that Mrs Weston was attending to some one
else—and the pause gave her Lime to reﬂect. “Now,
how am I going to introduce him E—Am I unequal to
speaking his name at once before all these people! Is it
necessary for me to use any roundabout phrase l—Your
Yorkshire friend—your correspondent in Yorkshire ;—
that would be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.
No, I can pronounce his name without the smallest dis‘
trees. I certainly get. better and better.—Now for it."

Mrs Weston was disengaged, and Emma began again
—“ Mr Frank Churchill writes one of the best gentle-
man’s hands I ever saw.”

“ I do not admire it,” said Mr Knightley. “ It is too
small—wants strength. It is like a woman’s writing.”

This was not submitted to by either lady. They
vindicated him against the base aspersion. “ No,
it by no means wanted strength—it was not a large
hand, but very dear, and certainly strong. Had not
Mrs Weston any letter about her to produce ? ” No, she
had heard from him very lately, but having answered
the letter, had put it away.

“ If we were in the other mom,” said Emma—J“ If
I had my writingvdesk, I am sure I could produce a
specimen. 1 have a note of his—Do not you remem-
ber, Mrs Weston, employing him to write for you one
day ? "

“ He chose to say he was employed.”

“ Well, well, I have that note; and can show it after
dinner to convince Mr Knightley."

u. E

6: nun.

“Ohl when a t young man, like Mr Frank
Churchill,” aid r Knightley drily, “write. to a fair
lady like Mia Woodhouee, he will, of eoune, put forth
his best.”

Dinner wan on tnble. Mrs Elton, before the could
be spoken to, wal ready; and before Mr Woodhouee
had reached her, with his request to be allowed to hand
her into the dining-parlour, was saying—

“Mult I go lint? I rally am ashamed of always
leading the way.”

Jane’s Iolicitude about fetching her own letter: had not
escaped Emma. She had heard and aeen it all; and
felt tome curioeity to know whether the wet walk of
this morning had reduced any. She eu ted that it
bad; that it would not have been to reso utely encoun-
tered but in full expectation of hearing from tome one
very dear, and that it had not been in vain. She
tboughtﬂtere wu an nir of grater happineu than uml
——a glow ,lpth of complexion and Ipiritl.

She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the
expedition and the male of the Irieh maila;—it was
at her tongue’l end t the abstained. She wan quite
determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane
Fairfax’l feelings: and they followed the other ladiel
out of the room, nrm-in-anu, with an appearance of
good-le highly becoming w the beauty and grace of

uch.

chum: 9mm.

HEN the [adieu returned to the drawing-room
after dinner, Emma found it hardly possible
to yrevent their making two distinct partiet;

-—with no mnch peneverance in judging and behaving
ill did Mn Elton engrou Jane Fairfax and slight her-

muss. 63

self. She and Mn Weston were obliged to he almost
always either talking together or silent togethe . Mn
Elton left them no choice. If Jane ressed her for
alittle time she soon began again; an though much
that passed between them was in s half-whisper, especi-
all on Mrs Elton’s side, there was no avoiding a know-
] ge of their Friucipal :—the post-ofﬁce—
catching cold— etching letters—and friendship, were
long under discussion; and to them succeeded one
which must be at lean equally unplannt to Jane—
inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation
liker to suit her, and professions of Mrs Elmo’s
mediated activity.

“Here is April come,” said she; “I get quite
anxious about you. June will soon be here."

“But I have never ﬁxed on June or any other
month—merely looked forward to the mmer in
general.”

“ But have you really heard of nothin 9’“

“I have not even made any inquiry; g do not wish
to make any yet."

"Oh! my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are
not aware of the difﬁculty of procuring exactly the
desirable thing."

“ I not aware ! ” said Jane, shaking her head; “dear
Mrs Elton, who can have thought of it as I have done i"

“ But have not seen so much of the world as I
have. on do not know how many candidates there
always are for the ﬁrst situations. I saw a vast deal of
that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. A
cousin of Mr Suckling, Mrs Bragge, had such an
inﬁnity of applications; everybody was anxious to he
in her family, for she moves in the ﬁrst circle. Wax-
candles in the school-room! You may imagine how
desirable! Of all houses in the kingdom, Mrs Bragge’s
is the one I would most wish to see you in."

64 EMMA.

“Colonel and Mn Campbell are to be in town again
by midlurnrner,” laid Jane, “ I must spend come time
with them; I am cure they will want it;—afterwnrde
I may probably be glad to dispone of myrelf. But I
would not wish you to take the trouble of making any
inquiries at pl'cIan"

“Trouble! aye, I know your Icruplet. You are
afraid of giving me trouble; but I sure you, my dar
Jane, the Campbells can hardlybe more interested about
you than I am. I shall write to Mn Partridge in a
day or two, and shall give her a strict charge to be on
the look-out for anything eligible.”

“ Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention
the rubject to her; u'll the time drawn nearer, I do not
wish to be giving anybody trouble.’ ’

“ But, my dear child, the time i: drawing near; here
in A ril, and June, or may even July, in very near, with
such mines! to accomplish before ua. Your inexperi-
ence really amulet me! A situation such a: you
deterve, and your friends would require for you, in
no everyday occurrence, is not obtained at a moment’s
notice; indeed, indeed, we must begin inquiring
directly."

“ Excule me, ma’am, but this ll by no meant my in-
tention; I make no inquiry myself, and should be lorry
to have any made by my friends. When I am quite
detemrined u to the time, I am not at all afraid of
being long unemployed. There are places in town,
ofﬁcer, where inquiry would soon produce tomething—
ofﬁces for the ale, not quite of human ﬂesh, but of
human intellect."

"Ohl my dear, human ﬂesh! You quite shock
me; if you mean a ﬂing at the slave trade, I auure
you Mr Suckling was always rather a friend to the
abolition.”

“I did not mean—I war not thinking of the slave-

muss. 65

trade,” replied Jane; “govemess—trade, I assure ou,
was all that I had in view; widely dilfenent, certainly,
astotheguiltofthose whocarryit on; but as to the

renter misery of the victims, I do not know where it
fies. But I only mu to say that there are advertising
ollioes, and that by applying to them I should have no
doubt of very soon meeting with something that would
db.”

“Something that would do! " repeated Mrs Elton.
“Aye, that may suit your humble ides of yourself ;—I
know what a modest creature you are; but it will not
satisfy your friends to have you taking up with anything
that may offer, any inferior commonplace situation, in a
family not moving in a certain circle, or able to command
the elegancies of life.”

“ You are very obliging; but as to all that I am very
indifferent; it would be no object to me to be with the
rich; my mortiﬁcalions, I think, would only be the
greater; I should suffer more from comparison. A
gentleman’s family is all that I should condition for.”

“ I ltnow you, I know you; you would take up with
anything; but I shall be a little more nice, and I am
sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side; with
your superior talents, you have a right to move in the
ﬁrst circle. Your musical knowledge alone would en-
title you to name your own terms, have as many rooms
as you like, and mix in the family as much as you
chose ;—thnt isr—I do not know—if you knew the
harp, you might do all that, I am ve sure; but you
sing as well as play; yes, I really be ieve you might,
even without the harp, stipulate for what you chose:
—and you must and shall be delightfully, honourably,
and comfortably settled before the Campbell: or I have
any rest."

“ You may well class the delight, the honour, and
the comfort of such a situation together,” said Jane,

66 ma.

“theyarepreuymrewbeequal; however,Iarn very
eeriona in not wishing anything to be attempted at
Event for me. I an exceedingly obli to you, Mu

lmn ; I am obliged to anybody who eela for me, but
I am quite serious in wiahing nothing m be done till the
mm. For two or three months longer I Ihall
remain where I am. and an I an”

“ And I am quire aerioua too, I allure you,” replied
Mrs Elton, gail , “in reaolving to he alwayl on the
watch, and emphaying my friends to watch also, that
nothing really unexceptionable may pass ul."

In thil ater the ran on; never thoroughly atopped
by anything till Mr Woodhmue came into the room;
her vanity had then a change of object, and Emma
heard her laying in the lame half-whiaper to Jane—

“ Here comes this dear old bean of mine, I proteu !
—Only think of hi- gallantry in coming away before
the other men !—whar a dear creature he in 1—1 anure
you I like him exceuively. I admire all that quaint,
old-faahioned politeness; it in much more to my taste
than modern eaae ; modern nae often disgust: me. But
this good old Mr Woodhonae, I wiah you had heard
his gallant speeches to me at dinner. 0h ! I assure you
I began to think my tam :fom would be absolutely
jealoua. I fancy I am rather a favourite; he took
notice of my gown. How do on like it ?—Selinn’u
choice— handnome, I think, but do not know whether
it is not over-trimmed ; I have the greatest dislike to
the id of being nver-trimmed;—quite a horror of
ﬁnery. I must put on a few omaments now, becauae it
in expected of me. A bride, you know, must appear
like a bride, but my natural taste in all for simplicity; a
rimplc style of dress is no inlinircl referable to lincry.
But I am quite in the minority, Iy lieve ; few people
aeem to value aimplicity of dress—chow and ﬁnery are
everything. I have Iorne notion of putting such a

EMMA. 67

trimming at this to my white and silver poplin. Do
you think it will look well 2 ”

The whole party were but re-aaaembled in the
drawing-room, when Mr Wenon made hie appearance
among them. He had returned to n late dinner, and '
walked to Hanﬁeld an noon an it was over. He had
been too much expected by the bent judges, for urn-prize
—bnt there was great joy. Mr Woodhouue was almont
or glad to lee him now, as he would have been aorry to
ace him before. John Knightley only was in mute al-
tonishment. That a man who might have at hil
evening uietly at home after a day of business In Lon-
don nhorild set off again, and walk half a mileto another
man'u houlc for the sake of being in mixed company till
bed-lime, of ﬁniehing his day in the effort: of civrlity and
the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to otrike him
d ly. A man who had been in motion tince eight
o'c ock in the morning, and might now lnve been still
—who had been long talking, and might have been uilent
—who had been in more than one crowd, and might
have been alone !—Such a man to quit the tranquillity
and independence of his own ﬁreside, and on the even-
ing of a cold sleety April day rush out again into the
world !—Could he, by a touch of hia ﬁnger, have
inltantly taken back his wife, there would have been a
motive; but his coming would probably‘pmlong rather
than break up the party. John Knigh ey looked it
him with amazement, then shrugged hi: shoulders, and
mid, “ I could not haVe believed it even of the.”

Mr Weston, meanwhile, perfectly unmepicioul of
the indignation he was exciting, happy and cheerful as
usual, and with all the right of being principal talker,
which a day t anywhere from home confen, waa
making himnel agreeable among the rest; and having
'tiaﬁed the inquiriel of hia wife an to hie dinner, con-
vincing her that none of all her carent directions to the

68 EMMA.

servants had been forgotten, and spread abroad what
public l1er he had heard, was proceeding to a family
communication, which, though principally addrened to
Mrs Weston, he had not the smallest doubt p: being
highly interestin to everybod in the room. e ave
her a letter—it gas ﬁ'om Fruit, and to henelf; heghad
met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of
opening it.

“ Read it, read it," said he——“ it will give you pleas-
ure; only a few lines—will not take you long; read it
to Emma.”

The two ladies looked over it together; and he lat
smiling and talking to them the whole time, in a voice a
little subdued, but very audible to everybody.

“ Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think.
Well, what do you eay to it? I 'alwaya told you he
would be here again noon, did not. I ? Anne, my dear,
did not I always tell you to, and you would not believe
me ? In town next week, you see—at the latest, I
dare my ; for :5: is as impatient as the black gentleman
when anything in to be done ; most likely they will be
there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her illness, all
nothing, of coune. But it is an excellent thing to have
Frank among us again, so near at town. They will
stay a good while when they do come, and he will be
half his time with no. This is precisely what I wanted.
Well, retty good newt, ll not it? Have you ﬁnilhed
it .’ an Emma read it all? Put it up, put it up; we
will have a good talk about it some other time, but it
will not do now. I shall only just mention the circum-
Itanoe lo the others in a common way.”

Mrs Weston was most comfortably pleased on the
occasion. Her looks and words had nothing to restrain
them. She was happy, she knew she was happy, and
knew she ought to be happy. Her congratulations
were warm and open; but Emma could not speak so

emu. 69

ﬂuently. Sb: was a little occupied in weighing her own
feelings, and trying to understand the degree of her
agitation, which she rather thought was considerable.

Mr Weston, however, too eager to be very observant,
too communicative to want others to talk, was very well
satisﬁed with what she did say, and soon moved away
to make the rest of his friends happy, by a partial com-
munication of what the whole room must have over-
heard already.

It was well that he took everybody's for granted,
or he might not have thought either Mr oodhouse or
Mr Kni htley particularly delighted. They were the
ﬁrst enti ed, after Mrs Weston and Emma, to be made
happy. From them he would have proceeded to Miss
Fairfax ; but she was so deep in conversation with John
Kuightley, that it would have been too posidve an
intermptinu; and, ﬁnding himself close to Mrs Elton,
and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on
the subject with her.

Cbspur £¥£U1

HOPE I shall soon have the pleasure of introduc-

iu my son to you,” said Mr Weston.

r rs Elton, very willing to suppose a rticular
compliment intended her by such a hope, smi ed most
gncrously.

“ You have heard of a certain Flank Churchill, I
presume," he continued, " and know him to be my son,
though he does not hear my name ?”

“ Oh, yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaint-
ance. I am sure Mr Elton will lose no time in calling
on him; and we shall both have great pleasure in see-
ing him at the Vicarage.”

7o nuns.

“ You are very obliging. ank will be extremeJy
happy; I am sure. He is to be in town next week, if
not owner. We have notice of it in a letter to-day.
I met the letter: in my way this morning. and seeing
my son’s hand, presumed to open it, though it was not
directed to me—it was to Mrs Weston. She is his
principal correspondent, I assure you. I hardly ever
get a letter."

“And so you absolutely 0 ed what was directed
to herl 0h, Mr Weston ” {Eighing aﬂectedly), “ I
must protest against that. A most dangerous preced-
entindeedl I beg you will not let your neighbourl
follow your example. Upon my word, if this is what
I am to expect, we rnanied women must begin to exert
ourselves. 0h, Mr Weston, I could not have believed
it of you! "

“ Aye, we men are sad fellows. You must take care
of yourself, Mrs Elton. This letter tells us—it is a
short letter, written in a hurry, merely to give us notice
—-it tells no that they are all coming up to town directly,
on Mn Churchill’s account! she has not been well the
whole winter, and thinks Enscombetoo cold for her ; so
they are all to move southward without loss of time.”

“Indeed! from Yorkshire, I think. Enscomhc is
in Yorkshire ? ”

“Yes, they are about 190 miles from London: a
considerable journey."

“ Yes, upon my word, ve considerable. Sixty-ﬁve
miles farther than from Map e Grove to London. But
what is distance, Mr Weston, to people of large for-
tune? You would be amazed to hear how my brother,
Mr Suckling, sometimes ﬂies about. You will hardly
believe me, but twice in one week he and Mr Bmgge
went to London and back again with four horses."

“ The evil of the distance from Enlcornbe," said Mr
Weston, “is, that Mrs Churchill, a: we linden-land,

EMMA. 71

has not been able to leave the sopha for a week to-
gether. In ank’l last letter she complained, he said,
of being too weak to get into her conservatory without
having both his arm and his uncle’s. This, you know,
speaks a gmt degree of weakness; but now Iheisso im-
patient to be in town, that she means to sleep only two
nights on the road—so Frank writes word. Ceminly,
delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions,
Mrs Elton; you must rant me that.”

“ No, indeed, I sh grant you nothing. I always
take the part of“;in own sex; I do, indeed. I give
you notice, you ' ﬁnd me a formidable antagonist on
that point. I always mud up for women; and I
assure you, if you knew how Selim feels with re t
to aleeping at an inn, you would not wonder at r!
Churchill's making incredible exertions to avoid it.
Selina says it is quite horror to her; and I believe I
have caught a little of her uicety. She always travels
with her own sheets; an excellent precaution. Does
Mrs Churchill do the same 9 ”

“Depend upon it, Mrs Churchill does everything
that any other ne lady ever did. Mrs Churchill will
not be second to any lady in the land for "

Mrs Elton eagerly interposed with—

“ 0h, Mr Weston, do not minake me. Selina in no
line lady, I assure you. Do not run away with such an
idea.”

“ Is not she? Then she is no rule for Mrs
Churchill, who is as thorough a line lady as anybody
ever beheld.”

Mn Elton began to think she had been wrong in
disclaiming so warmly. It was by no means her object
to have it believed that her sister was no! a ﬁne lady;
perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it;
and she was considering in what way she had best
retract, when Mr Weston went on.

 

7: EMMA.

“ Mn Churchill is not much in my good graces, as
you may su ; but this is quire between ourselves.
She is very and of Frank, and therefore I would not

I: ill of her. Besides, she is out of health now; but
I I indeed, by her own account, she has always been.
I would not In so to everybody, Mrs Elton; but I
have not much aith in Mrs Churchill's illness.”

“ If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr
Weston? To Bath, or to Clifton?"

“ She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is
too cold for her. The fact it, I suppose, that she is
tired of Enscombe. She has now been a longer time
stationary there than she ever was before, and she begins
to want change. It is a retired place. A ﬁne place,
but very retired."

“Aye, like Maple Grove, I dare my. Nothing
can stand more retired from the road than Maple
Grove. Such an immense plantation all round it!
You seem shut out from everything—in the most com-
plete retirement. And Mrs Churchill probably has no!
health or spirits like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclu-
sion. Or, perhaps, she may not have resources enough
in herself to be qualiﬁed for a country life. I always
say a woman cannot have too many resoumee—and I
feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be
quite independent of society."

“ Frank was here in F ebnlary for a fortnight.” ‘

“ So I remember to have heard. He will ﬁnd an
addition to the society of Highbury when he comes
again ; that is, if I may presume to call myself an addi-
tion. But perhaps he may never have heard of there
being such a creature in the world."

This was too loud a call for a compliment to be
passed-by, and Mr Weston, with a very good grace,
Immediately exclaimed—

“My dear madam! Nobody but yourself could

sum. ‘ 73

imagine such a thing possible. Not heard of you! I

believe Mrs Weston’s letters lately have been full of
little else than Mrs Elton.”

"fizle had done his duty, and could return to his son.

“ When Frank left us,” continued he, “ it was quite
uncertain when we might see him again, which makes
this day’s news doubly welcome. It has been com-
pletely unexpected That is, I always had a strong
persuasion he would be here again soon; I was sure
something favourable would turn up—but nobody be-
lieved me. He and Mrs Weston were both dreadfully
desponding. ‘ How could he contrive to come? And
how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would
spare him again 2’ and so forth. I always felt that some-
thing wonld happen in our favour, and so it has, you see.
I have observed, Mrs Elton, in the course of my life,
that if things are going untowardly one month, they are
sure to mend the next.”

“ Very true, Mr Weston, perfectly true. It is just
what I used to say to a certain gentleman in company
in the days of courtship, when, because things did not
go quite right—did not proceed with all the rapidity
which suited his feelings—he was apt to be in de air,
and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it woul be
My before Hymen’s salii'on robe would be put on for
us! Oh! the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy
ideas, and give him cheerfuller views! The carriage—
we had disappointments about the carriage—one morning,
I remember, he same to me quite in despair.”

She was stopped by a slight ﬁt of coughing, and Mr
Weston instantly seized the o rtunity of going on.

“ You were mentioning ay. May is the very
month which Mrs Churchill is ordered, or has ordered
herself, to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe
—-—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the
agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank, the
whole spring—precisely the season of the year which

74 me.

one should have chosen for it: days almost at the
longeu: weather genial and plunnt, always inviting
one out, and never too hot for exerciee. When he was
here before, we made the best of it: but there wan a
good deal of wet, damp, cheerle- weather ; there alwayl
is in February, ou know; and we could not do half
that we intend Now will be the time. This will
be complete enjoyment; and I do not know, Mrs Elton,
whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the sort of
constant expectation there will be of hie coming in
to-da or to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more
friendjy to happiue- than having him actually in the
house. I think it in lo. I think it in the state ofmind
which give: most vpirit and delight. I hope you will
be pleated with my eon; but you must not expect a
prodigy. He it generally thought a fine young man,
but do not expect a prodigy. Mr- Weston’e partiality
for him in very great, and, as you may tuppoee, moot
gratifying to me. She thinks nobody equal Io him."

“And I assure you, Mr Weston, I have ve little
doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in hie your.
I have heard so much in praise of Mr Frank Churchill.
A: the same time, it is fair to observe, that I am one of
those who always judge for themselves, and are by no
means im licitly guided by others. I give you notice,
that as I nd your son, so I shall judge of him. I am
no ﬂatterer.”

Mr Weston wa- musing.

“ I hope," said he, presently, “ I have not been severe
upon poor Mra Churchill. If the is ill, I should be
oon'y to do her injustice; but there are some traits in
her character which make it difﬁcult for me to epeak of
her with the forbearance I could wish. You cannot be
ignorant, Mn Elton, of my connection with the family,
nor of the treatment I have met with; and, between
ourselves, the whole blame of it is to be laid to her.

mm. 75

She was the instiytor. Frank’s mother would never
have been Ilighted as she was but for her. Mr Churchill
has pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife’s; his is
a quiet, indolent, gentleman-like sort of pride, that would
harm nobody, and only make himself a little helpless
and tiresome; but her pride is an'ognnce and insolence.
Ami what inclines one less to bear, she has no fair
pretence of family or blood. She was nobody when he
married her, barely the daughter of a gentleman; but
ever since her being turned into a Churchill, she has
out-Churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims;
but in herself, I assure you, she is an upstart.”

“ Only think! well, that must be inﬁnitely provoking ?
I have quite a honor of upstarts. Ma le Grove has
given me a thorough disgust to people 0 that sort; for
there is a family in that neighbourhood who are such an
annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs the
give themselves! Your description of Mn Churc '
made me think of them directly. People of the name
of Tupman, very lately settled there, and encumbered
with many low connections, but giving themselves
immense airs, and expecting to be on a footing with
the old established families. A year and a half is the
very utmost that they can have lived at West Hall;
and how they got their fortune nobody knows. They
came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise
much, you know, Mr Weston. One has not great
hopes from Birmingham. I always say there is some-
thing direﬁil in the sound; but nothing more is positively
known of the Tupmans, though a good many things, I
assure you, are suspected; and yet by their manners
they evidently think themselves equal even to my
brother, Mr Suckling, who happens to be one of their
nearest neighbours. It is inﬁnitely too had. Mr
Suckling, who has been eleven years a resident at Maple
Grove, and whose father had it before him—I believe,

76 mum.

at lean—I am almost sure that old Mr Suckling had
com leted the purchase before hi: death.”

hey were interrupted. Tea was carrying round,
and Mr Weston, having aaid all that he wanted, soon
took the opportunity of walking [away].

After tea, Mr and Mrs Weston, and Mr Elton, cat
down with Mr Woodhousc to cards. The remaining
ﬁve were left to their own powers, and Emma doubted
their getting on very well; for Mr Knightley seemed
little dispoaed for conversation; Mn Elton was wanting
notice, which nobody had inclination to pay, and the
was herself in a worry of spirit: which would have
made her prefer being lilan

Mr John Knightley proved more talkative than his
brother. He was to lave them early the next day;
and he soon began with—

“Well, Emma, I do not believe I have anything
more to say about the boyl; but you have your sister’s
letter, and everything is down at full length there,
we may be sure. My charge would be much more
concise than hem, and probably not much in the same
spirit; all that I have to recommend being comprised
in—Do not spoil them, and do not phyaic them.”

“I rather hope to satisfy you both,” said Emma;
“ for I shall do all in my power to make them happy,
which will be enough for Isabella; and happiness must
preclude false indulgence and physio.”

“ And if you ﬁnd them troublesome, you must send
tltem home again."

“ That is very likely. You think so, do not you P "

“I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for
your Father ; or even may be some incumbranee to you,
if your visiting engagements continue to increase as much
as they have done lately."

" Increase! ”

“ Certainly; you must be sensible that the last

mun. 77

half-year has made a gmt difference in your way of
life.”

" Difference! No, indeed, I am not.”

“ There can be no doubt of your being much more
engaged with com ny than you used to be. Witness
this very time. are am I come down for only one
day, and you are engaged with a dinner-party ! When
did it happen before? or anything like it? Your
nei hbourhood is increasin , and you mix more with it.
A ittle while ago, every etter to Isabella brought an
account of fresh gaicties; dinners at Mr Cole’l, or
ball: at the Crown. The difference which Randalls,
Randalls alone, makes in your going: on in very
great.”

“Yes,” said his brother, quickly, “ it is Randalls
that does it all.”

“ Very well ; and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely
to have lees inﬂuence than heretofore, it Itrikes me as a
possible thing, Emma, that Henry and John may he
sometimes in the way. And if they are,I onlybeg
you to send them home."

“ No,” cried Mr Knightley ; “ that need not he the
consequence. Let them be sent to Donwell. I shall
certainly be at leisure."

“ Upon my word," exclaimed Emma, “ you amuse
me! I should like to know how many of all my
numerous engagements take place without your being of
the party; and why I am to be supposed in danger
of wanting leisure to attend to the little boys. These
amazing engagements of mine——what have they been?
Dining once with the Coles, and having a hall talked of,
which never took place. I can understand u—
(nodding at Mr John Knightley)—your good onune
in meeting with so many of your friends at once here
delights you too much to pass unnoticed—But you,
(turning to Mr Knightley,) who know how very, very

II. F

78 run,

oeldom I am ever two hour: from Hatﬁeld—why you
ahould foresee Iuch :- eerie: of dissipation for me, 1 can-
not imagine. And an to my dear little boys,I mutt
lay, that if Aunt Emma has not time for them, I do
:not think they would fak much better with Uncle
Kuightley, who ll abtent from home about ﬁve houn
where the in ahoent one ; and who, when he in at home,
ia either reading to him-elf or aettling hit accounts.”
Mr Knightley teen-red to be trying not to smile; and
succeeded without diﬂieulty, upon Mn Eltou’l begin-
ning to talk to him.

Cblpttr £55173].

VERY little quiet reﬂection was enough to eatiafy
Emma n to the nature of her agimtion on hear-
ing thil newt of Frank Churchill. She was soon

convinced that it was not for herlelf the was feeling at
all apprehensive or embarrassed—it wu for him. Her
own attachment had really Iubeided into a mere nothing
-—it was not worth thinking of ; but if he, who had
undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of
the two, were to be returning with the same warmth of
nentiment which he had taken away, it would be very
dirtressing. If a separation of two months thould not
have cooled him, there were dangers and evils before
her: caution for him and for herself would he necemry.
She did not mean to have her own aﬂ'ections entangled
again. and it would be incumbent on her to avoid any
encouragement of hit.

She wished the might be able to [keep] him from an
abaolute declaration. That would be so very painful a
conclusion of their present acquaintance; and yet she
could not help rather anticipating something decisive.
She felt a: if the spring would not pa- without bring-

EMMA. 79

ing a crisis, an event, a something to alter her present
composed and tranquil state.

It. was not very long, though rather longer than Mr
Weston had foreseen, before she had the power of
foming some 0 iuion of F rank Churchill’s feelings.
The Enscombc aniily were not in town quite so soon
as had been imagined, but he was at Highbury very soon
afterwards. He rode down for a couple of hours; he
could not t do more; but as he came from Randalls
immediatey to Hartlield, she could then exercise all
her quick observation, and speedily determine how he
was inﬂuenced, and how she must act. They met with
the utmost friendliness. There could be no doubt of
his great pleasure in seeing her. But she had an almost
inmnt doubt of his caring for her as he had done, of
his feeling the me tenderness in the me degree.
She watched him well. It was a clear thing he was
less in love than he had been. Absence, with the con-
viction probably of her indifference, had produced this
velylnatural and very desirable effect.

e was in high irits; as ready to talk and laugh
asever; and stemeitl’dclighted to speak of his former
visit, and recur to old stories; and he was not without
agitation. It was not in his calmness that she read his
comparative difference. He was not calm; his spirits
were evidently ﬂuttered; there was restlessness about
him. Lively as he was, it seemed a liveliness that did
not satisfy himself; but what decided her belief on the
subject, was his staying only a quarter of an hour, and
hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. “ He
had seen a group of old acquaintance in the meet as he
passed—he had not stopped, he would not stop for
more than a word—but he had the vanity to think they
would be disappointed if he did not call; and, much as
he wished to stay longer at Hartlield, he must hurry
off.”

80 EMMA.

She had no doubt as to his being less in love, but
neither his agitated spirits nor his hun'ying away seemed
like a perfect cure; and she was rather inclined to think
it implied a dread of her returning power, and a discreet
resolution of not trusting himself with her long.

This was the only visit from ank Churchill in the
course often days. He was often h 'ng, intending to
come; but was always prevented. aunt could not
bear to have him leave her. Such was his own account
at Randalls. If he were uite sincere, if he really tried
to come, it was to be in erred that Mrs Churchill’s
removal to London had been of no service to the wilful
or nervous part of her disorder. That she was really ill
was very certain ; he had declared himself convinced of
it, at Randalls. Though much might be fancy, he
could not doubt, when he looked back, that she was in
a weaker smu- of health than she had been half a year
ago. He did not believe it to proceed from anything
that care and medicine might not remove, or at least
that she might not have many years of existence before
her; but he could not he prevailed on, by all his father’s
doubts, to say that her complaints were merely imagin-
ary, or that she was as strong as ever.

It soon appeared that London was not the place for
her. She could not endure its noise. Her nerves were
under continual irritation and suffering; and by the ten
days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls communicated
a change of plan. They were going to remove imme-
diately to Richmond. Mrs Churchill had been recom-
mended to the medical skill of an eminent person there,
and had otherwise a fancy for the place. A mdy-
furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged, and
much beneﬁt expected from the change.

Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits
of this arrangement, and seemed most fully to appreciate
the blessing of having two months before him of such

mus. 8r

nut neighbourhood to many dear friends ; for the house
was taken for May and June. She was told that now
he wrote with the greatest conﬁdence of being often
with them, almost as often as he could even wish.

Emma saw how Mr Weston understood these joyous
prospects. He was considering her as the source of all
the happiness they oﬂ‘emd. She hoped it was not so.
Two months must bring it to proof.

Mr Weston’s own happiness was indisputable. He
was quite delighted. It was the very circumstance he
could have wished for. Now, it would be really having
Frank in their neighbourhood. What were nine miles
to a young man ?——An hour's ride. He would be
always coming over. The difference in that respect of
Richmond and London was enough to make the whole
difference of seeing him always and seeing him never.
Sixteen miles—nay, eighteen—it must be full eighteen
to Manchester Street—Mas a serious obstacle. Were
he ever able to get away, the day would be spent in
coming and returning. There was no comfort in having
him in London; he might as well be at Enscombe;
but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse.
Better than nearer !

One good thing was immediately brought to a cer-
tainty by this removal—the ball at the Crown. It had
not been forgotten before; but it had been soon acknow-
ledged vain to attempt to ﬁx a day. Now, however,
it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed;
and very soon after the Churchills had removed to
Richmond, a few lines from Frank, to say that his aunt
felt already much better for the change, and that he had
no doubt of being able to join them for twenty-four
hours at any given time, induced them to name as early
a da as 'ble.

Nl eswu’s ball was to be a real thing. A very
few to-morrows stood between the young people of
Highbury and happiness.

82 mun.

Mr Woodhouse was resigned. The time of the year
lightened the evil to him. May was better for every-
thing than February. Mrs Bates was engagedtospend
the evening at Hartﬁeld; .lames ha'd due notice, and
he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little Henry nor ,
dear little John would have anything the matter with
them while dear Emma were gone.

Chum £33333}-

0 misfortune occurred again to prevent the ball.
N The day approached, the day arrived; and, after
a morning of some anxious watching, Frank
Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached
Randalls before dinner; and everything was safe.

No second meeting had there et been between him
and Emma. The room at the rown was to witness
it ; but it would be better than a common meeting in a
crowd. Mr Weston had been so very earnest in his
entreatiet for her early attendance, for her arriving there
as soon as possible after themselves, for the purpose of
taking her opinion at to the propriety and comfort of
the room: before any other persons came, that she could
not refuse him, and therefore must spend some quiet
interval in the young man’t company. She was to con-
vey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good time,
the Randalls part just sufficiently before them.

Frank Chlll‘Cl‘llll seemed to have been on the watch ;
and though he did not say much, his eyes declared that
he meant to have a delightful evening. They all
walked about together, to see that everything was as it
should be; and within a few minutes were joined b the
contents of another carria e, which Emma coul not
hear the sound of at ﬁrst Without great Iurprise. “ So

EMMA. 83

\.II1rtaponably early! " she was going In exclaim; but
\she presently found that it was a family of old friends,
Who were coming, like herself, by particular deeire, to
help Mr Weston's judgment; and they were so very
dlcsely followed by another carriage ofcouuina, who had
been entreated to come early with the nine distinguilh-
ing earnestness, on the same errand, that it turned as if
Ha! the company might soon be collected together for
thKEpurpoIe of Preparatory inspection.

v mma perceived that her taste was not the only taste
on which Mr Weston depended, and felt that In be the
famorite and intimate of a man who had no many inti-
mates and conﬁdantea, was not the very ﬁrst distinction
in the scale of vanity. She liked his open manners,
but a little less of open-heartednesa would have made
him a higher character.—General benevolence, but not
general friendship, made a man what he ought to be.—
.‘ihe could fancy such a man.

The whole party walked about, and looked, and
praised again; and then, having nothing else to do,
onned a sort of half-circle round the ﬁre, to observe in
their various modes, till other subjects were started, that,
though My, :1 ﬁre in the evening was ltill very
pleasant.

Emma found that it was not Mr Weston’s fault that
the number of privy counsellors was not yet larger.
They had stopped at Mrs Bates’s door to offer the use
of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to he
brought by die Elwns.

Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there
was a restlessness, which showed a mind not at ease.
He was looking about, he was going to the door, he
was watching for the sound of other carriages—impatient
to begin, or afraid of being always near her.

Mrs Elton was spoken of. " I think she must be
here soon,’ ’ said he. “ I have a great curiosity to see

84 ms.

Mn Elton, I live hard so much of ha. It unnot
be long I think, before the cornea.”

Aarriagewasbeard. Hensonthemmeimmw
dialely; but coming back, Iaid— :

“ I am forgetting um. I am not acquainted with hm:
IhavenevermeitheerorMnl-len. Ihaveso
business to ut myself forward.” ‘

Mrand n Elwnappeared; andallthenniles and
the proprietiea passed.

“But Miss Bates and Mia- Fairfax! ” aid Mr
Weston, looking about. “ We thought you were to
bring them.”

The minake had been slight. The aniage wan
tent for them now. Emma longed to know what
Frank's ﬁrst opinion of Mrs Elton might be; how he
wan affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and
her miles of gracioumeu. He was immediately qualiw.
l'ying himself to form an opinion, by giving her very
pro r attention, after the introduction had patted.

n a few minutes the carriage returned—Somebody
talked of Him—“I will see that there are umbrellas,
air,” laid Frank to his father: “Miss Bate- must not
be forgotten ;” and away he went. Mr Weston was
following : but Mrs Elton detained him, to gratify him
by her opinion of his son; and so briskly did the begin,
that the young man himself, though by no means moving
slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.

“A very line young man, indeed, Mr Weston. You
know I candidly told you I should form my own
0 ininn; and I am happy to say that I am extremely
plaeased with him. You may believe me. I never
compliment. I think him a very handsome young man,
and his manners are precisely what I like and approve,
—eo truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or
puppyism. You must know I have a vast dislike to
puppies—quite a horror of them. They were never

nuns. 85

tolerated at Maple Grove. Neither Mr Suckling nor
me had ever any patience with them; and we used
sometimes to say very cutting things. Selina, who is
mild almost to a fault, bore with them much better.’ ’

While she talked of his son, Mr Westou’s attention
was chained; but when she got to Maple Grove, he
could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be
attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.

Mrs Elton turned to Mrs Weston. “ I have no
doubt of its being our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane.
Our coacth and horses are so extremely expeditious!
I believe we drive faster than anybod . What a plea-
sure it is to send one’s carriage for a riendl I tmder-
stand you were so kind as to offer, but another time it
will be quite unnecessary. You may be very sure I
shall always take care of thin.”

Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two
gentlemen, walked into the room; and Mrs Elton
seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs Weston’s
to receive them. Her gestures and movements might
be understood by any one who looked on like Emma;
but her words, everybody’s words, were soon lost under
the incessant ﬂow of Miss Bates, who came in talking,
and had not ﬁnished her speech under many minutes
after her being admitted into the circle at the lire. As
the door opened she was heard—

“ So very obliging of you l—No rain at all. Nothing
to signify. I do not care for myself. Quite thick
shoes. And Jane declares——-Well ! ” (as soon as she
was within the door), “ well ! This is brilliant indeed!
This is admirable! Excellently contrived, upon my
word. Nothing wanting. Could not have imagined
it. 30 well lighted up! Jane, Jane, lookl did you
ever see anything—? Oh! Mr Weston, you must
real! have had Aladdin’s lamp. Good Mrs Stokes
wo d not know her own room again. I saw her as I

86 EMMA.

came in; she was standing in the entrance. ‘Oh!
Mrs Stokes,’ mid I—but I had not time for more."
She was now met b Mrs Weston. “Very well, I
thank you, ma’am. I. hope you are quite well. Very
happy to hear it. So afraid you might havea headach!
seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much
trouble you mutt have. Delighted to hear it indeed!
—Ah! dear Mrs Elton, so obliged to you for the
carriage; excellent time; Jane and I uite ready. Did
not keep the horses a moment. on comfortable
carriage. Oh! and I am sure our thanks are due to
you, Mrs Weston, on that score. Mrs Elton had most
kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been. But
two such oﬂ'ers in one day! Never were such neigh-
bours. I said to my mother, ‘Upon my word,
ma’am—’ Thank you, my mother is renmrkably well.
Gone to Mr Woodhousc's. I made her take her shawl
—-—for the awnings are not warm—her large new shawl,
Mrs Dixon's wedding present. So kind of her to
think of m mother! Bought at Weymouth, you
know; Mr ixon’s choice. There were three others,
Jane says, which they hesitated about some time.
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive.—My dear
Jane, are you sure you did not wet your feet? It was
but a drop or two, but I am so afraid; but Mr Frank
Churchill was so extremely— and there was a mat to
step u n. I shall never forget his extreme politeness.
Oh ! 1‘ Frank Churchill, I must tell you my mother’s
spectacles have never been in fault since; the rivet
never came out again. My mother often talks of your
good-nature; does not she, Jane? Do not we often
talk of Mr Frank Churchill? Ah! here ’s Miss
Woodhouse. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you
do? Very well, I thank you, quite well. This is
meeting quite in fairy land. Such a tmnsformation!
Must not compliment, I know ” (eyeing Emma most

EMMA. 87

complacently -—“ that would be rude; but upon my
word, Miss oodhouse, you do look—how do you
like Jane's hair? You are a judge. She did it all
herself. Quite wonderful how she does her hair! No
hairdresser from London' I think, could— Ah! Dr
Hughes,I declare—and Mrs Hughes. Must go and
speak to Dr and Mrs Hughes for a moment. How do
ou do ? How do you do? Very well I thank you.
*‘his is delightful, is not it? Where s dear Mr Richard?
Oh! there he is. Don’t disturb him. Much better
emplo ed talking to the young ladies. How do you
do lld’r Richard? I saw you the other day as you
rode through the town. Mrs Otway, I protest, and
good Mr Otway, and Miss Otway, and Miss Caroline.
Such a host of friends! and Mr George and Mr
Arthur! How do you do? How do you all do?
Quite well, I am much obliged to on. Never bener.
Don’t I hear another carriage? ho can this be?—
very likely the worthv Coles. Upon my word, this is
charming, to be standing about among such friends!
and such a noble lire! I am quite roasted. No
coffee, I thank you, for me; never take coffee. A
little tea, if you please, sir, by-and-by; no hurry.
Oh! here it comes. Everything isso good! "

Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma;
and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet, she found herself
necessarily overbearing the discourse of Mrs Elton and
Miss Fairfax, who were standing a linle way behind her.
He was thoughtful. Whether he were overbearing too
she could not determine. After a good many com-
pliments to Jane on her dress and look—compliments
very quietly and properly taken—Mrs Elmo was
evidently wanting to be complimented herself—and it
was, “ How do you like my gown ? How do you like
my trimming P—How has Wright done my hair?”
wrth many other relative questions, all answered with
patient politeness. Mrs Elton then said——

88 nun.

“ Nobody can think lens of dress in general than I
do : but upon such an occasion as this, when everybody?-

I are so much upon me, and in compliment to the

estons, who I have no doubt are giving this ball chieﬂy
to do me honour,—I would not wish to be inferior to
othern; and I see very few pearls in the room except
mine.—So, Frank Churchill in a capital dancer, I un-
derstand. We shall see if our styles suich ﬁne
young man certainly is Frank Churchill. I like him
very well."

At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously,
that Emma could not but imagine he had overheard
his own praises, and did not want to hear more ;—and
the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs Elton’s tones again
distinctly forwrd. Mr Elton had just joined them,
and his wife was exclaiming—

“ Oh! you have found us out at last, have on, in
our seclusion ?—I was this moment telling ﬁne, I
tlpought you would begin to be impatient for tidings
0 us. ’

“Jane!” repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of
surprize and displeasure. “That is easy; but Miss
Fairfax does not disapprove it, I suppose."

“ How do you like Mrs Elton ? " said Emma, in a

whisﬁr.
“ at at all.”

“ You are ungrateful.”

“Ungrateful ! ——What do you mean .’” Then
changing from a frown to a smile,—“No, do not
tell me,—I do not want to know what you meant
Where is my father? When are we to begin
dancing P”

Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in
an odd humour. He walked off to ﬁnd his father, but
was quickly back again with both Mr and Mrs Weston.

EMMA. 89

He had met with them in a little perplexity, which
must be laid before Emma. It had just occurred to
Mrs Weston that Mrs Elton must be asked to begin the
ball ; that she would expect it; which interfered with
all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction. Emma
heard the sad truth with forn'tude.

“And what are we to do for a proper partner for
her 2” said Mr Weston. “ She will think Frank
ought to ask her.”

Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former
promise; and boasted himself an engaged man, which
his father looked his most perfect approbation of—and
it then appeared that Mrs Wenon was wanting bin: to
dance with Mrs Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to rsuade him into it, which was done
pretty soon. r Weston and Mrs Elton led the way;
Mr F rank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed.
Emma mun submit to stand second to Mrs Elton
though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly
for her. It was almost enough to make her think of
marrying.

Mrs Elton had undoubtedly the advantage, at this
time, in vanity completely gratiﬁed ; for though she had
intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not
lose by the change. Mr Weston might be his son’s
superior. In spite of this little rub, however, Emma
was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see the re-
spectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel
that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before
her. She was more disturbed by Mr Knightley’s not
dancing than by anything else. There he was, among
the sanders-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to
be dancing, not classing himself with the husbands, and
fathers, and whist-players, who were pretending to feel
an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up,
—so young as he looked! He could not have appeared

90 mm.

to greater advtanta perhaps anywhere, than where he
had placed himsef. His tall, ﬁrm, upright ﬁgure,
among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the
elderly men, was such as Emma felt must draw every-
body’s eyes; and, excepting her own partner, there was
not one among the who e row of young men who could
be compared with him. He moved a few steps nearer,
and those few steps were enough to prove in how
gentlemanlilte a manner, with what natural grace, he
must have danced, would he but take the trouble.
Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him to smile;
but in general he was looking grave. She wished he
could love a ball-room better, and could like Frank
Churchill better. He seemed often observing her.
She must not ﬂatter herself that he thought of her danc—
ing; but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did
not feel afraid. There was nothing like flirtation
between her and her partner. They seemed more
like cheerful easy friends than lovers. That Frank
Churchill thought less of her than he had done was
indubitable.

The ball proceeded plantly. The anxious cares,
the incessant attentions of Mrs Weston were not thrown
away. Everybody seemed happy; and the praise of
being a delightful ball, which is seldom bestowed till
after a ball has ceased to he, was repeatedly given in the
very beginning of the existence of this. Of very im-
portant, very recordable events, it was not more produc-
tive than such meetings usually are. There was one,
however, which Emma thought something of.—The two
last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had
no partner ;—the only young lady sitting down; and so
equal had been hitherto the number of dancers, that how
there could be any one disengaged was the wonder.
But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards, on see-
ing Mr Elton auntering about. He would not ask

emu. 9:

Harriet to dance, if it were possible to be avoided; she
was sure he would not—and she was expecting him
every moment to escape into the card-room.

Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to
the part of the room where the duemby were collected,

ke to some, and walked about in front of them, as if
to show his liberty, and his resolution of maintaining it.
He did not omit being sometimes directly before
Miss Smith, or speaking to those who were close to
her. Emma saw it. She was not yet dancing; she
was working her way up from the bottom, and had
therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning
her head a little she saw it all. When she was half
way up the set, the whole group were exactly behind
her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch ;
but Mr Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable
of a dialogue which just then took lace between him
and Mrs Weston; and she percva that his wife, who
was standing immediately above her, was not only
listening also, but even encouraging him by signiﬁcant
glances. The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs Weston had
left her seat to join him and say, “Do not you dance,
Mr Elton ? ” to which his prompt reply was, “ Most
readily, Mrs Weston, if you will dance with me.”

“Me !—oh ! no—I would get you a better partner
than myself. I am no dancer.”

“ If Mrs Gilbert wishes to dance,” said he, “ I
shall have great pleasure, I am sure; for, though be-
ginning to feel myself rather an old married man, and
that m dancing days are over, it would give me very
great p ensure at any time to stand up with an old friend
like Mrs Gilbert.”

“ Mrs Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a
young lady disengaged whom I should be very glad to
see dancing—Miss Smith.”

" Miss Smith—oh !--I had not observed. You are

9: Elana.

extremely obliging—and if I were not an old married
—but my dancing days are over, Mn Weston. You
will excuse me. Anything else I shouldhe most happy
to do, at your command—but my dancing days .are
over.”

Mrs Weston said no more; and Emma could
imagine with what surprize and mortification she must
be retuming to her seat. This was Mr Elton! the
amiable, ohliging, gentle Mr Elton. She looked round
for a moment; he had joined Mr Knightley at a little
distance, and was arranging himself for settled conversa-
tion, while smiles of high glee passed between him and
his wife. She would not look again. Her heart was
in a glow, and she feared her face might be as hot.

In another moment a happier sight caught her—Mr
Knightley leading Harriet to the set! Never had she
been more no rized, seldom more delighted, than at
that instant. he was all pleasure and gntitude, both
for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him;
and though too distant for speech, her countenance mid
much, as soon as she could catch his eye again.

His dancing proved to be just what she had believed
it, extremely good; and Harriet would have seemed
almost too lucky, if it had not been for the cruel state
of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy
features announced. It was not thrown away on her;
she hounded higher than ever, ﬂew farther down the
middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.

Mr Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking
(Emma trusted) very foolish. She did not think he
was quite so hardened as his wife, though growing very
like her; rbt spoke some of her feelings, by observing
audihly to her partner—

“ Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith l
—Very good-natured, I declare."

Burn. 93

Supper was announced. The move began; and
Miss Bates might be heard from that moment without
:pten'uption, till her being seated at table and taking up

er .

“ ane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you? Here
is your ti )ct. Mrs Weston begs you to put on your
tippeL bhe says she is afraid there will be draughts in
the passage, though everything has been done—one door
nailed up—quantities of matting—my dear Jane, indeed
you must. Mr Churchill, oh! you are too obliging.
How well you put it on—so gratiﬁed! Excellent
dancing indeed. Yes, my dear, I Ian home, as I said
I should, to help gmndmamma to bed, and got back
again, and nobody missed me. I set of? without saying
a word, just as I told you. Grandmamma was quite
well, had a charming evening with Mr Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon. Tea was made
downstairs, biscuits and baked apples, and wine before
she came away: amazing luck in some of her throws:
and she inquired a great deal about you, how ou were
amused, and who were your partners. ‘ 0h! said I,
‘ I shall not forestall Jane; I left her dancing with Mr
George Otway; she will love to tell you all about it
herself to-morrow: her ﬁrst partner was Mr Elton;
I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr
William Cox.’ My dear sir, you are too obliging. Is
there nobody you would not rather? I am not helpless.
Sir, you are most kind. Upon my word, Jane on one
arm, and me on the other. Stop, stop, let us stand a
little back, Mrs Elton is going; dear Mr: Elton, how
elegant she looks—-beautiful lace. Now we all follow
in her train. Quite the queen of the evening! Well,
here we are at the passage. Two mp6, Jane, take care
of the two steps. Oh, no, there is but one. Well, I
was persuaded there were two. How very odd! I
was convinced there were two, and there is but one. I

H. G

94 nun.

never saw anything equal to the comfort and style—
andles eve here. I was telling you of your grand-
mamma. lire—drew was a little disappointment.
The baked apples and biscuits, excellent in their way,

ou know; but there was a delicate fricasaee of sweet-

read and some asparagus brought in at ﬁrst1 and good
Mr Woodhouse, not thinking the asparagus quite boiled
enough, sent it all out again. Now there is nothing
grandmamma loves better than sweetbmd and asparagus
—oo she was rather disappointed; but we agreed we
would not speak of it to anybody, for fear of its getting
round to dear Mist Woodhoutc, who would be so ve
much concerned. Well, this in brilliant! I am al
amazement l—could not have supposed anything—such
elegance and profusion! I have seen nothing like it
since—Well, where shall we sit? Where shall we sit?
Anywhere, so that Jane is not in a draught. Where I
til it of no consequence. Oh! do you recommend
this side? Well, I am sure, Mr Churchill—only it
seems too good—but as you please. What you
direct in this house cannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how
shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmarnma?
Soup tool Bless me! I should not be helped Io
soon, but it smells most excellent, and I cannot help
beginning.”

Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr
Knightley till after supper ; but, when they were all in
the ball-room again, her eyes invited him irresistibly to
come to her and be thanked. He was warm in his
reprobation of Mr Elton’s conduct; it had been un-
pardonable rudeness; and Mrs Elton’s looks also
received the due share of censure.

" They aimed at wounding more than Harriet," said
he. “ Emma, why in it that they are your enemies 2 ”

He looked with smiling spenetration; and, on re-
ceiving no answer, added, “ be ought not to be angry

emu. 95

with you, I suspect, whatever he may be. To that
surmise, you say nothing, of course: but confess Emma,
that you did want him to marry Harriet.”

“ I did,” replied Emma, “ and they cannot forgive
me.”

He shook his head; but there was a smile of indul-
gence with it, and he only said—

“ I shall not scold you. I leave you to your own
reﬂections."

“ Can you trust me with such ﬂatterers? Does my
vain Ispirit ever tell me I am wrong 2 "

“ or your vain spirit, but your serious irit. If
one leads you wrong, I am sure the other tel a you of
it."

“ I do own myself [0 have been completely mimken
in Mr Elton. There is a littleness about him which
you discovered, and which I did not: and I was fully
convinced of his being in love with Harriet. It was
through a series of strange blunders! ”

“ And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I
will do you the justicr: to say, that you would have
chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself.
Harriet Smith has some ﬁrst-rate qualities, which Mrs
Elton is totally without. An unpretending, single-
minded, ardess girl—inﬁnitely to be preferred by any
man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs Elton.
I found Harriet more conversable than I expected.”

Emma was extremely gratiﬁed. They were inter-
rupted by the bustle of Mr Weston calling on every-
body to begin dancing again.

" Come, Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fair-
fax, what are you all doing? Come, Emma, set your
companions the example. Everybody is lary! Every-
body is asleep I ” ~

“ I am ready,” said Emma, “ whenever I am

wanted.”

96 ms.

“Whom are you going to dance with?" asked Mr

Knighth.
vShe hesitated a. moment, and then “With
you, if you will ask me.”

“ Will you ?" said he, oﬂ‘ering his hand.

“ Indeed I will. You have shown that you an
dance, and you know we are not really so much brother
and sister as to make it at all improper.”

“ Brother and sister !—no, indeed."

Chum: iiﬁli.

HIS little explanation with Mr Knightley gave
Emma considerable pleasure. It was one of
the agreeable recollections of the ball, which she

walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.
She was extremely glad that they had come to so good
an understanding respecting the Eltons, and that their
opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike;
and his raise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, was
peculiar y gratifying. The impeninence of the Eltonsl
which for a few moments had threatened to ruin the
rest of her evening, had been the occasion of some of its
highest satisfaction; and she looked forward to an-
other happy result—the cure of Harriet’s infatuation.
From Han-let's manner of speaking of the circumstance
before they quitted the hall-room she had strong hopes.
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened, and she
were enabled to see that Mr Elton was not the superior
creature she had believed him. The fever was over,
and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being
quickened again by in'urious courtesy. She depended
on the evil feelings o the Eltons for supplying all the
discipline of pointed neglect that could be further re-

anus. 97

qu'wite. Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too
much in love, and Mr Knightley not wanting to quarrel
with her, how very happy 3 summer must be before her.

She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning.
He had told her that he could not allow himself the
pleasure of mopping at Hartfield, as he was to be home
by the middle of the day. She did not regret it.

Having an-anged all these matters, looked them
through, and put them all to rights, she was just turning to
‘the house, with spirits freshencd up for the demands of
the two little boys, as well as of their grandpapa, when
the great iron sweep-gate opened. and two persons
entered whom she had never less expected to see
together—Frank Churchill, with Harriet leaning on his
arm—actually Han-iet! A moment sufﬁced to con-
vince her that something extraordinary had happened.
Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was ﬂying
to cheer her. The iron gates and the front-door were
not twenty yards asunder :—they were all three soon in
the hall ; and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair,
fainted away.

A young lady who faints must be recovered; questions
must be answered, and surprises be explained. Such
events are very interesting; but the suspense of them
cannot last long. A few minutes made Emma
ac uainted with the whole.

in Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour
boarder at Mrs Goddard’s, who had been also at the
hall, had walked out together, and taken a road—the
Richmond road, which, though apparently ublic
enough for safety, had led them into alarm. bout
half a mile beyond Highbury, making a sudden turn,
and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it became for
a considerable stretch very retired ; and when the young
ladies had advanced some way into it, they hadsuddme
perceived, at a small distance before them, on a broader

98 EMMA.

patch of green-ward by the aide, a party of gipyc A
child on the watch came towards them to beg; and
Mia Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great
acream, and calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a
steep bank, cleared a slight hedge at the top, and made
the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury.
But poor Harriet could not follow. She had sulfered
very much from cnmmfter dancing, and her ﬁrst
attempt to mount the It brought on Inch a return
of it as made her abuolutely powerless; and in this
state, and exceedingly terriﬁed, the had been obliged to
remain.

How the trampers might have behaved, had the
young ladies been more courageous, must. be doubtful ;
but Inch an invitation for attack could not be resisted;
and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children,
headed by a stout woman, and a great boy, all clamoroua,
and impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.
More and more frightened, ahe immediame promiaod
them money, and taking out her purse, gave them a
shilling, and begged them not to want more, or to use
her ill. She was then able to walk, though but
dowly, and was moving away—but her terror and
her purse were too tempting; and she was followed,
or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding
more.

In this state Frank Churchill had found her, ehe
trembling and conditioning, they loud and insolent. By
a most fortunate chance, hie leaving Highbury had been
delayed to as to bring him to her auistancc at thin
critical moment. The pleasantneas of the morning had
induced him to walk forward, and leave his horse: to
meet him by another road, a mile or two beyond High-
bury; and happening to have borrowed a of
acisaars the night before of Miss Bates, and to have
forgotten to restore them, he had been obliged to stop

lunch. 99

at her door, and go in for a few minutes; he was
therefore later than he had intended ; and being on foot,
was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them.
The terror which the woman and boy had been creating
in Harriet was then their own portion. He had left
tlem completely frightened ; and Harriet eagerly cling-
ing to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength
enough to reach Hartﬁeld, before her spirits were quite
overcome. It was his idea to bring her to Hatﬁeld;
he had thought of no other lace.

This was the amount of the whole story—of his
cumnunication and of Harriet’s. as soon as she had
recovered her senses and speech. He dared not stay
larger than to see her well ;——thcse several delays left
him not another minute to lose; and Emma engaging
to give assurance of her safety to Mrs Goddard, and
notice of their being such a set of people in the neigh-
bourhood to Mr Knightley, he set off, with all the
grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and
herself.

Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a
lovely young woman thrown together in such a way,—
could hardly fail of suggesting certain ideas to the
coldest heart and the stcadiest brain. So Emma
thought, at least. Could a linguist, could a glammarian,
could even a mathematician have seen what she did,
have witnessed their appearance together, and heard
their history of it, without feeling that circumstances
had been at work to make them peculiarly interesting to
each other? How much more must an imaginist, like
herself, be on ﬁre with speculation and foresight ?—

cially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her
mmd had already made.

It was a very extraordinary thing! Nothing of the
sort had ever occurred before to any young ladies in the
place, within her memory; no rencontre, no alarm of

I 00 EMMA.

the kind; and now it had happened to the very person,
and at the very hour, when the other very person was
charming to pals by to rescue her! It certainly vm
very extraordina ! And knowing, no she did, the
favourable state 0 mind of each at this period, it struck
her the more. He was wishing to get the better of lie
attachment to herself, she just recovering from her maria
for Mr Elton. It accrued as if everything united to
promise the most interesting consequences. It was mt
possible that the occurrence should not he strongy
recommending each to the other.

In the few minutes' conversation which the had yet had
with him, while Han-iet had been partially insensible,
he had spoken of her terror, her na'iveté, her fervor as
the seized and clung to his arm, with a sensibility
amused and delighted; and at last, after Harriet's
own account had been given, he had ex ressed his
indignation at the abominable folly of Miss iekerton in
the warmest terms. Everything was to take its natural
course, however, neither impelled nor assisted. She
would not air a step nor dro a hint. No, she had
had enough of interference. here could be no harm
in a scheme, a mere passive scheme. It was no more
than a wish. Beyond it she would on no account
proceed.

Emma’s ﬁrst resolution was to keep her father from
the knowledge of what had passed, aware of the anxiety
and alarm it would occasion; but she soon felt that
concealment must be impossible. Within half an hour
it was known all over Highhury. It was the wry event
to engage those who talk most—the young and the low ;
and all the youth and servants in the place were soon
in the happiness of frightful news. The last night’s
ball seemed lost in the gipsies. Poor Mr Woodhouse
trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen, would
scarcely be latitﬁed without their promising never to go

EMMA. [0!

beyond the shrubbery again. It was some comfort to
him that many inquiries after himself and Miss Wood-
house (for his neighbours knew that he loved to be
inquired after), as well as Miss Smith, were coming in
during the rest of the day ; and he had the pleasure of
returning for answer, that they were all very indiﬁ'erent;
which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly
well, and Harriet not much othemise, Emma would not
interfere with. She had an unhappy state of health in
general for the child of such a man, for she hardly knew
what indisposition was ; and if he did not invent illnesses
for her, she could make no ﬁgure in a message.

The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice;
they took themselves off in a hurry. The young ladies
of Highbury might have walked again in safety before
their panic began, and the whole history dwindled soon
into a matter of little importance but to Emma and her
nephews: in her imagination it maintained its ground;
and Henry and John were still asking eve day for the
story of Harriet and the gipsies, and sti I tenaciously
setting her right if she varied in the slightest particular
from the original recital.

chant" i1.

VERY few days had passed after this adventure,

when Harriet came one morning to Emma with

a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down
and hesitating, thus began :—

“ Miss Woodhouse—if you are at leisure, I have
something that I should like to tell you: a sort of con-
fession to make—and then, you know, it will be over.”

Emma was a good deal surprised; but begged her to

speak. There was a seriousness in Harriet’s manner

[02 urn.

whichpranedher,qu‘neanu:haherwords,for
lomething more tho ordinary.

“It in mydnty,andlamlne itis my'ish," lie
coudnued,“tohavenoreoervu with yononthix d)-
jcct. A: I mhnﬁlyﬂguite an altaed margin
mrafadﬂtinveryﬁtthatyondionld Inve the satia-
ﬁncu‘on ofknowingiv. Idonotnntmny moretlnn
ilneoeaury311mmornuchadnmndofhaving give:
way'n Ihavedomandldamnyyouundemnd
me. '

“You,” aid Emm, “ I liq): I do.”

“ How I could no long a time be fanqing myself—3’
cried Harriet warmly. “It mn- like madneu! I
can nee nothing at all extraordinary in him now. I do
not care whether I meet him or not, except tint. of the
two, I had rather not nee him; and, indeed, I would
go any distance round to avoid him ; but I do not envy
his wife in the least: I neitheradmire her norenvyher,
an I have done. She in very charming. I dare say, and
all that; but I think her very ill-tempered and (lil-
agreeahle : I shall never forget her look the other night.
However, I assure you, Min Woodhuue, I winh her
no evil. No; let them be ever Io happy together, it
will not give me another moment’s pang; and, to con-
vince you that I have been speaking truth, I am now
going to destroy—what I ought to have destroyed long
ago—what I ought never to have kept: I know that
very well " (blushing a she spoke). “ However, now I
will devtroy it all ; and it in my particular whh to do it
in your presence, that you may see how rational I am
grown. Cannot you guess what thin parcel holds 2 ”
laid she, with a conocioun look.

“ Not the least in the world. Did he ever give you
anything ? "

“ No—I cannot call them gifts; but they are things
that I have valued very much.”

EMMA. I 03

She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the
words Marl preview trtaulru, on the to . Her curi-
osity was greatly excited. Harriet unfo ded the parcel,
and she looked on with impatience. Within abundance
of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box,
which Harriet opened: it was well lined with the
softest cotton; but, excepting the cotton, Emma saw
only a small piece of court-plaister.

“ Now,” said Harriet, “ you mart recollect."

“ No, indeed, I do not."

“Dear me! I should not have thought it possible
you could forget what passed in this very room about
counrplaister, one of the very last times we ever met in
it. It was but a very few days before I had my sore
throat—just before Mr and Mrs John Knightley came ;
I think the very evening. Do not you remember his
cutting his ﬁnger with your new penknife, and your re-
commending court-plaister ? But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply
him; and so I took mine out, and cut him a piece:
but it was a great deal too large, and he cut it smaller,
and kept playing some time with what was left before he
gave it back to me. And on then, in my nonsense, I
could not help making a treasure of it; so I put it by,
never to be used, and looked at it now and then as a
great treat."

“My clearest Harriet! ” cried Emma, puuing her
hand before her face, and jumping up, “ you make me
more ashamed of myself than I can bear. Remember -
it? Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your
saving this relick: I knew nothing of that till this
moment,—but the cutting the ﬁnger, and my recom-
mending court-plaister, and saying I had none about me.
——-Oh! my sins! my sins !—And I had plenty all the
while in my pocket! One of my senseless tricks. I
deserve to be undera continual blush all the rest of

104 anus.

my life. Well " (sitting down again), “go on: what
else ? ”

“ And had you really some at hand yourself? I am
sure I never suspected it, you did it so naturally.”

“ And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister
by for his ke?” id Emma, recovering from her state
of shame and feeling, divided between wonder and amuse-
ment; and secretly she added to herself, “Lord bless
me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in
cotton a piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill
had been pulling about! I never was equal to this.”

“ Here,” resumed Harrier1 turning to her box again,
“ here is something still more valuable,—I mean that
bar been more valuable,—-because this is what did really
once belong to him, which the court-plaister never did.”

Emma was quite eager to see this superior treamre.
It was the end of an old pencil, the part without any
lead.

“This was really his," said Harriet. “ Do not you
remember one morning i—no, I dare say you do not.
But one moming—I forget exactly the day—but per-
haps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before that
netting, he wanted to make a memorandum in his
pocket-book; it was about spruce-beer. Mr Knightle,
had been telling him something about brewing spruce-
beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took
out his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut
it all away, and it would not do, so you lent him
another, and this was left upon the table as good for
nothing. But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I
dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from
that moment.”

“ I do remember it,” cried Emma; “ I perfectly
remember it. Talking about spruce-beer. Oh! yes.
Mr Knightley and I both saying we liked it, and Mr
Elton’s seeming resolved to learn to like it too. I perfectly

mun. ms

remember it. Stop—Mr Knightley was ﬁnding
here, was not he? I have an idea he wan standing just
here.”

“Ah! I do not know. I cannot recollect. It is
very odd, but I cannot recollect. Mr Elton was eitting
here, I remember, much about where I am now.”

“Well, go on.”

“ Oh! that ’3 all. I have nothing more to Ihow you,
or to say, except that I am now going to throw them
both behind the ﬁre, and I with you to see me do it.”

“ My poor dear Harrietl and have you actually
found happineso in treamring up thue things ?"

“ Yes, simpleton an I was l—but I am quite ashamed
of it now, and with I could forget as easily as I can
burn them. It was very wrong of me, you know, to
keep any remembrance: after he was married. I knew
it was—but had not reoolun‘on enough to part with
them.”

“But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-
plninter? I have not a word to say for the bit of old
pencil, but the court-planner might be unef ."

“ I shall be happier to burn it," replied Harriet.
“ It has a disagreeable look to me. I must get rid of
everything. There it goes, and there is an end, thank
Heaven! of Mr Elton."

“ And when," thought Emma, “will there be a be-
ginning of Mr Churchill?”

She had won afterwards reason to believe that the
beginning was already made, and could not but ho
that the gipey, though she had (all! no fortune, might E:
proved to have made Harriet'a. About a fortnight
after the alarm they came to a sufﬁcient explanation, and
quite undesignedly. Emma war not thinking of it at
the moment, which made the information she received
more valuable. She merely laid in the course of some
trivial chat, “Well, Harriet, whenever you marry, I

106 EMMA.

would advise you to do so and so "—and thought no
more of it, till, after a minute’s silence she heard
Harriet say, in a very serious tone, “I shall never
marry."

Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it
was; and after a moment's debate, as to whether it
should pass unnoticed or not, replied—

“ Never marry l—This is a new resolution.”

“ It is one that I shall never change, however.”

After another short hesitation, “ I hope it does not
proceed from—I hope it is not in compliment to Mr
Elton ?”

“ Mr Elton, indeed!” cried Harriet, indignantly.
“ Oh I no "—and Emma could just catch the words,
“ so superior to Mr Elton l ”

She then took a longer time for consideration.
Should she proceed no farther .’—should she let it pass,
and seem to suspect nothing ?—-Perhaps Han'iet might
think her cold or angry if she did; or, perhaps, if she
were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into ask-
ing her to hear too much; and against anything like
such an unreserve as had been, such an open and fre-
quent discussion of hopes and chances, she was perfectly
resolved. She believed it would be wiser for her to
say and know at once all that she meant to say and
know. Plain dealing was always best. She had pre-
viously determined how far she would proceed, on any
application of the sort; and it would be safer for both
to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down
with . She was decided, and thus spoke——

“ arriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your
meaning. Your resolution, or rather your expectation
of never marrying, results from an idea that the person
whom you might prefer would be too greatly your
superior in situation to think of you. Is not it so 2”

“ Oh, Miss Woodhouse, believe me, I have not the

sum. :01

presumption to suppose—indeed I am not so mad. But
It is a pleasure to me to admire him at a distance, and
to think of his inﬁnite superiority to all the rest of the
world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration which
are so proper, in me especially.”

“1 am not at all surprised at you, Harriet. The
service he rendered you was enough to warm your
heart.”

“Service! oh, it was such an inexpressible obliga-
tion! The very recollection of it, and all that I felt at
the time, when I saw him coming—his noble look, and
my wretchedness before. Such a change! In one
moment such a change! From perfect misery to per-
fect happiness! ”

“ It is very natural. It is natural, and it is honour-
able. Yes, honourable, I think, to choose so well and
so gratefully. But that it will be a fortunate refer-
ence is more than I can promise. I do not adme you
to give way to it, Humet. I do not by any means
engage for its being returned. Consider what you are
about. Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your
feelings while you can: at any rate do not let them
carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking
you. Be observant of him. Let his behaviour be the
guide of your sensations. I give you this caution now,
because I shall never speak to you again on the subject.
I am determined against all interference. Hencefor-
ward I know nothing of the matter. Let no name
ever pass our lips. We were very wrong before; we
will be cautious now. He is your superior, no doubt,
and there do seem objections and obstacles of a ve
serious nature ; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things
have taken place: there have been matches of grater
disparity. But take care of yourself; I would not
have you too sanguine; though, however it may end,
be assured that your raising your thoughts to bin: is a

m8 EMMA.

mark of good taste which I shall always know how to
value.’ ’

Han-iet kissed her hand in silent and lubmiuivc
giatitude. Emma was very decided in thinking such
an attachment no bad thing for her friend. Its tendency
would be to raise and reﬁne her mind—and it must be
saving her from the danger of degnidation.

chapter 31,].

June opened upon Hartﬁeld. To Highbury, in

general, it brought no material change. The
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings,
and of the use to be made of their barouche-landau, and
Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother’ - and as the
return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed,
and August, instead of Midsummer, ﬁxed for it, she
was likely to remain there full two months longer, pro-
vided at least she were able to defeat Mrs Elton’s
activity in her service, and save herself from being
hurried into a delightful situation against her will.

Mr Knightley, who, for some reason best known to
himself, had certainly taken an early dislike to Frank
Churchill, was only growing to dislike him more. He
began to suspect him of some double dealing in his

ursuit of Emma. That Emma was his object appeared
indisputable. Everything declared it: his own atten-
tion, his father’s hints, his mother-in-law’s guarded
silence; it was all in unison; words, conduct, discre-
tion and indiscrelion, told the same story. But while
so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emma her-
self making him over to Harriet, Mr Knightley began
to suspect him of some inclination to triﬂe with Jane

IN this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance,

  

EMMA. 109

Fairfax. He could not understand it; but there were
symptoms of intelligence between them—he thought so
at least—symptoms of admirao'on on his side, which,
having once observed, he could not persuade himself to
think entirely void of meaning, however, he might wish
to escape any of Emma’s errors of imagination. Sb:
was not present when the suspicion ﬁrst arose. He was
dining with the Randalls familyand Jane at the Eltons’ ;
and he had seen a look, more than a single look, at
Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss Wood-
house, seemed somewhat out of place. When he was
again in their company, he could not help remembering
what he had seen; nor could he avoid observations
which, unless it were like Cowper and his ﬁre at twi-
ﬁghg
“ Myself creating what I saw,"

brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a some-
thing of private liking, of private understanding even,
between Frank Churchill and Jane.

He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very
often did, to spend his evening at Hartﬁeld. Emma
and Harriet were going to walk ; he joined them ; and,
on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who like
themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early,
as the weather threatened rain; Mr and Mrs Weston
and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had
accidentally met. They all united; and, on reaching
Hartﬁeld gates, Emma, who knew it was exactl the
sort. of visiting that would be welcome to her ather,
pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him. The
Randalls party agreed to it immediately; and after a

retty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons
listened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss
Woodhouse’s most ohliging invitation.
.As they were turning into the grounds, Mr Perry
11. H

l I O EMMA.

passed by on horseback. The gentlemen spoke of his
horse.

“ By the bye,” said Frank Churchill to Mrs Weston
presently, “ what became of Mr Perry’s plan of netting
up his carriage 2”

Mrs Wenton looked surprised, and mid, “ I did not
know that he ever had any such plan.”

“Nay, I had it from you. You wrote me word of
it three months ago.”

“ Me! impossible!”

“Indeed you did. I remember it perfectly. You
mentioned it as what was certainly -to be very noon.
Mrs Perry had told somebody and was extremely happy
about it. It was owing to her persuasion, as she thought
his being out in bad weather did him a greal dl of
harm. You must remember it now ? "

“ Upon my word, I never heard of it till this
moment.”

“ Never! really never !—Bleta me ! how could it
be? Then I must have dreamt it—but I was com-
pletely mailed—Mina Smith, you walk at if you were’
tired. on will not be norry to ﬁnd yuumelf at home.”

“ What is this ?———What is this?" cried Mr Weston,
“ about Perry and a carriage? In Perry going to net up
his carriage, Frank? I am glad he can aford it. You
had it from himself, had you?"

“No, sir," replied his son, laughing. “I seem to
have had it from nobody. Very odd! I really was
persuaded of Mrs Weswn's having mentioned it in one
of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with all
thene rticulars ; but as she declares she never heard a
syllabll;a of it before, of course it must have been a
dream. I am a great dreamer. I dream ofeverybodyzat
Highbury, when I am away; and when I have gone
through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of
Mr and Mrs Perry."

EMMA. I l l

“ It is odd, though,” observed his father, “ that you
should have had such a regular connected dream about

ple whom it was not very likely you should be think-
lng of at Enscombe. Perry’s setting up his carriage!
and his wife’s persuading him to it, out of care for his
health—just what will happen, I have no doubt, some
time or other; only a little premature. What an air of
probability sometimes runs through a dream! And at
others, what a heap of absurdities it is ! Well, Frank,
your dream certainly shows that Highbury is in your
thou hts when u are absent. Emma, on are a t
dreargner, I thinIto?" y W

Emma was out of hearing. She had hurried on
before her guests to prepare her father for their appear-
ance, and was beyond the reach of Mr Weston’s
hint.

“Why, to own the truth,” cried Miss Bates, who
had been trying in vain to be heard the last two minutes,
“ if I must speak on this subject, there is no denying
that Mr Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean
no say that he did not dream it—I am sure I have some-
times the oddest dreams in the world—but if I am
questioned about it, I must acknowledge that there was
such an idea last spring; for Mrs Perry herself men-
tioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of itas
well as ourselves—but it was quite a secret, known to
nobody else, and only thought of about three days.
Mrs Perry was very anxious that he should have a
carriage, and came so my mother in great spirits one
morning because she thought she had revailed. Jane,
don’t you remember grandmamrna’s te ing us of it when
we got home? I forget where we had been walking
to—very. likely to Randalls; yes, I think it was to
Randalls. Mrs Perry was always particularly fond of
my mother—indeed I do not know who is not—and
she had mentioned it to her in conﬁdence; she had no

I 12 EMMA.

objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to
go beyond; and from that day to this I never men-
tioned it to a soul that I know of. At the mne time,
I will not positively answer for my having never dropt
a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing
before I am aware. I am a talker, ou know; I am
rather a talker; and now and then thave let a thing
escape me which I should not. I am not like Jane; I
wish I were. I will answer for it rbr never betrayed
the least thing in the world. Where is she? Oh!
just behind. Perfectly remember Mrs Perry’s coming.
Extraordinary dream, indeed! ” _

They were entering the hall. Mr Knightley’s eyes
had preceded Miss Bates’l in a glance at Jane. From
Frank Churchill’s face, where he thought he saw con-
fusion suppressed or laughed away, he had involuntarily
turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind, and too
hay with her shawl. Mr Weston had walked in. The
two other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass.
Mr Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the deter-
mination of catching her eye—he seemed watching her
intently—in vain, however, if it were 30. Jane passed
between them into the hall, and looked at neither.

There was no time for farther remark or explanation.
The dream must be borne with, and Mr Knightley must
take his seat with the rest round the large modern cir-
cular table which Emma had introduced at Hartﬁeld,
and which none but Emma could have had power to
place there and persuade her father to use, instead of
the small-sized Pembroke, on which two of his daily
meals had for forty years been crowded. Tea passed
pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.

“ Miss Woodhouse," said Frank Churchill, after ex-
amining a table behind him, which he could reach as heat,
“ have our nephews taken away their alphabets—their
box of etten? It need to mud here. Where is it?

nuns. : 1 3

This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be
treated rather as winter than summer. We had great
amusement with those letters one morning. I want to
puzzle you again."

Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing
the box, the table was quickly scattered over with
alphabets, which no one seemed so much di d to
employ as their two selves. They were rapidy fann-
ing words for each other, or for anybody ese who
would be puzzled. The quietness of the game made it
Erticularly eligible for Mr Woodhouse, who had often

en distressed by the more animated sort, which Mr
Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now at
happily occupied in lamenting, with tender melancholy,
over the d armre of the “poor little boys,” or in
fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter near
him, how beautifully Emma had wrinen it.

Frank Churchill placed a word before Mi- Fairfax.
She gave a slight glance round the table, and applied
herself to it. Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite
to them; and Mr Knightley so placed as to see them
all; and it was his object to see as much as he could,
with as little apparent observation. The word was
discovered, and with a faint smile pushed away. If
meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and
buried from sight, she should have looked on the table
instead of looking just across, for it was not mixed;
and Harriet, eager after every fresh word, and ﬁnding
out none, directly took it up, and fell to work. She
was sitting by Mr Knightley, and turned to him for
help. The word was blunder ,- and as Harriet exult-
ingly proclaimed it, there was a blush on Jane’s check
which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible. Mr
Knightley connected it with the dmm; but how it
could all be, was beyond his comprehension. How the
delicacy, the discretion of his favourite could have been

x 1 4 LIMA.

so lain asleep! He feared there must be some decided
involvement. Disingenuousness and double dealing
seemed to meet him at every turn. These letters were
but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. It was a child’s
play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank
Churchill’s part.

With great indignation did he continue to observe
him; with great alarm and distrust, to observe also his
two blinded companions. He saw a short word pre-
pared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and
demure. He saw that Emma had soon made it out.
and found it highly entertaining, though it was some-
thing which she judged it pro r to appear to censure ;
for she said, “ Nonsense! or shame! ” He heard
Frank Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane,
“ I will give it to her—shall I ?" and as clearly heard
Emma opposing it with eager laughing wannth,—“No,
no, you must not, you shall not, indeed.”

It was done, however. This gallant young man, who
seemed to love without feeling, and to recommend him-
self without complaisanCe, directly handed over the
word to Miss F aufax, and with a particular degree of
sedate civility entreated her to study it. Mr Knightley‘s
excessive curiosity to know what this word might be,
made him seize every possible moment for darting his
eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it to
be Dixon. Jane Fairfax’s perception seemed to ac-
com ' ny his; her comprehension was certainly more
equa to the covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of
those ﬁve letters so arranged. She was evidently dis-
pleased ; looked up, and seeing herlelf watched, blushed
more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying
only, “ i did not know that proper names were allowed,”

ushed awa the letters with even an angry spirit, and
lboked reso ved to be engaged by no other word that
could be oﬁ‘ered. Her face was averted from those

EMMA. r r 5

who had made the attack, and turned towards her
aunt.

“Ay, very me, my dear,” cried the latter, though
Jane had not spoken a word : “ I was just going to say
the same thing. It is time for us to he going, indeed.
The evening is closing in, and glandmamma will be
looking for us. My dear sir, ou are too obliging.
We really must wish you good-night."

Jane's alertness in moving proved her as ready as her
amt had preconceived. She was immediately up, and
wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also mov-
ing, that she could not get away; and Mr Knightley
thought he w another collection of letters, anxiously
pushed towards her, and resolutely swept away by her
unexamined. She was afterwards looking for her
shawl—Frank Churchill was looking also: it was grow-
ing dusk, and the room was in confusion; and how
tﬁparted Mr Knightley could not tell.

e remained at Hartﬁeld after all the rest, his
thoughts full of what he had seen; so full, that when
the candles came to assist his observations, he must—-
yes, he certainly must, as a friend—an anxious friend——
give Emma some hint, ask her some question. He
could not see her in a situation of such danger without
trying to preserve her. It was his duty.

“Pray, Emma," said he, “mayI ask in what lay
the great amusement, the poignant sting of the last word
given to you and Miss Fairfax? I aw the word, and
am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other.”

Emma was extremely confused. She could not en-
dure to give him the true explanation; for though her
unpicions were by no means removed, she was really
ashamed of having ever imparted them.

“Oh ! ” die cried in:evident embarrassment, “it all
meant nothing, a mere joke among ourselves."

r r 6 EMMA.

“The joke," he replied gravely, “seemed conﬁned
to you and Mr Churchill."

He had hoped she would speak again, but she did
not. She would rather busy herself about anything
than Ipeak. He t a little while in doubt. A variety
of evils crossed his mind. Interference—{milieu inw-
ference. Emma’s confusion, and the acknowledged
intimacy, seemed to declare her affection engaged. Yet
he would speak. He owed it to her, to risk anything
that might be involved in an unwelcome interferenm,
rather than her welfare; to encounter anything, rather
than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.

“ My dear Emma,” said he at last, with earnen
kindness, “do you think you perfectly understand the
degree of acquaintance between the gentlean and lady
we have been Ipeaking of?”

“ Between Mr Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax?
Oh! yes, perfectly. Why do you make a doubt of
it 3 ”

“Have you never at any time had reason to think
that he admired her, or that she admired him ? ”

“ Never, never! ” she cried with a most open eager-
ness. “ Never, for the twentieth part of a moment, did
mch an idea occur to me. And how could it possibly
come into your head .’ "

“ I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of
attachment between them ; certain ex reseive looks,
which I did not believe meant to be public.”

I‘Oh! you amuse rue excessively. I am delighted
to ﬁnd that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination
wander; but it will not do——very sorry to check you in
your ﬁrst emy, but indeed it will not do. There is no
admiration between them, I do assure you : and the
appearance: which have caught you, have arisen from
some peculiar circumstances; feelings rather of a totally
diﬁ‘erent nature; it is impossible exactly to explain—

EMMA. 1 r7

there is a good deal of nonsense in it—hut the part
which is capable of being communirated, which is sense,
is, that they are as far from any attachment or admira-
tion for one another as any two beings in the world can
be. That is, I pram it to be so on her side, and I
can drawer for its being so on his. I will answer for
the gentleman’s indifference.”

She spoke with a conﬁdence which staggered, with a
satisfaction which silencad Mr Knightle . She was in
gay spirits, and would have rolonged e conversation,
wanting to hear the rticu an of his suspicions, every
look described, and al the wheres and hows of a circum-
stance which highly entertained her; but his gaiet did
not meet hers. He found he could not be usefu , and
his feelings were too much irritated for talking. That
he might not he irritatedjnto an absolute fever by the
lire which Mr Woodhouse’s tender habits required
almost every evening throughout the year, he soon
afterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the
coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.

chum: £13].

FTER being long fed with hopes of a speedy
visit from Mr and Mrs Suckling, the Highbury
world were obliged to endure the mortiﬁcation

of hearing that they could not possibly come ﬁll the
autumn. No such importation of novelties could en-
rich their intellectual stores at present. In the daily
interchange of news, they must he again restricted to
the other topics, with which for a while the Sucklings’
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of
Mrs Churchill, whose health seemed every day to supply
a different report, and the situation of Mrs Weston,

1 r8 EMMA.

whose happiness, it was to be hoped, might eventually
be as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that
of all her neighbours was by the approach of it.

Mrs Elton was very much dimppointed. It was the
delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade. Her
introductions and recommendations must all wait, and
every projected party he still only talked of. So she
thought at ﬁrst; but a little consideration convinced
her that everything need not be put off. Wh should
not they explore to Box Hill though the Suck ings did
not come? They could go there again with them in
the autumn. It was settled that they should go to
Box Hill. That there was to be such a party had
been long generally known; it had even given the idea
of another. Emma had never been to Box Hill ; she
wished to see what everybody found so well worth
seeing, and she and Mr Weston hard agreed to choose
some line morning and drive thither. Two or three
more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join
them, and it was to be done in a quiet, unpretending,
elegant way, inﬁnitely superior to the bustle and pre-
paration, the regular eating and drinking, and pic-nic
parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings. . _

This was so very well understood between them that
Emma could not but feel some surprise, and a little
displeasure, on hearing from Mr Weston that he had
been roposing to Mrs Elton, as her brother and sister
had .Iilcd her, that the two parties should unite, and go
together; and that as Mrs Elton had very readily
acceded to it, so it was to be, if she had no objection.
Now, as her objection was nothing but her very great
dislike of Mrs Elton, of which Mr Weston must already
be perfectly aware, it was not worth bringing forward
again :—it could not be done without a reproof to him,
which would be giving pain to his wife; and she found
herself, therefore, obliged to consent to an arrangement

EMMA. 1 :9

which she would have done a great deal to avoid; an
amngernent which would, probably, expose her even to
the degradation of being said to be of Mrs Elton’s
party! Every feeling was offended; and the forbear-
ance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due
of secret severity in her reﬂections, on the unmanage-
able good-will of Mr Weston's temper.

“ I am glad you approve of what I have done,”
said he, very comfortably. “ But I thought you
would. Such schemes as these are nothing without
numbers. One mnnot have too large a party. A
large party secures its own amusement. And she is a
good-natured woman after all. One could not leave
her out.”

Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none
of it in private.

It was now the middle of June and the weather line;
and Mn Elton was growing impatient to name the da ,
and settle with Mr Weston as to pigeon-pies and 00 d
lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw everything into
sad uncertainty. It might be weeks, it might be only a
few days, before the home were usenble; but no pre-
parations could be ventured on, and it was all melan-
choly stagnation. Mrs Elton's resources were in-
adequate to such an attack.

“ Is not this most vexatious, Knightley 9 ” she cried;
“ and such weather for exploring ! these delays and dis-
appointments are quite odiouS. What are we to do?
The year will wear away at this rate, and nothing done.
Before this time last year, I assure you, we had had a
delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings
Weston.”

“You had better explore to Donwell," replied Mr
Knightley. “ That may be done without horses. Come
and eat my strawberries; they are ripening fast."

If Mr Knightley did not begin seriously, he was

120 EMMA.

obliged to proch so; for his proposal was caught at
with delight; and the “Oh! I should like it of all
things,” was not plainer in words than manner. Don-
well was famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed
a plea for the invitation; but no plea was necessary;
cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt the
lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere. She
promised him again and again to come—much oftener
than he doubted—and was extremely gratiﬁed by nick
a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment as
she chose to consider it.

“ You may depend upon me,” said she; “I certainly
will come—Name your day, and I will come.—You
will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax ? "

H I cannot name a day," said he, “ till I have ken
to some others, whom I would wish to meet you. ’

“Oh,leavc all that to me; only give me a cane-
blanche.—I am Lady Patroness, you know. It is my
party. I will bring friends with me."

“ I in you will bring Elton,” said he; “ but I will
not troub a you to give any other invitations.”

“ Oh, now you are looking very sly ;——but consider,
—you need not be afraid of delegating power to are. 1
am no young lady on her prefennent. Man-ied
women, you know, may be safely authorized. It
is my party. Lve it all to me. I will invite your

eats.”

“ No," he calmly replied, “there is but one married
woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite
what ,guests she pleases to Donwell, and that one is

,

“ Mrs Weston, I suppose,” internipted Mrs Elton,
lather mortiﬁed.
“No,—Mrs Knightley; and till she is in being, I
will manage such matters myself.”
“ Ah,you are an odd creature! ” she cried, satisﬁed

EMMA. I 2 I

to have no one preferred to herself. “You are a
humorist, and may say what you like. Quite a
humorist. Well, I shall bring Jane with me——Jane and
her aunt. The rest I leave to you. I have no
objections at all to meeting the Hardield family.
Don’t scruple, I know you are attached to them.”

“You certainly will meet them. if I can prevail;
and I shall call on Miss Bates in my way home.”

“ That 's quite unnecessary ; I see Jane every day ;—
but as you like. It is to be a morning scheme, you
know, Knightley; quite a simple thing. I shall war
a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hang-
ing on my arm. Here,—probably this basket with
pink ribbon. Nothing can he more simple, you see
And Jane will have such another. There is to be no
form or parade—a sort of gipsy party. We are to
walk about your gardens, and gather the strawberries
ourselves, and sit under trees; and whatever else you
may like to provide, it is to be all out of doors; a
table spread in the shade, you know. Everything as
natural and simple as possible. Is not that your idea i"

“ Not quite. My idea of the simple and the natuml
will be to have the table spread in the dining-room.
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies,
with their servants and furniture, I think is best observed
by meals within doors. When you are tired of eating
strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in
the house.”

“ Well, as you please; only don’t have a great set-
out. And, by the bye, can I or my housekeeper be of
any use to you with our opinion? Pray be sincere,
Knightley. If you wish me to talk to Mrs Hodges, or
to inspect anything "

“ I have not the least wish for it, I thank you.”

“Well,-hut if an diﬂieulties should arise, my
housekeeper is extremeliy clever.”

 

I 22 EMMA.

“ I will answer for it that mine thinks henelf full as
clever, and would spum anybody’u aalimncc."

“ I with we had a donkey. The thing would be for
In all to come on donkies, Jane, Mina Bates, and me,
and my tam :pom walking by. I really muat talk to
him about purchasing a donkey. In a country life I
conceive it to be a sort of necessary ; for, let a woman
have ever so many resourcel, it in not possible for her
to be always nhut up at home; and very long walks,
you know—in summer there in dust, and in winter there
is dirt."

“You will not ﬁnd either between Donwell and High-
bury. Donwell Lane in never dusty, and now it in
perfectly dry. Come on a donkey, however, if you
prefer it. You can borrow Mrs Cole’s. I would with
everything to be as much to your taste as poasihle.”

“That I am sure you would. Indeed I do you
justice, my good friend. Under that peculiar sort of
dry, blunt manner, I know you have the warmeu heart.
A: I tell Mr E., you are a thorough humorist. Yes,
believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your at-
tention to me in the whole of this scheme. You have
hit Iawn the very thing to please rue."

r Knightley had another reason for avoiding a
table in the shade. He wished to persuade Mr Wood-
house, as well as Emma, to join the party; and he knew
that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to
eat would inevitably make him ill. Mr Woodhousc
must not, under the specious retcnee of a morning drive,
and an hour or two spent at l)Donwell, be tempted away
to his misery.

He was invited on good faith. No lurking horrors
were to u ibrnirl lllﬂ) for his easy crcdulity. He did
content. c had not been at Donwell for two cars.
“ Some very ﬁne morning, he, and Emma, and arriet
could go very well; and he could sit ttill with Mrs

nuns. 123

Weston while the clear girls walked about the gardens.
He did not suppose they could be damp now, in the
middle of the day. He should like to see the old house
again exceedingly, and should be very happy to meet
Mr and Mn Elton, and any other of his neighbours.
He could not see any objection at all to his, and
Emma's, and Harriet’s going there some very ﬁne
morning. He thought it very well done of Mr
Knightleyto invite them ; very kindand sensible ; much
cleverer than dining out. He was not fond of dining
mm”

Mr Knightlcy was fortunate in everybody’s most read
concurrence. The invitation was everywhere so wel
received, that it seemed as if, like Mrs Elton, they were
all taking the scheme as a particular compliment to
themselves. Emma and Harriet professed very high
expectations of pleasure from it; and Mr Weston, un-
aslted, promised to get Frank over to join them, if
possible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which
could have been dispensed with. Mr Knightley was
then obliged to say that he should be glad to see him 5
and Mr Weston engaged to lose no time in writing, and
spare no arguments to induce him to come.

In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast
that the party to Box Hill was again under hap y con-
sideration; and at last Donwell was settled or one
day; and Box Hill for the next, the weather appear-
ing exactly right.

Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer,
Mr Woodhouse was safely conveyed in his carriage,
with one window down, to partake of this al-fresco
party; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the
Abbey, especially pre ared for him bya ﬁre all the
morning, he was happily placed, quite at his ease, ready
to talk with pleasure of what had been atchieved, and
advise everybody to come and sit down, and not to heat

r 24 EMMA.

themselves. Mrs Weston, who seemed to have walked
there on purpose to be tired, and sit all the lime with
him, remained, when all the other: were invited or per-
suaded out, his patient listener and sympathizer.

It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey,
that as soon as she was satisﬁed of her father’s comfort,
the was glad to leave him and look around her; eager
to refresh and correct her memory with more particular
observation, more exact understanding of a house and
grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all
her family.

She felt all the honest pride and complacency which
her alliance with the present and future pro rietor could
fairly warrant1 asshe viewed the respecta le size and
style of the building, in suitable, becoming, character-
istic situation, low and sheltered; its ample gardens
stretching down to meadows washed by a stream, of
which the Abbey, with all the old neglect of prospect,
had scarcely a sight—and its abundance of timber in
rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extrava-
gnce had rooted up. The house was larger than

artﬁeld, and totally unlike it, covering a good deal of
ground, rambling and irregular, with many comfortable,
and one or two handsome rooms. It was just what it
ought to be, and it looked what it was ; and Emma felt
an increasing respect for itI as the residence of a family
of such true gentility, unminted in blood and under-
standing. Sonic faults of temper .lohn Kniglrtlcy had;
but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionally. She
had given them neither men, nor names, not places, that
could raise a blush. These were pleasant feelings, and
she walked about and indulged them till it was neces-
sary to do as the others did, and collect round the
strawberry-beds. The whole party were assembled,
excepting Frank Churchill, who was expected eve
moment from Richmond; and Mrs Elton, in all her

EMMA. r: 5

apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket,
was very ready to lead the wa in gathering, accepting.
or talking. Strawbenies, and, only strawberries, could
now he thought or spoken of. “The best fruit in
England ———everybody’s favourite —always wholesome.
These the ﬁnest beds and ﬁnest sorts. Delightful to
gather for one’s self—the only way of really enjoying
them. Morning decidedly the best time—never tired
—every sort good—hautboy inﬁnitely superior—no
comparison—the others hardly eatable—hautboys very
scarce—Chili preferred—white wood ﬁnest ﬂavour of
all—price of strawberries in London—abundance about
Bristol—Maple Grove—cultivation——beds when to be
renewed—gardeners thinking exactly diKerent—no
general nrle—gardeners never to he put out of their
way—delicious fruit—only too rich to be eaten nruch
of—inferior to cherries—Currants more refreshing—
only objection to gathering strawberries the snooping—-
glaring sun—tired to dmth—could bear it no longer—
must go and sit in the shade.”

Such, for half an hour, was the conversation; in-
terrupted only once by Mrs Weston, who came out, in
her solicitude after her son-in-law, to inquire if he were
come; and she was a little uneasy. She had some
fears of his horse.

Seats tolerany in the shade were found; and now
Emma was obliged to overhear what Mrs Elton and
Jane Fairfax were talking of. A situation, a most
desirable situation, was in question. Mrs Elton had
received notice of it that morning, and was in mptures.
It was not with Mrs Suckling, it was not with Mrs
Bmgge, hut in felicity and splendour it fell short only
of them: it was with a cousin of Mrs Bragge, an
acquaintance of Mrs Suckling, a lady known at Maple
Grove. Delightful, charming, superior, ﬁrst circles,
spheres, lines, ranks, everything: and. Mrs Elton was

II. I

126 EMMA.

wild to have the olfcr closed with immediately. On
her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph; and
she positively refused to take her friend’s negative,
though Miss Fairfax continued to assure her that she
would not at resent engage in an ing— tin the
same motives ill/hich she had beenyllrard “1.3;; begfore.
Still Mrs Elton insisted on being authorized to write
an acquiescence by the morrow's post. How Jane
could bear it at all, was astonishing to Emma. She
did look vexed; she did speak pointedly; and at last,
with a decion of action unusual to her, roposed a
removal. “Should not they walk? W :1 not Mr
Knightlcy show them the gardens—all the gardens?
She wished to see the whole extent." The pertinaeity
of her friend seemed more than she could bear.

It was hot; and after walking some time over the
gardens in a scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any
three together, they inxnsihly followed one another to
the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes,
which, stretching beyond the garden at an equal dis-
tance from the river, seemed the ﬁnish of the pleasant
grounds. It led to nothing; nothing but a view at the
end over a low stone wall with high pillars, which
seemed intended, in their erection, to give the appear-
ance of an approach to the house, which never had
been there. Disputable, however, as might be the taste
of such a termination, it was in itself a chamling walk,
and the view which closed it extremely pretty. The
considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which the
Abbey stood, gladually acquired a steeper form beyond
its grounds; and at half a mile distant was a bank of
considerable abruptncss and grandeur, well clothed with
wood; and at the bottom of this bank, favourany
placed and sheltered, rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with
meadows in front, and the river making a close and
handsome curve around it.

EMMA. r 27

It was a sweet view—sweet to the eye and the
mind. English verdure, English culture, English com-
fort, seen under a sun bright, without being oppressive.

In this walk Emma and Mr Weston found all the
others assembled; and towards this view she immedi-
ately perceived Mr Knightley and Han'iet distinct from
the rest, quietly leading the way. Mr Knightley and
Harriet! It was an odd téte-a-téte; but she was glad
to see it. There had been a time when he would have
scorned her as a companion, and turned from her with
little ceremony. Now they seemed in pleasant con-
versation. There had been a time also when Emma
would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot so
favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm; but now she
feared it not. It might be safely viewed, with all its
appendages of prosperity and beauty, its rich pastures,
spreading ﬂocks, orchard in blossom, and light column
of smoke ascending. She joined them at the wall, and
found them more engaged in talking than in looking
around. He was giving Harriet information as to
modes of agriculture, &c. ; and Emma received a smile
which seemed to say, “ These are my own concerns. I
have a right to talk on such subjects, without being
suspected of introducing Robert Martin." She did
not suspect him. It was too old a story. Robert
Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet. They
took a few turns together along the walk. The shade
was most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest
part of the day.

The next remove was to the house; they must all
go in and eat; and they were all seated and busy, and
still Frank Churchill did not come. Mrs Weston
looked, and looked in vain. His father would not own
himself uneasy, and laughed at her fears; but she could
not be cured of wishing that he would part with his
black mare. He had expressed himself as to coming with

128 EMMA.

more than common certainty. “ His aunt was so much
better, that he had not a doubt of getting over to them.”
Mrs Churchill’s state, however, as many were ready to
remind her, was liable to such sudden variation as might
disappoint her nephew in the mm reasonable depend-
ence; and Mrs eston was at last persuaded to believe,
or to say, that it must be by some attack of Mrs
Churchill that he was prevented coming. Emma
looked at Harriet while the point was under considera-
tion ; she behaved very well, and betrayed no emotion.

The cold repast was over, and the party were to go
out once more to see what had not yet been seen, the
old Abbey ﬁsh-ponds; perhaps get as far as the clover,
which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at
any rate, have the pleasure of being hot, and growing
cool again. Mr Woodhouse, who had already taken
his little round in the highest part of the gardens, where
no clamps from the river were imagined even by him,
stined no more; and his daughter resolved to remain
with him, that Mrs Weston might be persuaded away
by her husband to the exercise and variety which her
spirits seemed to need.

Mr Knightley had done all in his power for Mr
Woodhouse’s entertainment. Books of engravings,
drawers of medals, cameos, corals, shells, and every
other family collection widrin his cabinets, had been
prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning;
and the kindness had perfectly answered. Mr Wood-
house had been exceedingly well amused. Mrs Weston
had been showing them all to him, and now he would
show them all to Emma; fortunate in having no other
resemblance to a child, than in a total want of taste for
what he saw, for he was slow, constant, and methodical.
Before this second looking over was begun, however,
Emma walked into the hall for the sake of a few
moments’ free observation of the entrance and ground-

EMMA. :29

lot of the house, and was hardly there when Jane

airfax appeared, coming quickly in from the garden,
and with a look of escape. Little expecting to meet
Miss Woodhouse so soon, there was a start at ﬁrst; but
Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was in quest
of.

“ Will you be so kind," mid she, “when I am
missed, as to sayithat I am gone home? I am going
this moment. y aunt is not aware how late it is, nor
how long we have been absent; but I am sure we shall
he wanted, and I am determined to go directly. I have
said nothing about it to anybody. It would only be
giving trouble and distress. Some are gone to the
ponds, and some to the lime-walk. Till they all come
in I shall not be missed; and when the do, will you
have the goodness to say that I am gone . ”

“ Certainly, if you wish it; but you are not going to
walk to Highbury alone .’ "

“ Yes; what should hurt me? I walk fast. I shall
be at home in twenty minutes.’ ’

“ But it is too far, indeed it to be walking quite
alone. Let my father’s servant go with you. Let me
order the carriage. It can be round in ﬁve minutes.’ ’

“Thank you, thank you; but on no account; I
would rather walk. And for me to be afraid of walking
alone; I, who may so soon have to guard others! "

She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very
feelineg replied—“ That can be no reason for your
being exposed to danger now. I must order the car-
riage. he heat even would be danger. You are
fatigued already.”

“ I am,” she answered, “ I am fatigued; but it is
not the sort of fatigue—quick walking will refresh me.
Miss Woodhouse, we all know at times what it is to be
wearied in spirits. Mine, I confess, are exhausted.
The greatest kindness you can show me will he to let

130 suns.

me have my own way, and only say that I am gone
when it is necessary."

Emma had not another word to oppose. She saw it
all ; and entering into her feelings, promoted her quit-
ting the house immediately, and watched her safely off
with the zeal of a friend. Her rting look was grate-
ful; and her parting words, “ 8;! Mia Woodhouse,
the comfort of being sometimes alone ! " seemed to
burst from an overcharged heart, and to describe some-
what of the continual endurance to be practised by her,
even towards some of those who loved her best.

“ Such a home, indeed! such an aunt! " aid Emma,
as she turned back into the hall again. “ I do pity you.
Aml lln: more sensibility yuubctncy of their just horrors,
the more I shall like you.”

Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and
they haul only accomplished some views of St Mark’s
Place, Venice, when F rank Churchill entered the room.
Emma had not been thinking of him ; she had forgonen
to think of him, but she was very glad to see him.
Mrs Weston would be at ease. The black mare was
blameless ; rbey were right who had named Mrs
Churchill as the cause. He had been detained by a
temporary increase of illness in her—a nervous seizure
which had lasted some hours; and he had quite given
up every thought of coming till very late; and had he
known how hot .1 ride he should have, and how late,
with all his hurry, he must be, he believed he should
not have come at all. The heat was excessive; he had
never suffered anything like it—almom wished he had
stayed at home—nothing killed him like heat—he could
bear any degree of cold, am, but heat was intolerable ;
and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from
the slight remains of Mr Woodhouse's ﬁre, looking very
deplorable.

“ You will soon be cooler, ifyou sit su‘ll,” said Emma.

nuns. 13x

“ As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again. I
could very ill be spared: but such a point had been
made of my coming! You will all be going soon, I
suppose; the whole party breaking up. I met was
I came—Madness in such weather !—absolube mad-
ness! ”

Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that
Frank Churchill’s stale mightb'e bendefined by the ex-
pressive phrase of being out of humour. Some people
were always cross when they were hot. Such might be
his constitution; and as she knew that eating and drink-
ing were often the cure of such incidental complaints,
she recommended his taking some refreshment; he
would ﬁnd abundance of everything in the dining-
room; and she humanely pointed out the door.

“ No ; he should not eat. He was not hungry; it
would only make him hotter." In two minutes, how-
ever, he relench in his own favour; and muttering
something about spruce-beer, walked off. Emma re-
turned all her attention to her father, saying in secret—

“ I am glad I am done being in love with him. I
should not like a man who is so soon discom by a
hot morning. Hanict’s sweet easy temper wi l not mind
it.”

He was gone long enough to have had a very com-
fortable meal, and came back all the better—grown

uite cool, and with good manners, like himself, able to

w a chair close to them, take an interest in their em-
ployment, and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should

so late. He was not in his best spirits, but seemed
trying to improve them ; and, at last, made himself talk
nonsense very agreeably. They were looking over
views in Swisserland.

“ As soon as my aunt gets well I shall go abroad,”
said he. “ I shall never be easy till I have seen some
of these places. You will have my sketches, some time

r 32 EMMA.

or other, to look at—or my tour to read—or my poem.
I shall do lomething to expose myself."

“ That. may be—but not by sketches in Swinerland.
You will never go to Swisserland. Your uncle and aunt
will never allow you to leave England.”

“ They may be induced to go too. A warm climate
may be prescribed for her. I have more than half an
expectation of our all going abroad. I assure you, I
have. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad. I ought to travel. I am tired
of doing nothing. I want a change. I am serious,
Miss Woodhouse, whatever your netrating eyes may
fancy—I am sick of England, an would leave it to-
morrow if I eoul ."

“ You are sick of prosperity and indulgence! Cannot
you invent a few hardships for yourself, and be contented
to my ? ”

“I sick of prosperity and indulgence! You are
quite mistaken. I do not look upon myself as either
prosperous or indulged. I am thwarted in everything
material. I do not consider myself at all a fonunate

non."

“You are not quite so miserable, though, as when
you ﬁrst came. Go, and eat and drink a little more,
and you will do very well. Another slice of cold meat,
another draught of Madeira and water, will make you
nearl on a par with the rest of us."

“ o—I shall not stir. I shall sit by you. You
are in best cure."

“ e are going to Box Hill to-morrow: you will
join us. It is not Swingerland, but it will be some-
thing for a young man so much in want of a change.
You will stay and go with us?"

“ No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of
the evening.”

“ But you may come again in the cool of to-mon'ow
morning.”

EMMA. r 3 3

“No—it will not be worth while. If I come, I
shall be cross.”

“Then ray stay at Richmond.”

“But ifP I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never
bear to think of you all there without me.”

“These are difﬁculties which you must settle for
yourself. Choose your own degree of crossncss. I
shall press you no more.”

The rest of the party were now netuming, and all
were soon collected. With some there was great joy
at the sight of Frank Churchill; others took it very
eomposedly ; but there was a very general distress and
disturbance on Miss Fairfax’s disappearance being ex-
plained. That it was time for everybody to go concluded
the subject; and with a short final arrangement for the
next da ’3 scheme, they parted. Frank Churchill’s
little inclination to exclude himself increased so much,
that his last words to Emma were—

},Vell ;—ifyou wish me to stay and join the party I
wr .

She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a
summons from Richmond was to take him back before
the following evening.

churn: £1333.

HEY had a very line day for Box Hill; and all
the other outward circumstances of amnge-
ment, accommodation, and punctuality, were in

favour of a pleasant party. Mr Weston directed the
whole, olliciating safer between Hartﬁeld and the
Vicarage, and everybody was in good time. Emma and
Harriet went together; Miss Bates and her niece with
the Eltona; the gentlemen on horseback. Mrs Weston

134 sum.

remained with Mr Woodhouse. Nothing was wanting
but to be happy when they got there. Seven mile: were
travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and everybody
had a burst of admiration on ﬁrst arriving; but in the
general amount of the day there was deﬁciency.
There was a languor, a want of spirits, a want of union.
which could not be got over. They separated too
much into parties. The Elton: walked together; Mr
Knightley took charge of Miss Bates and Jane; and
Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill.
And Mr Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmon-
ise better. It seemed at ﬁrst an accidental division, but
it never materially varied. Mr and Mrs Elton, indeed,
showed no unwillingness to mix, and be as agreeable as
they could; but during the two whole hours that were
spent on the hill, there seemed a principle of separation
between the other )nrties, too strong {or any ﬁne
Wspects, or any colld collation, or any cheerful Mr
eston, to remove.

At ﬁrst it was downright dulness to Emma. She
had never seen Frank Churchill so silent and stupid.
He said nothing worth hearing—looked without seeing
—admired without intelligence—listened without know-
ing what she said. While he was so dull, it was no
wonder that Harriet should be dull likewise; and they
were both insufferable.

When they all sat down it was better—to her taste a
great deal better—for Frank Churchill grew talkative
and gay, making her his ﬁrst object. Every disﬁnguish-
ing attention that could be paid, was paid to her. To
amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that
he cared for—and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not
sorry to be ﬂattered, was gay and easy too, and gave him
all the friendly encouragement, the admission to be
gallant. which she had ever given in the ﬁrst and most
animating period of their acquaintance; but which now,

min. :35

in her own estinmion, meant nothing, though in the
judgment of most people looking on, it must have had
such an appearance as no English word but ﬂirtation
could very well describe. “Mr Frank Churchill and
Miss Woodhouse ﬂirted together excessively.” They
were laying themselves open to that very phrase—and
to having it sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one
lady, to Ireland by another. Not that Emma was gay
and thoughtless from any real felicity; it was rather
because she felt less happy than she had expected.
She laughed because she was disappointed; and though
she liked him for his attentions, and thought them all,
whether in friendship, admiration, or playfulness, ex-
tremely judicious, the were not winning back her
heart. She still inten ed him for her friend.

“How much I am obliged to you,” said he, “ for
telling me to come to—day l—If it had not been for you,
1 should certainly have lost all the happiness of this
party. I had quite determined to go awa again.”

“Yes, you were very cross; and I 0 not know
what about, except that you were too late for the best
strawberries. I was a kinder friend than you deserved.
But you were humble. You begged hard to be com-
manded to come.”

“ Don’t say I was cross. I was fatigued. The heat
overcame rne. ’

“It is hotter tan-day.”

“Not to my feelings. I am perfectly comfortable
00-day.”

“ You are comfortable because you are under com-
mand.”

“ Your command ?—ch."

“ Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-
command. You had, somehow or other, broken
bounds yesterday. and run away from your own manage-
ment; but to-day you are got back again—and as I

136 EMMA.

cannot be always with you, it is best to believe your
temper under your own command rather than mine.”

“It comes to the same thing. I can have no self-
command without a motive. You order me, whether
you speak or not. And you can he always with me.

ou are always with me.”

“ Dating from three o'clock yesterday. My per-
petual inﬂuence could not begin rlier, or you would
not have been so much out of humour before."

“Three o’clock yesterday! That is your date. I
thought I had seen you ﬁrst in Februa .”

“ Your gallantry is really unanswerab7. But (lower-
ing her voice) nobody spults except ourselves, and it is
mthcr too much to be talking nonsense for the entertain-
ment'of seven silent ple.”

“ I say nothing amid) I am ashamed," replied he,
with lively impudcncc. “I saw you ﬁrst in Fcbnmry.
Let everybody on the Hill hear me if they can. Let
my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and Dork-
ing on the other. I saw you ﬁrst in February." And
then whispering — “ Our companions are excessively
stupid. What shall we do to rouse them? Any non-
sense will serve. They :ball talk. Ladies and gende-
men, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever
she is, presides) to say, that she desires to know what
you are all thinking of .’ ”

Some laughcd,nntl answered goth-humouredly. Miss
Bates said it great. deal; Mrs Elton swelled at the idea
ofMiss Woodhouse’s presiding ; Mr Knightley’s answer
was the most distinct.

“Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to
hear what we are all thinking of i ”

“ Oh, no, no ! ” cried Emma, laughing as carelesst
as she could—“upon no account in the world. It is
the very last thing I would stand the brunt of now.
Let me hear anything rather than what you are all

EMMA. 137

drinking of. Iwill not say uite all. There are one
or two perhaps " glancing atler Weston and Harriet),
“ whose droughts might not be afraid of knowing.”

“ It is a sort of thing," cried Mrs Elton emphatically,
“ which I should not have thought myself privileged to
inquire into. Though, perhaps, as the {bopemr of the
party—I never was in any circle—cxplonng parties—
young ladies—married women—”

Her mutterings were chieﬂy to her husband ; and he
murmured, in reply—

“ Very true, my love, very true. Exactly so, indeed
——quite unheard of—but some ladies my anything.
Better pass it oi? as a joke. Everybody_ knows what
is due to you.”

“ It will not do," whispered Frank to Emma, " they
are most of them aﬁ'roured. I will attack them with
more address. Ladies and gentlemen, I am ordered by
Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waves her right of
knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and
only requires something very entertaining from each of
you, in a general way. Here are seven of you, besides
myself (who, she is pleased to say, am very entertaining
already), and she only demands from each of you,
either one thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original
or repeated ; or two things moderately clever; or three
things very dull indeed; and she engages to laugh
heartily at them all."

“Oh! very well,” exclaimed Miss Bates; " then I
need not be uneasy. ‘Three things very dull indeed.’
That will just do for me, you know. I shall be sure
to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my
mouth, shan’t I?” (looking round with the most good-
humoured dependence on evcrybody’s assent.) “ Do not
you all think I shall?”

Emma could not resist.

“Ah! ma’am, but there may be a difﬁculty. Pardon

1 38 EMMA.

me, but you will be limited as to number—only three
at once.”

Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her
manner, did not immediame catch her meaning; but,
when it burst on her, it could not anger, though a slight
blush showed that it could pain her.

“Ah! well—to be sure. Yea, I see what she
means” (turning to Mr Knightlcy) “and I will try to
hold my tongue. I must make myself very digreeable,
or she would not have said such a thing to an old
friend.”

“I like your plan," cried Mr Weston. “Agreed,
agreed. I will do mybest. I am making a conundrum.
How will a conundrum reckon 3"

“Low, I am afraid, sir, Very low,” answered his
son; “ but we shall be indulgent, especially to any one
who leads the way.”

“ No, no,” said Emma, “ it will not reckon low. A
conundnlm of Mr Weston’s shall clear him and his next
neighbour. Come, sir, pray let me hear it.”

“ I doubt its being very clever myself," said Mr
Weston. “ It is too much a matter of fact; but here
it is—What two letters of the alphabet are there that
express perfection i"

“ What two letters—express perfection? I am sure
I do not know.”

“Ah! you will never guess. You” (to Emma), “I
am cenain, will never guess. I will tell you. M and A.
Emma. Do you understand?

Understanding and gratiﬁcation came together. It
might be a very indifferent piece of wit, but Emma
found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it: and so
did Frank and Harriet. It did not seem to touch the
rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid about
it, and Mr Knightley gravel said—

“ This explains the tort o clever thing that is wanted,

nuns, 139

and Mr Weston has done very well for himself: but he
must have knocked up everybody else. Perfxriau
should not have come quite so soon.”

“Oh! for myself,I retest I must be excused,”
said Mrs Elton. “ I ly cannot attempt—I am not
at all fond of the sort of thing. I had an acrostic
once sent to me upon my own name which I was not
at all pleased with. I knew who it came from. An
abominable puppy! You know who I mean ” (nodding
to her husband). “ These kind of things are very well
at Christmas, when one is sitting round the lire; but
quite out of plaCe, in my opinion, when one is exploring
about the country in summer. Miss Woodhouse must
excuse me. I am not one of those who have witty
things at everybody’s service. I do not pretend to be
a wit. I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way,
but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak,
and when to hold my tongue. Pass us, ifyou please, Mr
Churchill. Pass Mr E., Knighdey, Jane, and myself.
We have nothing clever m say——not one of us."

“ Yes yes, pray pass me,” added her husband, with a
sort of sneering consciousness ; “I have nothing to say
that can entertain Miss Woodhousc, or any other young
lady. An old married man—quite good for nothing.
Shall we walk, Augusta 2 "

“With all my heart. I am really tired of exploring
so long on one spot. Come Jane, take my other arm.”

Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife
walked off. “ Happy couple ! ” said Frank Churchill,
as soon as they were out of hearing; “how well they suit
one another! Very lucky—marrying as they did, upon
an acquaintance formed only in a public place! They
only knew each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath!
Peculiarly lucky! for as to any real knowledge of a
person’s disposition that Bath, or any public place, can
give—it is all nothing; there can be no knowledge.

14° suns.

It is only by seeing women in their own homes, among
their own set, just as they always are, that you can form
any just judgment. Short of that, it is all guess and
luck—and will generally be ill-luck. How many a
man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and
rued it all the rest of his life! "

Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except
among her own confederates, spoke now.

“Such things do occur, undoubtedly.” She was
stopped by a cough. Frank Churchill tnmed towards
her to listen.

“You were speaking,” id be, gravely. She re-
covered her voice.

“I was only going to observe, that though such unfortu-
nate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and
women, I cannot imagine them to be very frequent.
A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise—but
there is generally time to recover from it afterwards. I
would be understood to mean, that it can be onl weak,
irresolute characters (whose happiness must be a ways at
the mercy of chance), who will sulfer an unfortunate
vauainranee to be an inconvenience—an oppression
for ever.”

He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed
in submission ; and soon afterwards said, in a lively
tone—

“ Well, I have so little conﬁdence in my own judg-
ment, that whenever I marry, I hope somebody will
choose my wife for me? Will you?” (Iturning to Emma}.
" Will you choose a wife for me? am sure I shou d
like anybody ﬁxed on by you. You provide for the
family, you know " (with a smile at his father). “Find
somebody for me. I am in no hurry. Adopt her;
educate her.”

“ And make her like myself.”

“ By all means, if you um.”

EMMA. 14:

“ Very well. I undertake the commission. You
shall have a charming wife.”

“She mun be very lively, and have hazle eyes. I
care for nothing else. I shall go abroad for a couple of
years—and when I return, I shall come to you for my
wife. Remember."

Emma was in no danger of forgetting. It was a
commission to touch every favourite feeling. Would
not Harriet be the very creature described? Hazle
eyes exc ted, two years more mi ht make her all that
he ' . He might even have arriet in his thoughts
at the moment; who could say ? Referring the educa-
tion to her seemed to impl it.

“Now, ma’am,” said ane to her aunt, “ shall we
join Mrs Elton ? "

“If you please, my dear. With all my heart. I
am quite ready. I was ready to have gone with her,
but this will do just as well. We shall soon overtake
her. There she is—no, that’s somebody else. That’ s
one of the ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like
her. Well, I declare ”

They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr
Knightley. Mr Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet
only remained; and the young man’s spirits now rose
to a pitch almost unpleasant. Even Emma grew tired
at last of ﬂattery and merriment, and wished herself
rather walking quietly about with any of the others, or
sitting almost alone, and quite unattended w, in trsn nil
observation of the beautiful views beneath her. he
appearance of the servants looking out for them to give
notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; and even the
bustle of collecting and preparing to depart, and the
solicitude of Mrs Elton to have bar carriage ﬁrst, were
gladly endured, in the pmspect of the uiet drive home
which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of
this day of pleasure. Such another scheme, composed

n. K

 

r42 Emu.

of so many ill-assorted people, she hoped never to be
betrayed into again.

While waiting for the can-iage, she found Mr
Knighdey by her side. He looked around, as if to see
that no one were near, and then said—

“ Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have
been used to do ; a privilege rather endured than
allowed, perhaps; but I must still use it. I cannot see
you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. How could
you be so unfeeling to Mi Bates? How could you
be so insolent in your wit to a woman of her character,
age, and situation? Emma, I had not thought it
possible."

Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to
laugh it all.

“Nay, how could I help saying what I did?
Nobody could have helped it. It time not so very
bad. I dare say she did not understand me.”

“ I assure you she did. She felt your full meaning.
She has talked of it since. I wish you could have
heard how she talked of it—with what candour and
generosity. I wish you could have heard her honour-
ing your forbearance, in being able to pay her such
attentions, as she was for ever receiving from yOurself
and your father, when her society must be so irksome.”

“ Oh ! " cried Emma, “ I know there is not a better
creature in the world ; but you must allow, that what
is good and what is ridiculous are most unfortunately
blended in her.”

“They are blended,” said he, “I acknowledge;
and, were she prosperous, I could allow much for the
occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over the good.
Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every
harmless absurdity to take its chance; I would not
quarrel with you for any liberties of manner. Were she
your equal in situation— but, Emma, consider how far

EMMA. 143

this is from being the case. She is poor; she has sunk
from the comforts she was born to; and if she live to
old age must probably rink more. Her situation should
secure your companion. It was badly done, indeed!
You, whom she had known from an infant, whom she
had seen grow up from a period when her notice was
an honour—to have you now, in thoughtless spirits,
and the pride of the moment, laugh at her, humble
her—and before her niece, too—and before others,
many of whom (certainly rm) would be entirely
guided by your treatment of her. This is not pleamnt
to you, Emma—and it is very far from plamnt
to me; but I must, I will—I will tell Wu truths
while I can; satisﬁed with proving myself your friend
by very faithful counsel, and trusting that you will some
drne’or other do me greater justice than you can do
now.

While they talked they were advancing towards the
carriage; it was ready; and, before she could speak
again, he had handed her in. He had misinterpreted
the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her
tongue motionless. They were combined only of
anger against herself, mortiﬁcation, and deep concern.
She had not been able to speak; and, on entering the
carriage, sunk hack for a moment overcome; then
reproaching herself for having taken no leave, making
no acknowledgement, parting in apparent eullcnnees, she
looked out with voice and hand uger to show a differ-
ence; but it was just too late. He had turned away,
and the horses were in motion. She continued to look
back, but in vain; and soon, with what appeared
unusual speed, they were half way down the hill, and
everything left far behind. She was vexed beyond
what could have been expressed—almost beyond what
she could conceal. Never had she felt so agitated,
mortiﬁed, grieved, at any circumstance in her life.

x44 EMMA.

She was most forcibly struck. The tntth of his
representation there was no denying. She felt it at
her heart. How could the have been so bnml, so
cruel to Miss Bates! How could the have ex ted
herself to such ill opinion in any one the valitoed!
And how suffer him to leave her without saying
one word of gratitude, of concurrence, of common kind-
nest!

Time did not compose her. As the reﬂected more
she seemed but to feel it more. She never had been so
depressed. Hap ily it was not necessary to speak.
There wan only ﬁarriet, who seemed not in spirits her-
self, ﬂagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma
felt the tears mnning down her cheeks almost all the
way home, without being at any trouble to check them,
extraordinary as they were.

than": £1311.

HE wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was
in Emma’s thoughts all the evening. How it
might be considered by the rent of the party she

could not tell. They, in their different homes, and
their different ways, might be looking back on it with
pleasure; but in her View it was a morning more com-
pletely misspcnt, more totally bare of mtional satisfaction
at the time, and more to be nbhorred in recollection,
than any the had ever paused. A whole evenin of
backgammon with her father was felicity to it. Tia-e,
indeed, lay real pleasure, for there she was giving up
the sweetest haun of the twenty-four to his comfort;
and feeling that, unmerited as might be the degree of
his fond affection and confiding esteem, she could not,
in her general conduct, be open to any severe reproach.

EMMA. r4 5

As a daughter she hoped the was not without a heart.
She hoped no one could have said to her, " How could
you be so unfeeling w your father ?——I must, I will tell
you truths while I can.” Miss Bates should never
again—no never! lf attention in future could do away
the past she might hope to be forgiven. She had been
often remiss, her conscience told her so; remiss, per-
haps, more in thought than fact; scoruful, ungracious.
But it should be so no more. In the warmth of true
contrition she would call upon her the very next mom-
ing, and it should he the beginning, on her side, of a
regular, equal, kindly intercourse.

She was just as detemiined when the marrow came
and went early, that nothing might revent her. It was
not unlikely, she thought, that she might see Mr Knight-
ley in her way; or perhaps he might come in while
she were paying her visit. She had no objection. She
would not be ashamed of the appearance of the peni-
tence, so justly and truly hers. Her eyes were towards
Donwell as she walked, but she saw him not.

“The ladies were all at home.” She had never
rejoiced at the sound before, nor ever before entered
the passage, nor walked up the stairs, with any wish of
giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of deriv-
ing it, except in subsequent ridicule.

There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of
moving and talking. She hard Miss Bates’s voice ;
something was to be done in a. hurry; the maid looked
frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased
to wait a moment, and then ushered her in too soon.
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the ad-
‘oining room. Jane she had a distinct glimpse of,
looking extremely ill; and, before the door had shut
them out, she heard Miss Bates saying, “ Well, my
dear, I shall my you are laid down upon the bed, and I
am sure you are ill enough.”

146 EMMA.

Poor old Mrs Batu, civil and humble as usual, looked
as if she did not quite understand what was going
on.

“ I am afraid Jane is not very well,” said the, “but
I do not know; they kl! me she is well. I dare y
my daughter will be here presently, Min Woodhouse.
I hope you ﬁnd a chair. I wish Hetty had not gone.
I am very little able—have you a chair, ma’am? Do
you sit where you like? I am sure she will be here
presently."

Emma seriously hoped she would. She had a
moment’s fear of Miss Bates keeping away from her.
But Miss Bates soon came—“ Very happy and 0in ”
——but Emma’s conscience told her that there was not
the same cheerful volubility as before—less ease of look
and manner. A very friendly inquiry after Miss
Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to a return of
old feelings. The touch seemed immediate.

“ Ah, Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are! I
suppose you have heard—and are come to give us joy.
This does not seem much like joy, indeed, in me”
(twinkling away a tear or two) ; “but it will be very
trying for us to part with her, after having had her so
long; and she has a dreadful headach jun now, writing
all the morning; such long letters, you know, to be
written to Colonel Campbell and Mrs Dixon. ‘ My
dear,’ said I, ‘ you will blind yourself,’ for tears were in
her eyes perpetually. One cannot wonder, one cannot
wonder. It is a great change ; and though she is
amazingly fortunate,—such a situation, I suppose, as no
young woman before ever met with on ﬁrst going out;
do not think us ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such
surprising good fortune ” (again dispersing her tears)—
“ but, poor dear soul ! if you were to see what a headach
she has. When one is in great pain, you know one
cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve. She

sun. :47

is as low as possible. To look at her nobody would
think how delighted and happy she is to have secured
such a situation. You will excuse her not coming to
you; she is not able, she is gone into her own room.
I want her to lie down upon the bed. ‘My dear,’
said I, ‘ I shall say you are laid down upon the bed ; ’
but, however, she is not ; she is walking about the room.
But, now that she has written her letters, she ys she
shall soon be well. She will be extremely sorry to
miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness
will excuse her. You were kept waiting at the door :
I was quite ashamed; but somehow there was a little
bustle; for it so happened that we had not heard the
knock; and, till you were on the stairs, we did not
know anybody was coming. ‘It is only Mrs Cole,’
said I, ‘ depend upon it; nobody else would come so
early.’—-‘ Well,’ said she, ‘it must be borne some time
or other, and it may as well be now.’ But then Patty
came in, and said it was you. ‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is
Miss Woodhouse, I am sure you will like to see her ’——‘ I
can see nobody,’ said she, and up she got, and would go
away; and that was what made us keep you waiting;
and extremely sorry and ashamed we were. ‘ If you
must go, my dear,’ said I, ‘ you must, and I will say
you are laid down upon the bed.’ ”

Emma was most sincerely interested. Her heart had
been long growing kinder towards Jane; and this pic-
ture of her present sufferings acted as a cure of every
former ungencrous suspicion, and left her nothing but
pity; and the remembrance of the less and less
gentle sensations of the past obliged her to admit that
Jane might very naturally resolve on seeing Mrs Cole,
or any other steady friend, when she might not bear in
see herself. She spoke as she felt, with earnest regret
and solicitude; sincerely wishing that the circumstances
which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually

148 EMMA.

determined on might be as much for Miss Fairfax’s
advantage and comfort as possible.

“ It must be a severe trial to them all. She had un-
derstood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell’s
return.”

“ So very kind! ” replied Miss Bates; “ but you are
always kind.”

There was no hearing such an “always,” and to
break through her dreadful gratitude Emma made the
direct inquiry of—

“Where, may I ask, is Miss Fairfax going ?”

“To a Mrs Smallridge——charming woman—most
superior—to have the charge of her three little girls—
delightful children! Impossible that any situation
could be more replete with comfort: if we exce
perhaps, Mrs Suckling’s own family, and Mrs Bragge s;
but Mrs Smallritlgu is intimate with both, and in the
very same neighbourhood; lives only four miles from
Maple Grove. Jane will be only four miles from
Maple Grove.”

“ Mrs Elton, X suppose, has been the person to whom
Miss Fairfax owes—”

“ Yes, our good Mrs Elton. The most indefatigable,
true friend. She would not take a denial. She would
not let Jane say, ‘ No;’ for when Jane ﬁrst heard of
it (it was the day before yesterday, the very morning
we were at Donwell), when Jane ﬁrst heard of it, she
was quite decided against accepting the offer, and for
the reasons you mention; exactly as you say, she had
made u her mind to close with nothing till Colonel
Campbel’s return, and nothing should induce her to
enter into any engagement at present—and so she told
Mrs Elton over and over again—and I am sure I had
no more ideas that she would change her mind ;—but
that good Mrs Elton, whose judgement never fails her,
saw farther than I did. It is not everybody that would

EMMA. 149

have stood out in such a kind way as she did, and re-
fuse to rake Jane’s answer; but she positively declared
she would not write any such denial yesterday, as Jane
wished her; she would wait—and, sure enough, yester-
day evening, it was all settled that Jane should go.
Quite a surprise to me! I had not the least idea!—
Jane took Mrs Elton aside, and told her at once, that,
upon thinkingover the advantages of Mrs [Smallbridge’s]
situation, she had come to the resolution of accepting it.
I did not know a word of it till it was all settled.”

“ You spent the evening with Mrs Elton ?”

“Yes, all of us; Mrs Elton would have us come.
It was settled so, upon the hill, while we were walking
about with Mr Knightley. ‘ You mull all spend your
evening with us,’ said she—‘ I positively must have you
all come.’ ”

“ Mr Knightley was there too, was he .’ "

“ No, not Mr Knightley; he declined it from the
ﬁrst; and though I thought he would come, because
Mn Elton declared she would not let him off, he did
not; but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there,
and a very agreeable evening we had. Such kind
friends, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one must always
ﬁnd agreeable, though everybody seemed rather faggcd
aﬁer the morning’s party. Even pleasure, you know, is
fatiguing—and I cannot say that any of them seemed
very much to have enjoyed it. However, I shall
always think it a very pleasant party, and fch ex-
tremely obliged to the kind friends who included me
in it.”

“ Miss Fairfax, I mppose, though you were not
aware of it, had been making up her mind the whole
day 2 n

“ I dare say she had.”

“ Whenever the time may come it must be unwelcome
to her and all her friends—but I hope her engagement

150 nuns.

will have every alleviation that is possible—I mean, as
to the character and manners of the family."

“ Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. Yes, indeed,
there is everything in the world that can make her
happy in it. Except the Sucklings and Bragges, there
is not such another nursery establishment1 so liberal and
elegant, in all Mrs Elton’s acquaintance. Mrs Small-
ridge, a most delightful woman! A style of living
almost equal to Maple Grove—and as to the children,
except the little Suckling: and little Bragges, there
are not such elegant sweet children anywhere. Jane
will be trusted with such regard and kindness! It
will be nothing but pleasure—a life of pleasure. And
her salary—I really cannot venture to name her salary
to you, Miss Woodhouse. Even you, used as you are
to great sums, would hardly believe that so much could
be given to a young person like Jane."

“ Ah, madam,” cried Emma, “ if other children are
at all like what I remember to have been myself, I
should think ﬁve times the amount of what I have ever
yet heard named as a salary on such occasions darly
earned.”

“ You are so noble in your ideas.”

“ And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you 3 "

“ Very soon, very soon, indeed ; that ’I the worst of
it. Within a fortnight. Mrs Smallridge is in a great
hurry. My poor mother does not know how to bear it.
So, then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and say,
‘ Come, ma’am, do not let us think about it any more.’ ”

“Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will
not Colonel and Mrs Campbell be sorry to ﬁnd that
she has engaged herself before their return ?”

“Yes ; Jane says she is sure they will ; but yet this
is such a situation as she cannot feel herself justiﬁed in
declining. I was so astonished when she ﬁrst told me
what she had been saying to Mrs Elton, and when Mrs

zmu. 15:

Elton at the same moment tame congratulating me
upon it. It was before oea—atay—no, it could not be
before tea, because we were just going to card: — and
yet it was before tea, because I remember thinking—
oh, no, now I recollect, now I have it: something hap-
pened before tea, but not that. Mr Elton was called
out of the room before tea, old John Abdy’a eon wanted
to speak with him. Poor old John—I have a great
regard for him; he was clerk to my poor father twenty-
seven years ; and, now, poor old man, he is bedridden,
and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints-—
I mun go and see him to-day ; and no will Jane, I am
rure,if she gets out at all. And poor John’s eon came to
talk to Mr Elton about relief from the parish : he is
very well-to-do himself, you know, being head man at
the Crown—caller, and everything of that sort—but
still he cannot keep his father without some help ; and
so, when Mr Elton came back, he told us what John
onler had been telling him, and then it came out about
the ch having been sent to Randall: to take Mr Frank
Churc to Richmond. That was what happened be-
fore tea. It was after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs
Elton.”

Mina Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how
perfectly new this circumstance was to her ; but as with-
out on posing it possible that she could be ignorant of
any 0 the rticularn of Mr Frank Churchill’s going,
ahe r ed to give them all, it was of no consequence.

hat Mr Elton had learned from the ootler on the
subject, being the accumulation of the oetler’a own
knowledge, and the knowledge of the uervanta at Ran-
dalla, was, that a messenger had come over from Rich-
mond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill—
which memenger, however, had been no more than was
ex mud; and that Mr Churchill had sent his nephew
a flew lines containing, upon the whole, a tolerable ac-

152 emu.

count of Mrs Churchill, and only wishing him not to
delay coming back beyond the next morning early ; but
that Mr Frank Churchill having resolved to go home
directly, without waiting at all, and his horse seeming to
have got a cold, Tom had been sent of immediately for
the Crown chaise, and the Mer had stood out and seen
it pass by, the boy going a good pace, and driving very

There was nothing in all this either to astonish or
interest, and it caught Emma’s attention only as it united
with the subject which already engaged her mind. The
contrast between Mrs Churchill's importance in the
world and Jane Fairfax's struck her; one was every-
thing, the other nothing—and she sat musing on the
difference of woman’s destiny, and quite unconscious on
what her eyes were ﬁxed, till roused by Miss Bates
saying—

“ Ay, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte.
What is to become of that? Very true. Poor dear Jane
was talking of it just now. ‘You must go,’ said she.
‘You and I must part. You will have no business here.
Let it stay, however,’ said she; ‘ give it house-mom
till Colonel Campbell comes back. I shall talk about it
to him ; he will settle for me ; he will help me out of
all my diﬂiculties.’ And to this day, I do believe, she
knows not whether it was his present or his daughter’s.”

Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte ;
and the remembrance of all her former Fanciful and un-
fair conjectures was so little pleasing that she soon
allowed herself to believe her visit had been long enough ;
and, with a repetition of everything that she could ven-
lture to say of the good wishes which she really felt, took
cave. '

EMMA. 153

Clima- #117.

MMA’S pensive meditations, as she walked home,
were not interrupted; but on entering the par-
lour, she found those who must rouse her. Mr

Knightley and Harriet had arrived durin her absence,
and were sitting with her father. r Knightley
immediately got up, and, in a manner decidedly gnver
than usual, said—

“I would not go away without seeing you, but I
have no time to spare, and therefore must now be gone
directly. I am going to London, to spend a few days
with John and Isabella. Have you anything to send or
say, besides the ‘love,’ which nobody carries ? "

“ Nothing at all. But is not this a sudden
scheme 2 "

“Yes—rather—I have been thinking of it some little
time.”

Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked
unlike himself. Time, however, she thought, would
tell him that they ought to be friends again. While he
stood, as if meaning to go, but not going—her father
began his inquiries.

“Well, my dear, and did you get there safely ?—
And how did you ﬁnd my worthy old friend and her
daughter ?—I dare say they must have been very much
obliged to you for coming. Dear Emma has been to
call on Mrs and Miss Bates, Mr Knightley, as I told
you before. She is always so attentive to them.”

Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise;
and with a smile and shake of the head, which spoke
much, she looked at Mr Knightley. It seemed as if
there were an instantaneous impression in her favour, as
if his eyes received the tmth from hers, and all that had
passed of good in her feelings were at once mught and

154 EMMA.

honoured. He looked at her with a glow of regard.
She was warmly gratiﬁed—and in another moment still
more so, by a little movement of more than common
friendliness on his rt. He took her hand ;—whether
she had not herscl made the ﬁrst motion, she could not
say—she might, perhaps, have rather offered it—but he
took her hand, pressed it, and certainly was on the
point of carrying it to his lips—when, from some fancy
or other, he suddenly let it go. Why he should feel
such a scruple, why he should change his mind when it
was all but done, she could not rceive. He would
have judged better, she thought, ' he had not stopped.
The intention, however, was indubitable; and whether
it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry,
or however else it happened, but she thought nothing
became him more. It was with him of so simple, yet
so digniﬁed a nature. She could not but recall the
attempt with great satisfaction. It spake such perfect
amity. He left them immediately afterwards—gone in
a moment. He always moved with the alertness of a
mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory,
but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his
disappearance.

Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss
Bates, but she wished she had left her ten minutes
earlier ;—it would have been a great leasure to talk
over Jane Fairfax’s situation with r Knightley.
Neither would she regret that he should be going to
Brunswick Square, for she knew how much his visit
would be enjoyed—but it might have happened at a
better time—and to have had longer notice of it would
have been pleasanter. They parted thorough friends,
however; she could not be deceived as to the meaning
of his countenance, and his unﬁnished allantry ;—it was
all done to assure her that she had {ﬁlly recovered his
good opinion. He had been sitting with them half an

EMMA. r55

hour, she found. It was a pity that she had not come
back earlier.

In the hope of diverting her father’s thoughts from
the disagreeableness of Mr Knightley’s going to London,
and going so suddenly, and going on horseback, which
she knew would be all very bad, Emma communicated
her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the
effect was juniiied; it supplied a ve useful check—
interested, without disturbing him. 13; had long made
up his mind to Jane Fairfax’s going out as governess,
and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr Knightley’s
going to London had been an unexpected blow.

“ I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to
be so comfortably settled. Mrs Elton is very good-
naturcd and agreeable, and I dare my her acquaintance
are what they ought to be. I hope it is a dry
situation, and that her health will be taken good care of.
It ought to be a ﬁrst object, as I am sure poor Miss
Taylor's always was with me. You know, my dear,
she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
was to us. And I hope she will be better off in one
respect, and not be indnCed to go away after it has been
her home so long.”

The following day brought news from Richmond to
throw everything else into the background. An ex-
press arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs
Churchill. Though her nephew had had no particular
reason to hasten back on her account, she had not lived
above six~and-thirty hours after his return. A sudden
seizure, of a different nature from anything foreboded
by her general state, had carried her off after a short
struggle. The great Mrs Churchill was no more.

It was felt as such things must be felt. Everybody
had a degree of gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards
the departed, solicitudc for the surviving friends; and,
in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where she would

r 56 EMMA.

be buried. Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman
stoops to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and
when she Maps to be dingreeable, it is equally to be
recommended as a clearer of ill-fame. Mrs Churchill,
after being disliked at least twenty-live years, was now

ken of with compassionate allowances. In one point
:li: was fully justiﬁed. She had never been admitted
before to be seriously ill. The event acquitted her of
all the fanciﬁslness, and all the selﬁshness of imaginary
complaints.

“Poor Mrs Churchill! no doubt she had been
suffering a great deal: more than anybody had ever
supposed—and continual pain would try the temper.
It was a sad event—a great shock—with all her faults,
what would Mr Churchill do without her? Mr
Churchill’s loss would be dreadﬁil, indeed. Mr Churchill
would never get over it.” Even Mr Weston shook
his head, and looked solemn, and said, “Ah, poor
woman, who would have thought it! ” and resolved
that his mourning should be as handsome as possible;
and his wife sat sighing and moralizing over her broad
hems with a commiseration and good sense true and
steady. How it would aﬁect Frank, was among the
earliest thoughts of both. It was also a very early
s ulation with Emma. The character of Mrs

hurchill, the grief of her husband—her mind glanced
over them both with awe and compassion—and then
rested with lightened feelings on how Frank might be
alfected by the event, how beneﬁted, how freed. She
saw in a moment all the possible good. Now an
attachment to Han'iet Smith would have nothing to
encounter. Mr Churchill, independent of his wife, was
feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be
persuaded into anything by his nephew. All that
remained to he wished was that the nephew should foms
the attachment, as, with all her good-will in the cause,

EMMA r 57

Emma could feel no certainty of its being already
formed.

Harriet behaved extreme] well on the occasion—
with great self-command. hatever she might feel of
brighter hope she betrayed nothing. Emma was gratiﬁed
to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character,
and refrained from any allusion that mi ht endanger its
maintenance. They spoke, therefore, of gin Churchill’s
death with mutual forbmlance.

Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls,
communicating all that was immediately important of
their state and plans. Mr Churchill was better than
could be expected; and their ﬁrst removal, on due
departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the
house of a very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr
Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years.
At resent, there was nothing to be done for Harriet;
good wishes for the future were all that could yet be
possible on Emma’s side.

It was a more pressing concern to show attention to
Jane Fairfax, whose prospects were closing while
Harriet's opened, and whose engagements now allowed
of no delay in any one at Highbury who wished to
show her kindness—4nd with Emma it was grown into
a ﬁrst wish. She had scarcely a stronger regret than
for her pan coldness; and the person, whom she had
been so many months neglecting, was now the very one
on whom she would have lavished every distinction of
regard or sympathy. She wanted to be of use to her;
wanted to show a value for her society, and testify
respect and consideration. She resolved to prevail on
her to spend a day at Hartﬁeld. A note was written
to urge it. The invitation was refused, and by a verbal
use-age. “Miss Fairfax was not well enou h to
write;” and when Mr Perry called at Hartﬁel , the
same morning, it appeared that she was so much in-

“. L

r 58 EMMA.

disposed as to have been visited, though against her
own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering
under severe headachs, and a nervous fever to a degree
which made him doubt the possibility of her going to
Mrs Smallridge's at the time proposed. Her health
seemed for the moment completely deranged—appetite
quite gone ; and though there were no absolutely alarming
symptoms, nothing touching the pulmonary complaint
which was the standing apprehension of the family, Mr
Perry was uneasy about her. He thought she had
undertaken more than she was ual to, and that she
felt it so herself, though she wo d not own it. Her
spirits seemed overcome. Her present home, he could
not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous disorder;
—conﬁned always to one room ;—he could have wished
it otherwise ;—and her good aunt, though his very old
friend, he must acknowledge to he not the best com-
panion for an invalid of that description. Her care
and attention could not be questioned; they were, in
fact, only too great. He very much feared that Miss
Fairfax derived more evil than good from them. Emma
listened with the warmest concern; grieved for her
more and more, and looked around eager to discover
some way of being useful. To take her—be it only
an hour or two—from her aunt, to give her change of
air and scene, and quiet, rational conversation, even for
an hour or_ two, might do her good; and the following
morning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling
language she could command, that she would call for
her in the mrriage at any hour that Jane would name—
mentioning that the had Mr Perry’s decided opinion
in favour of such exercise for his patient. The answer
was only in this short note :—

“ Miss Fairﬁx's compliments and thanks, but is quite
unequal to any exercise."

Emma felt that her own note had deserved something

EMMA. 159

better; but it was impossible to quarrel with words, whose
tremulous inequality showed indisposition so plainly, and
she thought only of how she might best counteract this
unwillingness to be seen or assisted. In spite of the
answer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove
to Mrs Bates's, in the hope that Jane would be induced
to join her—hut it would not do ;—Miss Babes came
to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeing with
her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of
the greatest service—and everything that message could
do was tried—but all in vain. Miss Bates was obliged
to return withontfsuccess; Jane was quite unpel‘luadable;
the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her
worse. Emma wished she could have seen her, and
tried her own powers; but, almost before she could
hint the wish, Miss Bates made it a r that she had

romised her niece on no account to let ' Woodhouse
In. “ Indeed, the tmth was, that poor dear Jane could
not bear to see anybody—anybody at all—Mrs Elton,
indeed, could not be denied—and Mrs Cole had made
such a point—and Mrs Perry had said so much—but,
except them, Jane would really see nobody.”

Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs
Eltons, the Mrs Perrys, and the Mrs Coles, who would
force themselves anywhere; neither could she feel any
right of preference herself—she submitted, therefore,
and only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece's
a petite and diet, which she longed to be able to assist.

n that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy, and
very communicative; Jane would hardly eat anything.
Mr Perry recommended nourishing food; but every-
thing Lhe could command (and never had anybody
such neighbours) was distasteful.

Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper
directly to an examination of her stores; and some
an'owroot of very superior quality was speedily de-

160 EMMA.

spatched to Miss Bates, with a most friendly note. In
half an hour the arrowroot was returned, with a thousand
thanks from Miss Bates, but “ dear Jane would not be
satisﬁed without its being sent back; it was a thing she
could not take—and, moreover, she insisted on her
saying that the was not at all in want of anything.”

When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had
been seen wandering about the meadows, at some dis.
tance from Highbury, on the afternoon of the very day
on which she had, under the plea of being unequal to
any exercise, so peremptorin refused to go out with her
in the carriage, she could have no doubt—putting every-
thing together—that Jane was resolved to receive no
kindness from bar. She was sorry, very sorry. Her
heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more
pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirits, inconsist-
ency of action, and inequality of powers; and it morti-
ﬁed her that she was given so little credit for roper
feeling, or esteemed so livale worthy as a fries : but
she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions
were good, and of being able to say to herself, that
could Mr Knightley have been privy to all her attempts
of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seen into
her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found
anything to rcprovc.

Cbsvttt #117}.

NE morning, about ten days after Mrs Churchill’s
deeease, Emma was tailed downstairs to Mr
Weston, who “ could not nay ﬁve minutes. and

wanted particularly to speak with her." He met her
at the parlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did,
in the natural key of his voice, sunk it immediately, to
say, unheard by her father—

EMMA. 161

“Can you come to Randalls at any time this morn-
ing? Do, if it be possible. Mrs Weston wants to see
you. She must see you."

“ Is she unwell ?”

“No, no; not at all; only a little agitated. She
would have ordered the carriage and come to you, but
she must see you alone, and that you know" (nodding
towards her father) “-—I'Iurnph ! can you come i ”

“ Certainly. This moment, if you please. It is
impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way, but
what can be the matter? is she really not ill 2”

“ Depend upon me ; but. ask no more questions. You
will know it all in time. The most unaccountable
business! But hush, hush! ”

To guess what all this meant was impossible even for
Emma. Something really important seemed announced
by his looks; but, as her friend was well, she end—
voured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father,
that. she would take her walk now, she and Mr Weston
were soon out of the house together, and on their way
at a uick pace for Randalls.

“ ow,’ said Emma, when they were fairly beyond
the sweep gates—1‘ now, Mr Weston, do let me know
what has happened.”

“ No, no,” he gravel replied. “ Don’t ask me.
I promised my wife to eave it all to her. She will
break it to you better than I can. Do not be impatient,
Emma ; it will all come out too soon.”

“ Break it to me! " cried Emma, standing still with
terror. “ Good God! Mr Weston, tell me at once.
Something has ha pened in Brunswick Square. I
know it has. Te l me, I charge you, tell me this
moment what it is.

“ No, indeed, you are mistaken."

“ Mr Weston, do not triﬂe with me. Consider how
many of my dearest friends are now in Bnmswick

162 EMMA.

Square. Which of them is it? I charge you by all
that in sacred not to attempt concealment.”

“Upon my word, Emma ”

“Your word! why not your honour! why not say
upon your honour, that it has nothing to do with any of
them? Good heavens! What an be to be brat: to
me, that does [not] relate to one of that family 9 ”

“ Upon my honour," said he very aeriously, “it does
not. It is not in the smallest degree connected with
any human being of the name of Knightley.”

‘ Emma’s courage mumed. and she walked on.

“I was wrong,” he continued, " in talking of its
being brat: to you. I should not have used the expres-
sion. In fact, it does not concern you, it concern only
myself ;—that is, we hope. Humphl—In short, my
dear Emma, there is no occasion to be no uneany about
it. I don’t say that it is not a disagreeable business,
but things might be much worse. If we walk fast, we
shall soon be at Randalls.”

Emma found that the must wait; and now it required
little effort. She asked no more questions therefore,
merely employed her own fancy, and that soon pointed
out to her the probability of its being some money can-
cem—something just come to light, of a disagreeable
nature, in the circumstances of the family; something
which the late event at Richmond had brought forward.
Her fancy was very active. Half a dozen natural
children, perha ,and nor Frank cut of! This, though
very undesirab e, we d be no matter of agony to her.
It In ired little more than an animating curiosity.

“ ho is that gentleman on horseback?" said she,
as they proceeded; speaking more to assist Mr Weston
in keeping his secret than with an other view.

“ I do not know. One of the tways —-Not Frank:
it is not Frank, I assure you. You will not see him.
He is half way to Windsor by this time.”

 

mass. 163

“ Has your son been with you, then ? "

“ Oh! yes, did not you know? Well, well, never
mind.”

For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a
tone much more guarded and demure——

“ Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us
how we did."

They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.
“Well, my dear," said he, as they entered the room,
“ I have brought her, and now I hope on will soon be
better. I shall leave you together. here is no use in
delay. I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And
Emma disﬁnctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before
he quitted the room—“ I have been as good as my word.
She has not the least idea.”

Mrs Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of
so much perturbation, that Emma’s uneasiness in-
creased : and the moment they were alone, she eagerly
said——

“ What is it, my dear friend? Something of a very
unpleasant nature, I find, has occurred ;—do let me
know directly what it is. I have been walking all this
way in complete suspense. We both abhor suspense.
Do not let mine conﬁnue longer. It will do you good
to speak of your distress, whatever it may be.”

“Have you, indeed, no idea?” said Mrs Weston
in a trembling voice. “ Cannot you, my dear Emma
—cannot you form a guess as to what you are to
hear ? ”

" So far as that it relates to Mr Frank Churchill, I
do guess.”

“You are right. It does relate to him, and I will
tell you directly;” (resuming her work, and seeming
resolved against looking up.) “ He has been here, this
very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. It is
impossible to express our surprise. He came to speak

164 EMMA.

to his father on a subject—40 announce an attach-
mam—n

She stopped to breathe. Emma thought ﬁrst of
herself, and then of Harriet.

“More than an attachment, indeed,” resumed Mrs
Weston : “ an engagement—a positive engagement.
What will you say, Emma—what will anybody say—
when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fair-
fax are engaged—nay, that they have been long
engaged 2"

Emma even jumped with lurprise; and, horror-struck,
exclaimed—

“Jane Fairfax! Good God! You are not serious?
You do not mean it ? ”

“ You may well be amazed,” returned Mrs Weston,
still averting her eyes, and talking on with eagerness,
that Emma might have time to recover—“ you may well
be amazed. But it is even so. There has been a
solemn engagement between them ever since October—
formed at Weymouth, and kept a secret from every-
body. Not a creature knowing it but themselves—
neither the Campbells, nor her ﬁlmily, nor his. It is so
wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact,
it is yet almost incredible to myself. I can hardly be-
lieve it. I thought I knew him.”

Emma scarcely heard what was said. Her mind was
divided between two ideas; her own former conversa-
tions with him about Miss Fairfax, and poor Harriet;
and for some time she could only exclaim, and require
continuation, ated conﬁrmation.

“Vl’ell! ” Bald she at last, 1 ing to recover herself,
“ this is a circumstance which ‘lymust think of at least
half a day before I can at all comprehend it. What!
—engaged to her all the winter—before either of them
came to Highbury?”

“ Engaged since October—secretly engaged. It has ‘

EMMA. x65

hurt me, Emma, very much. It has hurt his father
ually. Some part of his conduct we cannot excuse.”

Emma pondered a moment, and then replied :—“I
will not pretend no! to understand you; and to give an
all the relief in my power, be assured that no such e t
has followed his attentions to me as you are apprehen-
sive of."

Mn Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but
Emma’s countenance was as steady as her words.

“ T hat you may have less diﬁiculty in believing this
boast of my present perfect indifference," she continued,
“ I will farther tell you, that there was a period in the
early part of our acquaintance when I did like him—
when I was very much disposed to be attached to him;
nay, was anaehed—and how it came to cease is perhaps
the wonder. Fortunately, however, it did case. I
have really for some time past—for at last these three
months—cared nothing about him. You may believe
me, Mrs Weston. This is the simple truth.”

Mrs Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when
she could ﬁnd utterance, assured her that this protesta-
tion had done her more good than anything else in the
world could do.

“Mr Weston will be almost as much relieved as
myself,” said she. “ On this point we have been
wretched. It was our darling wish that you might be
attached to each other, and we were persuaded that it
was so. Imagine what we have been feeling on your
account."

“I have escaped; and that I should esca e maybea
matter of grateful wonder to you and myse . But this
does not acquit bim, Mrs Weston ; and I must say that
I think him greatly to blame. What right had he to
come among us with affection and faith engaged, and
with manners so very disengaged? What right had he
to endeavour to please, as he certainly did—to distinguish

J

166 EMMA.

any one young woman with persevering attention, as he
certainly did, while he really belonged to another ? How
could he tell what mischief he might be doing! How
could he tell that he might not be making me in love
with him? Very wrong, very wrong. indt ."

“From something that he said, my dear Emma, I
rather imagine——”

“ And how could it: bear such behaviour? Com-
posure with a witness! to look on, while repeated
attentions were offering to another woman before her
face, and not resent it. That is a degree of placidity
which I can neither comprehend nor respect.”

“There were misunderstandings between them,
Emma; he said so expressly. He had not time to
enter into much explanation. He was here only a
quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did
not allow the full use even of the time he could stay—
but that there had been misunderstandings, he decidedly
said. The present crisis, indeed, seemed to be brought
on by them; and those misunderstandings might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct.”

“Impropriety! Oh! Mrs Weston, it is too calm a
censure. Much, much beyond impropriety! It has
sunk him—I cannot say how it has sunk him in my
opinion. So unlike what a man should be! None of
that upright integrity, that strict adherence to truth
and principle, that disdain of trick and littleness, which
Inif man should display in every transaction of his

e."

“ Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for
though he has been wrong in this instance, I have
known him long enough to answer for his having many,
very many good qualities; and ”

“ Good God! ” cried Emma, not attending to her,
“ Mrs Smallridge, too! Jane actually on the int of
going as governess! What could he mean B; such

 

EMMA. r67

horrible indelicacy? To suffer her to enyge herself—
to suffer her even to think of such a measure! ”

“ He knew nothing about it, Emma. On this
article I can fully acquit him. It was a private resolu-
tion of hers, not communicated to him, or at least not
communicated in a wa to carry conviction. Till
yesterda , I know, he said he was in the dark as to her
plans. hey burst on him, I do not know how, but by
some letter or message—and it was the discovery of
what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which
determined him to come forward at once, own it all to
his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short,
put an end to the miserable state of concealment that
had been carrying on so long."

Emma began to listen better.

“ I am to hear from him soon,” continued Mrs
Weston. “ He told me at parting that he should soon
write; and :he spoke in a manner which seemed to
promise me many particulars that could not be given
now. Let us wait, therefore, for this letter. It may
bring many extenuations. It may make many things
intelligible and excumble which now are not to be un-
derstood. Don’t let us be severe; don’t let us be in a
hurry to condemn him. Let us have patience. I must
love him; and now that I am satisﬁed on one point,
the one material point, I am sincerely anxious for in all
turning out well, and ready to hope that it may. They
must both have suffered a great deal under such a system
of secrecy and concealment.”

“ Hi: sulferings," replied Emma, dryly, “ do not
appear to have done him much harm. Well, and how
did Mr Churchill take it?”

" Most favourably for his nephew—gave his consent
with scarcely a difﬁculty. Conceive what the events of
a week have done in that family! While poor Mrs
Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have been a

168 EMMA.

hope, a chance, I possibility; but Icarcely are her
remains at rest in the family vault, than her husband is

rsuaded to not exactly opposite to what she would
hive required. What a blessing it is, when undue in-
ﬂuence does not survive the gave! He gave his con-
tent with very little persuasion.”

“Ah!” thought Emma, “ he would have done as
much for Han-iet.”

“ This was settled laet night, and Frank was of? with
the light this morning. He stopped at Highbury, at
the Batee’s, I fancy, some time, and then came on
hither; but was in such a hurry to get back to his
uncle, to whom he is just now more necessary than ever,
that, as I tell you, he could stay with us but a quarter
of an hour. He was very much agitated—very much
indeed—to a degree that made him appear quite a
different creature from anything I had ever seen him
before. In addition to all the rest, there had been the
shock of ﬁnding her so very unwell, which he had had
no previous suspicion of, and there was every appaiance
of his having been feeling a great deal."

“And do you really believe the aﬁ'air to have been
car 'ng on with such perfect secrecy? The Campbelll,
therBixone—did none of them know of the engage-
merit?”

Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without
a little blush.

“ None; not one. He positively said that it had
been known to no being in the world but their two
selves."

“ Well," said Emma, “ I suppose we shall gradually
grow reconciled to the idea, and I wish them very
happy. But I shall always think it a very abominable
tort of proceeding. What has it been but a system of
hypocrisy and deceit, espionage and treachery? To
come among us with professions of openness and

man. 169

simplicity; and such a league in secret to judge us all!
Here have we been the whole winter and lpring, com-
pletely duped, faneying ourselves all on an equal footing
of truth and honour, with two people in the midat of on
who may have been carrying round, comparing and
sitting in judgment on eentimenra and words that were
never meant for both to hear. They must take the
consequence, if they have heard each other spoken of in
a wa not perfectly agreeable.”

“i am quite easy on that head,” replied Mr:
Weston. “ I am very sure that I never mid anything
of either to the other which both might not have heard.”

“ You are in luck. Your only blunder was conﬁned
to my ear, when you imagined a certain friend of ours
in love with the lady.”

“ True. But an I have always had a thoroughly
good opinion of Mine Fairfax, I never could, under an
blunder, have spoken ill of her; and as to speaking '
of him, there I must have been safe.”

At this moment Mr Weston appeared at a little dis-
tance from the window, evidently ou the watch. His
wife gave him a look which invited him in g and, while
he was coming round, added—

" Now, dearest Emma, let me entreat you to say and
look everything that may set his heart at ease, and in-
cline him to be satisﬁed with the match. Let ua make
the beat of it——and, indeed, almost everything may be
fairly aid in her favour. It in not a connexion to
gratify ; but if Mr Churchill does not feel that, why
should we? and it may be a very fortunate circumstance
for him—for Frank, I mean—that he should have
attached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character
and good jud men! as I have always given her credit for,
and still am girpoaed to give her credit for, in spite of thin
one great deviation from the strict rule of right. And
how much may be said, in her situation, for even that
error! "

17o nus“.

“ Much, indeed!" cried Emma, feelingly. “If a
woman can'ever be excused for thinking only of herself,
it is in a situation like Jane Fairfax’s. 0f arch, one
may always say, that ‘ the world is not theirs, nor the
world’s law.’ ”

She met Mr Weston on his entrance with a smiling
countenance, exclaiming—

“A very retty trick you have been playing me, upon-
my word! EThis was a device, I suppose, to sport with
my curiositfy, and exercise my talent of guessing. But
you really tightened me. I thought you had ost half
your property, at least. And here, instead of its being
a matter of condolence, it turns out to be one of con-
gratulation. I congratulate you, Mr Weston, with all

,me heart, on the prospect of having one of the moot
L. .5, lovley and accomplished young women in England for
A your daughter.”

A glance or two between him and his wife convinced
him that all was as right as this speech proclaimed ; and
it: happy effect on his spirits was immediate. His air
and voice recovered their unual briskness ; he shook her
heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the
ruhject in a manner to prove that he now only wanted
time and persuasion to think the engagement no very
bad thing. His companions suggested only what could
palliate imprudence or smooth objections; and by the
time they had talked it all over together, and he had
talked it all over again with Emma, in their walk back
to Hartlield, he was become perfectly reconciled, and
not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank
could possibly have done.

starts. 171

Cheats: ﬁl'H‘J].

“ ARRIET, poor Harriet! ”—Those were the
words; in them lay the tormenting ideas
which Emma could not get rid of, and which

constituted the.real misery of the business to her.

Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself—very

ill in many ways—hut it was not so much In} behaviour

as her own which made her so angry with him. It

was the scrape which he had drawn her into 0n

Harrict’s account, that gave the deepest hue to his

oﬂ'encc.—Poor Harriet! to be a second time the dupe

of her misconceptions and ﬂattery. Mr Knightley had
spoken prophetically, when he once said, " Emma, you
have been no friend to Harriet Smith.”—She was
afraid she had done her nothing but disservice—It
was true that she had not to charge herself in this
insmnce, as in the former, with being the sole and
original author of the mischief: with having suggested
such feelings as might otherwise never have entered
Harriet’s imagination; for Harriet had acknowledged
her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before
she had ever given her a hint on the subject; but she felt
completely guilty of having encouraged what she might
have repressed. She might have prevented the indul-
gence and increase of such sentiments. Her inﬂuence
would have been enough. And now she was very
conscious that she ought to have prevented them—She
felt that she had been risking her friend’s happiness on
most insutiicient grounds. Common sense would have
directed her to tell Harriet that she must not allow
herself to think of him, and that there were ﬁve hun-
dred chances to one against his ever caring for her.—

“ But with common sense," she added, “ I am afraid I

have had little to do.”

x72 EMMA.

She was extremely angry with herself. If she could
not have been angry with Frank Churchill too, it would
have been dreadful. As for Jane Fairfax, she might
at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude
on her account. Harriet would be anxiety enough;
she need no longer be unhappy about Jane, whose
troubles and whose ill health having, of course, the
same origin, must be equally under cure. —Her days of in-
signiﬁcance and evil were oven—She would soon be well,
and happy and prosperous—Emma could now imagine
why her own attentions had been slighted. This dis-
covery laid many smaller matters open. No doubt it
had been from jealousy—In Jane’s eyes she had been
a rival; and well might anything she could oﬂ'er of
assistance or regard be repulsed. An airing in the
Hanﬁeld carriage would have been the tack, and arrow-
root from the Hartﬁeld store-room must have been
poison. She understood it all; and as far as her mind
could disengage itself from the injustice and selﬁshness
of angry feelings, the acknowledged that Jane Fairfax
would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
desert. But poor Harriet was such an engrossing
charge! There was little sympathy to be spared for
anybody else. Emma was sadly fearful that this second
disap intment would be more severe than the ﬁrst.
Considering the very superior claim of the object, it
ought; and judging by its apparently stronger eﬂ‘ect on
Harriet’ s mind, producing reserve and self-command, it
would—She must communicate the painful truth, how-
ever, and as soon as ssible. An injunction of secrecy
had been among r Weston’s parting words. “For
the present the whole affair was to be completelya
secret. Mr Churchill had made a point of it, as a
token of respect to the wife he had so very recently
lost; and everybody admitted it to be no more than
due decorum.”—Emma had promised ; but. still Harriet
must be excepted. It was her superior duty.

EMMA. 173

In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling
it almost ridiculous, that she should have the very same
distressing and delicate oilice to perform by Harriet which
Mrs Weston had just gone through by herself. The
intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to
her, she was now to be anxiously announcing to another.
Her heart beat quick on healing Harriet’s fontstcp
and voice; so, she supposed, had poor Mrs Weston
felt when :5: was approaching Randalls. Could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance !—
But of that, unfonunately, there could be no chance.

“Well, Miss Woodhousc," cried Harriet, coming
eagerly inlo the room, “is not this the oddest news that
ever was?

“ What news do you mean ? ” replied Emma, unable
to guess, by look or voice, whether Harriet could
indeed have received any hint.

“ About Jane Fairfax. Did you ever hear anything
so strange? 0h l—you need not be afraid of owning it
to me, for Mr Wenon has told me himself. I met
him now. He told me it was to be a great secret;
and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to
anybody but you, but he said you knew it.”

“What did Mr Weston tell you?" said Emma, still
perplexed.

“ Oh ! he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax
and Mr Frank Churchill are to be married, and that
they have been privately engaged to one another this
long while. How very odd! ”

It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet’s behaviour was so
extremely odd, that Emma did not know how to
understand it. Her character appeared absolutely
changed. She seemed to propose showing no agita-
tion, or disappointment, or peculiar concern in the dis-
covery. Emma looked at her, uile unable to speak.

“Had you any idea,” cried arriet, “of his being

II. M

174 EMMA.

in love with her P—You, perhaps, might. You " (blush-
ing as she spoke), “who can see into everybody’s heart;
but nobody else ”

“ Upon my word," said Emma, “ I begin to doubt
in having any such talent. Can you seriously ask me,

arriet, whether I imagined him attached to another
woman at the very time that I was—tacitly if not
openly—encouraging you to give way to your own
feelings i—I never had the slightest suspicion, till within
the last hour, of Mr Frank Churchill’s having the least
regard for Jane Fairfax. You may be very sure that,
if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly.”

“Mel” cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished.
“ Why should you caution me l—You do not think I
care about Mr Frank Churchill?”

“ I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the
subject,” replied Emma, smiling; “but you do not
mean to deny that there was a time—and not very
distant either—when you gave me reason to understand
that you did care about him ? "

“ Himl—never, never. Dear Miss Woodhouse,
how could you so mistake me?” (turning away dis-
tressed.

“Harriet,” cried Emma, after a moment’s pause,
“ what do you mean i—Good Heaven! what do you
mean E—Mistake you l—Am I to suppow then ?”

She could not speak another word—Her voice was
lost; and she sat down, waiting in great terror till
Han'iet should answer.

Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and
with face turned from her, did not immediately say
anything; and when she did speak, it was in a voice
nearl as agitated as Emma’s.

“ should not have thought it possible,” she began,
“ that you could have misunderstood me i I know we
agreed never to name him—but considering how in-

 

 

mm. 175

ﬁnitely superior he is to everybody else, I should not
have thought it possible that I could be supposed to
mean any other person. Mr Frank Churchill, indeed l I
do not know who would ever look at him in the company
of the Other. I hope I have a better tame than to
think of Mr Frank Churchill, who is like nobody by
his side. And that you should have been so mistaken,
is amazingl—I am sure, but for believing that you
entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my
attachment, I should have considered it at ﬁrst too great
a presumption almost to dare to think of him. At ﬁrst,
if you had not told me that more wonderful things had
happened; that there had been matches of greater dis<
parity (those were your very words)——I should not
have dared to give way to—I should not have thought
it possible ;—but if you, who had been always acquainted
with him ”

“ Harriet," cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely,
“ let us understand each other now, without the possi-
bility of farther mistake. Are you speaking of—Mr
Knightley i"

“ To be sure I am. I never could have an idea of
anybody else—and so I thought you knew. When we
talked about him, it was as clear as possible.”

“ Not quite,” returned Emma, with forced calmness;
" for all that you then said ap red to me to relate to
a different person. I could most assert that you had
named Mr Frank Churchill. I am sure the service Mr
Flank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you
from the ' ‘es, was spoken of.”

“ Oh, ins Woodhouoe, how on do forget! "

“My dear Harriet, I peril-ctr): remember the sub-
stance of what I said on the ocmsion. I told you that
I did not wonder at your attachment; that, consider-
ing the service he had rendered you, it was extremely
natulal ;—snd you agreed to it, expressing yourself very

 

r 76 was.

wannly as to your sense of that service, and mentioning
even what your sensations had been in seeing him come
forward to your rescue. The impression of it is strong
on my memory.”

“ Oh, dear,” cried Harriet, " now I recollect what
you mean; but I was thinking of something very dif-
ferent at the time. It was not the gi 'es—it was not
Mr Frank Churchill that I meant. o ! ” (with some
elevation) “ I was thinking of a much more preciOus
circumstance—of Mr Knightley's coming and asking
me to dance, when Mr Elton would not stand up with
me, and when there was no other partner in the room.
That was the kind aco'on; that was the noble benevo-
lence and generosity; that was the service which made
me begin to feel how superior he was to every other
being upon ﬁrth.”

“ Good God ! ” cried Emma, “ this has been a most
unfortunate—most deplorable mistake! What is to be
done ?”

“You would not have encouraged me, then, if you
had understood me? At last, however, I cannot be
worse off than I should have been, if the other had been
the person; and now—it is possible—"

She paused a few moments. Emma could not
speak.

“ I do not wonder, Miss Woodhousc," she resumed,
“that you should feel a great difference between the
two, as to me or as to anybody. You must think one ﬁve
hundred million times more above me than the other.
But I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—dint if
—strange as it may appear But you know they
were your own words, that more wonderful things had
happened; matches of greater disparity had taken place
than between Mr Frank Churchill and me; and, there-
fore, it seems as if such a. thing even as this may have
occurred before—and if I should be so fortunate, be‘

 

EMMA r 77

yond expression, as to—if Mr Knightley should really
—ifbedoes notmindthedisparity,I hope,dear Miss
Woodhouse, you will not set yourself agamn it and try
to put difﬁculties in the my. But you are too good
for that, I am mire."

Harriet was sanding at one of the windows. Emma
turned round to look at her in consternation, and hastily
laid—

“ Have you any idea of Mr Knightley’s returning
your aﬁ'ectiou ?”

“ Yes," replied Harriet, modestly, but not fearfully;
" I must say that I have."

Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat
silently meditating, in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
A few minutes were sufﬁcient for making her acquainted
with her own heart. A mind like hers, once opening
to suspicion, made rapid progress; she touched, she
admitted, she acknowledged the whole truth. Why
was it so much worse that Han'iet should be in love
with Mr Knightley than with Frank Churchill? Why
was the evil so dreadfully incmsed by Han'iet’s having
some ho of a return ? It darted through her with the
speed 0 an arrow that Mr Knightley must marry no
one but herself !

Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was be-
fore her in the same few minutes. She uw it all with
a cleamess which had never blessed her before. How
improperly bad she been acting by Harriet! How in<
considerate, how indelicare, how irrational, how unfeel-
iog, had been her conduct! What blindness, what
madness had led her onI It Itmck her with dreadful
force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in
the world. Some portion of respect for herself, how-
ever, in spite of all these demerits, some concern for
her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice by
Harriet (there would be no need of [amputation w the

178 suns.

girl who believed herself loved by Mr Knightley—but
'urniee uired that she should not be made unhapp
by any on dncss now), gave Emma the resolution to at
and endure farther with calmness, with even apparent
kindness. For her own advantage, indeed, it was ﬁt
that the utmost extent of Han-iet’s hopes should be in-
quired into; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit
the regard and interest which had been so voluntarily
fanned and maintained, or to deserve to be slighted by
the person whose counsels had never led her right.
Rousing from reflection, therefore, and subduing hcr
emotion, she turned to Harriet again, and in a more
inviting accent renewed the conversation ; for as to the
subject which had ﬁrst introduced it, the wonderful story
of Jane Fairfax, that was quite sunk and lost. Neither
of them thought but of Mr Knightlcy and themselves.

Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy
reverie, was yet very glad to be called from it by the
now encouraging manner of such a judge, and such a
friend, as Miss Woodhouse; and only wanted invitation
to give the history of her hopes with great though
trembling delight. Emma’s tremblings, as she asked,
and as she listened, were better concealed than Harrict’s,
but they were not less. Her voice was not unsteady,
but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a
denlopment of self, such a burst of threatening evil,
such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions,
must create. She listened with much inward suffering,
but with great outward patience, to Harriet’s detail.
Methodical, or well arranged, or very well delivered, it
could not be expected to be; but it contained, when
separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the
namtion, a substance to sink her spirit; especially with
the corroborating circumstances which her own memory
brought in favour of Mr Knightlcy's most improved
opinion of Harriet.

1mm. :79

Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his
behaviour ever since those two decisive dances. Emma
knew that he had, on that occasion, found her much
mperior to his expectation. From that evening, or at
lent from the time of Miss Woodhouse’s encouraging
her so think of him, Harriet had begun to be sensible
of his talking to her much more than he had been used
to do, and of his having, indeed, quite a different manner
towards her ;—a manner of kindness and sweetness.
Laterly, she had been more and more aware of it.
When they had been all walking together, he had so
often come and walked by her, and talked so very
deliﬂatfullyl—He seemed to want to be acquainted
with her. limma knew it to have been very much the
case: she had often observed the change, to almost the
same extent. Haniet repeated expressions of approba-
tion 1nd praise from him—and Emma felt them to be
in tle closest agreement with what she had known of
his )pinion of Harriet. He praised her for being
withJut art or affectation; for having simple, honest,
generous feelings. She knew that he saw such recom-
nendations in Han'iet; he had dwelt on them to her
none than once. Much that lived in Harriet's memory,
may little particulars of the notice she had received
fnm him, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair
ts another, a compliment implied, a preference inferred,
hd been unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma.
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour’s relation,
aid contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen
tlem, had passed undiscerned by her who now heard
tlem; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned
—thc two of strongest promise to Harrict~—werc not
w'thout some degree of witness from Emma herself.
The ﬁrst was his walking with her a It from the
ohers in the lime-walk at Donwcll, w ere they had
but walking some time before Emma came, and he

180 EMMA.

had taken pains (as she was convinced) to draw her
from the rest to himself; and at ﬁrst he had talked to
her in a more particular way than he had ever done
before—in a very particular way indeed l—(Harritt
could not recall it without a blush.) He seemed to be
almost asking her whether her affections were engaged.
But as soon as she (Miss Woodhuuse) appeared likrly
to join them, he changed the subject, and began talkng
about farming. The second was his having at talking
with her nearly half an hour before Emma came lnck
from her visit. the very last morning of his being at
Hartlield—though, when he ﬁrst came in, he had said
that he could not my ﬁve minutes—and his having told
her, during their conversation, that though he must go to
London, it was very much against his inclination that
he left home at all, which was much more (as Enma
felt) than he had acknowledged to her. The superior
degree of conﬁdence towards Harriet which this one
article marked gave her severe pain.

0n the subject of the ﬁrst of the two circumstance,
she did, after a little reﬂection, venture the following
question:-—“ Might he not E—Is not it possible, that.
when inquiring, as you thought, into the state of you!
affections, he might be alluding to Mr Martin—he mighl
have Mr Martin’s interest in view 2 ” But Harrim
rejected the suspicion with spirit.

“Mr Martin! No, indeed l—There was not a hin:
of Mr Martin. I hope I know better now than to can
for Mr Martin, or to be suspected of it.”

When Harriet had closed her evidence, the appealel
to her dear Miss Woodhouse to say whether she hal
not good ground for hope.

“ I never should have presuan to think of it at ﬁrst,’
laid-he, “but for u. You told me to observe hin
carefully, and let llll behaviour be the rule of nu'ne—
sud so I have. But now I seem to feel that I mar

EMMA. 181

deserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not
be anything so very wonderful.”

The bitter feelings ocuaioned by this speech, the
many bitter feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary
on Emma's side to enable her to say on reply——

“Han'iet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr
Knightley is the last man in the world who would in-
tentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for
her more than he really does.”

Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a
sentence so satisfactory; and Emma was only saved
from mpturcs and fondness, which at that moment would
have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her father’s
footsteps, He was coming through the hall. Harriet
was too much agitated to encounter him. “ She could
not compose herself—Mr Woodhouse would be alarmed
—she had better go;”—with most ready encourage-
ment from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door—and the moment she was gone, this was
the ontaneous burst of Emma’s feelings :—“ O God I
that? had never seen her! ”

The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly
enough for her thoughts. She was bewildered amidst
the confusion of all that had rushed on her Within the
last few hours. Every moment had bmught a fresh
surprise; and every surpriSe must be matter of humilia-
tion to her. How to understand it all ! How on
understand the deceptions she had been thus practising
on herself, and living underl The blunders, the blind-
ness of her own head and heart! She mt still, she
walked about, she tried her own room, she tried the
shrubbcry—in every place, every posture, shc perceived
that she had acted most weakly; that she had been im-
posed ou by others in a most mortifying degree; that
she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more
mortifying; that she was wretched, and should probably
ﬁnd this day but the beginning of Wretchednees.

:82 EMMA.

To undermnd, thoroughly understand her own heart,
was the ﬁrst endeavour. To that point went every
leisure moment which her father’s claims on her
allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of
mind.

How long had Mr Knightley been so dGlf to her, as
every feeling declared him now to be? When had his
inﬂuence, such inﬂuence begun? When had he suc-
ceeded to that place in her aﬂ'ection which Frank
Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied 2—
She looked back; she compared the two—compared
them, as they had alwa s stood in her estimation, from
the time of the latter’s becoming known to her—and as
they must at any time have been compared by her, had
it—oh ! had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her
to institute the comparison. She saw that there never
had been a time when she did not consider Mr Knightley
as inﬁnitely the superior, or when his regard for her had
not been inﬁnitely the most dear. She saw, that in per-
suading herself, in fancying, in acting to the century,
she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant
of her own heart—and, in short, that she had never
really cared for Frank Churchill at all !

This was the conclusion of the ﬁrst series of [reﬂec-
tions]. This was the knowledge of herself, on the ﬁrst
question of inquiry, which she reached; and without
being long in reaching it. She was most sorrowfully
indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one
revealed to her—her affection for Mr Knightley. Every
other part of her mind was disgusting.

With insuﬂ‘erable vanity had she believed herself in
the secret of everybody’s feelings; with unpardonahle
arrogance proposed to arrange eve body’s destiny.
She was proved to have been universal y mistaken; and
she had not quite done nothing—for she had done
mischief. She had brought evil on Han-iet, on herself,

EMMA. r83

and, she too much fred, on Mr Knighdey. Were
this most un ual of all connections to take place, on
her must resteﬂl the reproach of having given it a be-
ginning; for his attachment she must believe to be
produced only by a consciousness of Harriet’s;—and
even were this not the case, he would never have known
Harriet at all but for her folly.

Mr Knightley and Harriet Smith !—It was an union
to distance every wonder of the kind. The attachment
of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax became common-
place, threadbare, stale in the com 1rison, exciting no
surprise, presenting no disparity, a ording nothing to be
said or thought. Mr Knightley and Harriet Smith!
Such an elevation on her side! Such a dcbasement on
his! It was hon'ible to Emma to think how it must
sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles,
the sneers, the merriment it would prom t at his ex-
pense ; the mortiﬁcation and disdain of his brother, the
thousand inconveniencies to himself. Could it be?
No; it was impossible. And yet it was far, very far,
from impossible.—Was it a new circumstance fora man
of ﬁrst-rate abilities to be captivated by very inferior
powers? Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek,
to be the prize of a girl who would seek him? Was it
new for anything in this world to be unequal, inconsist-
ent, incongruous—or for chance and circumstance (as
second causes) to direct the human fate?

Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward ! Had
she left her where she ought, and where he had told
her she ought! Had she not, with a folly which no
tongue could express, prevented her marrying the un-
exccptionablc young man who would have made her
happy and respectable in the line of life to which she

~ ought to belon , all would have been safe; none of this
dreadful seque would have been.

How Harriet could ever have had the presumption

x84 EMMA.

to raise her thoughts to Mr Knightley !—How she
could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man
till actually assured of it! But Han-iet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly. Her inferiority,
whether of mind or situation, seemed little felt. She
had seemed more sensible of Mr Elton’s being to stoop
in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr Knightlcy’s.
Alas! was not that her own doing too? Who had
been at pains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence
but herself? Who but herself had taught her, that she
was to elevate herself if ssible, and that her claims
were great to a high worl y establishment? If Harriet,
from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing
too.

Cbspttr £11733].

ILL now that she was threatened with its loss,
Emma had never known how much of her
happiness depended on being fut with Mr

Knightley, ﬁrst in interest and affection. Satisﬁed that
it was so, and feeling it her due, she had enjoyed it
without reﬂection ; and only in the dread of being sup-

lanted, found how inex resciny important it had been.

ong, ve long, she iglt the had been ﬁrst ; for,
having no emale connections of his own, there had been
only Isabella whose claims could be com 'red with hers,
and she had always known exactly howi; he loved and
esteemed Isabella. She had herself been ﬁrst with him
for many years past. She had not deserved it; she had
often been negligent or perverse, slighting his advice, or
even wilfully opposing him, insensible of half his merits,
and quarrelling with him because he would not acknow-
led e her false and insolent estimate of her own—but
stil, from family attachment and habit, and thorough

EMMA. 185

excellence of mind, he had loved her, and watched
over her from a girl, with an endeavour to improve her,
and an anxiety for her doing right, which no other
creature had at all shared. In spite of all her faulm,
she knew she was clear to him; might she not say, very
dear? When the suggestions of he , however, which
must follow here, presented themsells, she could not
presume to indulge them. Han-iet Smith might think
herself not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively,

ssionately loved by Mr Knightley. Sb: could not.

he could not ﬂatter herself with any idea of blindness
in his attachment to Ler. She had received a very re-
cent roof of its impartiality. How shocked had he
been y her behaviour to Miss Bates! How directly,
how strongly had he expressed himself to her on the
subject! Not too strongly for the offence—but far, far
too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright
justice and clear-sighted good-will. She had no hope,
nothing to deserve the name of he , that he could have
that sort of affection for hersel which was now in
question; but there was a hope (at times a slight one,
at times much stronger) that Harriet might have de-
ceived herself, and be overmting his regard for her.
Wish it she must1 for his sake—be the consequence
nothing to herself, but his remaining single all his life.
Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marry-
ing at all, she believed she should be rfeetly satisﬁed.
Let him but continue the same Mr Knightley to her and
her father, the me Mr Knightley to all the world; let
Douwell and Hartﬁeld lose none of their precious inter-
course of friendship and conﬁdence, and her pace would
be fully secured. Marriage, in fact, would not do for
her. It would be incompatible with what she owed to
her father, and with what she felt for him. Nothing
should separate her from her father. She would not
marry, even ifshe were asked by Mr Knightley.

186 sum.

It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be dis-
appointed; and she hoped, that when able to see them
together again, she might at least be able to ascertain
what the chances for it were. She should see them
henceforward with the closest observance; and
wretchedly as she had hitherto misunderstood even
those she was watching, she (lid not know how to admit
that she could be blinded here. He was expected back
every da . The power of observation would be soon
given— 'ghtfully soon it appeared when her thouth
were in one com In the meanwhile, she resolved
against seeing Harriet. It would do neither of them good,
it would do the subject no good, to be talking of it
farther. She was resolved not to be convinced, as long
as she could doubt, and yet had no authority for oppos-
ing Han'iet’s conﬁdence. To talk would be only to
in‘itate. She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, but de-
cisively, to beg that she would not, at present, come to
Hanﬁeld; acknowledging it to be her conviction that
all farther conﬁdential discussion of one topic had better
be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days were
allowed to pass before they met again, except in the
company of others—she objected only to a tiled-Me—
they might be able to act as if they had forgotten the
conversation of yesterday. Harriet submitted, and ap-
proved, and was grateful. -

This point was just arranged when a visitor arrivedto
tear Emma’s thoughts a little from the one subject
which had engrossed them, sleeping or waking, the last
twenty-four hours——Mrs Weston, who had been calling
on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hatﬁeld in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in
pleasure to herself, to relate all the particulars of so
interestin an interview.

Mr eaten had accompanied her to Mrs Bates’s,
and gone through his share of this essential attention

EMMA. :87

most handsomely; but she having then induced Miss
Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned with
much more to lay, and much more to say with satisfac-
tion, than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs Bates’s
parlour, with all the incumbrance of awkward feelings,
could have aﬂ'orded.

A little curiosity Emma had, and she made the most
of it while her friend related. Mrs Weston had set off
to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself 3 and
in the ﬁrst place had wished not to go at all at present,
to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead,
and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had
passed, and Mr Churchill could be reconciled to the
engagement’s becoming known; as, considering every-
thing, she thought such a visit could not be paid with-
out leading to reports; but Mr Weston had thought
differently ; he was extremely anxious to show his ap-
probation to Miss Fairfax and her family, and did not
conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it; or
if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for
“such things ” he observed, “ always got about."
Emma smiled, and felt that Mr Weston had very good
reason for saying so. They had gone, in short; and
very great had been the evident distress and confusion
of the lady. She had hardly been able to speak a word,
and every look and action had shown how deeply she
was suﬂ'ering from consciousness. The quiet, heart-felt
satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of
her daughter, who proved even too joyous to talk as usual,
had been a gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene.
They were both so truly respectable in their happiness,
so disinterested in every sensation; thought so much of
Jane ; so much of everybody, and so little of them-
selves, that every kindly feeling was at work for them.
Miss Fairfax’s recent illness had offered a fair lea for
Mrs Weston to invite her to an airing ; she drawn
back and declined at ﬁrst, but, on being pressed, had

188 Runs.

yielded ; and, in the course of their drive, Mrs Weston
had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of her
embarrassment, as to bring her to convene on the im-
portant subject. Apologies for her seemingly un-
gracious silence in their ﬁrst reception, and the warmest
expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling to-
wards herself and Mr Weston, must necessarily open
the cause; but when these eﬁ'usionr were put by, they
had talked a good deal of the present and of the future
state of the engagement. Mrs Weston was convinced
that such conversation must be the greatest reliefto her
companion, pent up within her own mind as everything
had so long been, and was very much pleased with all
that she had said on the subject

" On the misery of what she had suffered, during the
concealment of so f many months,” continued Mrs
Weston, “she was energetic. This was one of her ex-
pressions : ‘ I will not say that since I entered into the
engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but
I can say, that I have never known the blessing of one
tranquil hour : '—-and the quivering lip, Emma, which
uttered it was an attestation that I felt at my heart.”

“ Poor girl! ” said Emma. “ She thinks herself
wrong, then, for having consented to a private engage-
ment ? "

“ Wrong! No one, I believe, can blame her more
than she is disposed to blame herself. ‘The conse-
quence,’ said she, ‘ has been a state of rpetual suffering
to me; and so it ought But after al the punishment
that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct.
Pain is no expiation. I never can be blameless. I have
been acting contrary to all my sense of right ; and the fur-
tunate turn that everything has taken, and the kindness I
am now receiving, is what my conscience tells me ought
not to he.’ ‘Do not imagine, madam,’ she continued,
‘ that I was taught wrong. Do not let any reﬂection

EMMA. i 89

fall on the principles or the care of the friends who
brought me up. The error has been all my own;
and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that
resent circumstances ma to "ve, I shall

iiread making the story krénjgpafrColoﬁiel Campbell???

“ Poor girl ! ” said Emma, again. “ She loves him,
then, excessively, I suppose. It must have been horn
attachment only that she could be led to form the en-
gagement. Her affection must have overpowered her
judgment.”

“Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely
annulled to him."

“I am afraid,” returned Emma, righing, “ that I
must often have contributed tn make her unhappy.”

“ On your side, my love, it was very innocently
done. But she probably had something of that in her
thoughts, when alluding to the misunderstandings which
he had given us hints of before. One natural con-
sequence of the evil she had involved herself in, she
aid, was that of making her unreamlle. The con-
sciousness of having done amiss had exposed her to a
thousand inquictudes, and made her capu'ous and irrit-
able to a degree that must have been—that had been—
hard for him to hear. ‘I did not make the allow-
ances,’ said she, ‘which I ought to have done, for his
temper and spirits—his delightful spirits, and that gaie’ty,
that playfulness of disposition, which, under any other
circumstances, would, I am sure, have been as constantl
bewitching to me as they were at ﬁrst.’ She then
began to speak of you, and of the great kindness you
had shown her during her illness; and, with a blush
which showed me how it was all connected, desired me,
whenever I had an opportunity, to thank you—I could
not thank you too much—for every wish and every en-
deavour to do her good. She was sensible that you had
never received any proper acknowledgment from herself.”

II. N

190 suns.

“If I did not know her to be happy now,” said
Emma, nerioualy, “ which. in spite of every little draw-
back from her Icnrpuloul conscience, the must be, I
could not hear these thanks; for, oh! Mn Weston, if
there were an account drawn up of the evil and the good
I have done Min Fairfax Well ” checking her-
eelf and trying to be more lively), “this is all to be
forgotten. You are very kind to bring me these in-
teresting particulars; they show her to the grant
advantage. I am sure she is very good; I hope she
will be very happy. It is ﬁt that the fortune should be
on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers."

Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs
Weston. She thought well of Frank in almost every
respect; and, what was more, she loved him very much,
and her defence was, therefore, earnest. She talked
with a great dml of rczuon, and at least equal affection;
but she had too much to urge for Emma’s attention ; it
was soon gone to Bnmswick Square or to Donwell;
she forgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs Weston
ended with, “We have not yet had the letter we are so
anxious for, you know, but I hope it will soon come,"
the was obliged to pause before she answered, and at
last obliged to answer at random, before she could at
all recollect what letter it was which they were so
anxious for.

“Are you well, my Emma?” was Mrs Weston’s
parting question.

“ Oh, perfectly. I am always well, you know. Be
sure to give me intelligence of the letter as soon as
possible.’

Mrs Westou's communiutions furnished Emma with
more food for unpleasant reﬂection, by increasing her
esteem and compassion, and her sense of past injustice
towards Miss Fairfax. She bitterly regretted not having
sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for

 

miss. 19r

the envious feelings which had certain! been, in some
measure, the cause. Had she followed r Knightle ’-
known wishes, in paying that attention to Miss F ai ax
which was every way her due; had she tried to know
her better; hadshe done her towards intimacy; had
she endeavoured to ﬁnd a riend there instead of in
Han'iet Smith; she must1 in all probability, have been
red from every pain which pressed on her now. Birth,
a ' 'ties, and education had been equally marking one as
an associate for her, to be received with gratitude; and
the other—what was she? Supposing even that they
had never become intimate friends; that she had never
been admitted into Min Fairfax’s conﬁdence on this
important matter—which was most probable—still, in
knowing her as she ought, and as she might, she must
have been preserved from the abominable suspicions of
an improper attachment to Mr Dixon, which she
had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured
herself, but had so un rdonably imparted; an idea
which she greatly fea had been made a subject of
material distress to the delicacy of Jane's feelings, b
the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill’s. Of afl
the sources of evil surrounding the former, since her
coming to Highhury, she was persuaded that she must
herself have been the worst. She must have been a
perpetual enemy. They never could have been all
three together, without her having stabbed Jane Fair-
fax’s peace in a thousand instances; and on Box Hill,
pghaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would

r no more.

The evening of this day was very long and melan-
chon at Hartlicld. The weather added what it could
of gloom. A cold stormy rain set in, and nothing of
July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the
wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which
only made such cruel sights the longer visible.

192 EMMA.

The weather affected Mr Woodhouse; and he could
only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless
attention on his daughter’s side, and by exertions which
had never cost her half so much before. It reminded
her of their ﬁrst forlorn téte-‘a-téte, on the evening of
Mrs Weston's wedding-day; but Mr Knightley had
walked in then, soon after tea, and dissipated every
melancholy fancy. Alas! such delightful proofs of
Hartﬁeld’s attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed,
might shortly be over. The picture which she had then
drawn of the privations of the approaching winter had
proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them, no
pleasures had been lost. But her present forebodings
she feared would experience no similar contradiction.
The prospect before her now was threatening to a degree
that could not be entirely dispelled—that might not be
even partially brightened. If all took place that
might take ace among the circle of her friends, Hart-
field must comparatively deserted; and she left to
cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happi-
ness.

The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there
even dearer than herself; and Mrs Weston’s heart and
time would be occupied by it. They should lose her;
and probably, in great measure, her husband also. Frank
Churchill would return among them no more; and Miss
Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease
to belong to Highbury. They would be married, and
settled either at or near Enscombe. All that were
good would be withdrawn; and if to these losses the
loss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain
of cheerful or of rational society within their reach?
Mr Knighsley to be no longer coming there for his
evening comfort! No longer walking in at all hours,
as if ever willing to change his own home for theirs!
How was it to be endured? And if he were to be

 

 

 

 

 

 

, 1/17,",7/3’7/I/7a /n¢~al

0mm.

EMMA. :93

lost to them for Harriet’s sake; if he were tobe thought
of hereafter, as ﬁnding in Harriet’s society all that he
wanted! if Harriet were to be the chosen, the ﬁrst, the
dearest, the friend, the wife to whom he looked for all
the best blessings of existence; what could be increas-
ing Emma’s wretchednels but the reﬂection, never far
distant from her mind, that it had been all her own
work ?

When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not
able to refrain from a start, or a heavy sigh, or even
from walking about the room for a few seconds; and
the only source whence anything like consolation or
composure could be drawn, was in the resolution of her
own better conduct, and the hope that, however inferior
in spirit and gaiety might be the following and every
future winter of her life to the past, it would yet ﬁnd
her more rational, more acquainted with herself, and
leave her less to regret when it were gone.

Chapm- iljﬁ.

HE weather continued much the same all the
following morning; and the same loneliness,
and the same melancholy, seemed to reign at

Hartlield; but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind
changed into a softer quarter; the clouds were carried
MT: the sun appared; it was summer again. With
all the eagerness which Inch a transition gives, Emma
resolved to be out of doom as soon as possible. Never
had the exqusite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil,
warm, and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive
to her. She longed for the serenity they might gradually
introduce; and on Mr Perry’s coming in soon after
dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she

194 ms.

lost no time in hurrying into the shrubbery. There,
with spirits ﬁelhened, and thoughtl a little relieved, the
had mken a few turns, when Ihe aw Mr Knightley
pasting through the garden door, and coming toward.
her. It was the ﬁrst intimation of his bein returned
from London. She had been thinking o him the
moment before, a: unquestionably sixteen miles dintant.
There was time only for the quickest arran ent of
mind. She must be collected and calm. n half a
minute they were together. The “ Howd’ye-do'l"
were quiet and con-trained on each side. She asked
after their mutual friends; they were all well. When
had he left them? Only that morning. He mutt have
had a wet [dell-i]. Yes! He meant to walk with her,
she found. “ e had just looked into the dining-room,
and at he was not wanted there, preferred being out of
doors.” She thought he neither looked nor spoke
cheerfully; and the ﬁrst possible cause for it, ruggelted
by her fears, was, that he had perhapl been com-
municating his plans to his brother, and was pained
by the manner in which th had been received.

They walked together. e was silent. She thought
he was often looking at her, and trying for a fuller View
of her face than it suited her to give. And this belief
produced another dread. Perhaps he wanted to speak
to her of his attachment to Harriet, he might be watching
for encouragement to begin. She did not, could notI
feel ual to lead the way to any such subject. He
must 0 it all himself. Yet she could not bear this
silence. With him it was most unnatural. She con-
sidered, resolved, and, trying to smile, began—

“You have some news to hear, now you are come
back, that will nther lurpriae you."

“Have I?” mid he quietly, and looking at her ;
“ of what nature? ”

“ Oh, the beat nature in the world—a wedding.’ '

mssA. 195

After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended
to so no more, he replied—

“ f you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I
have heard that alrady.”

“How is it possible?” cried Emma, turning her
glowing cheeks towards him; for, while she spoke, it
occurred to her dint he might have called at Mrs
Goddard’s in his way.

“ I had a few lines on parish business from Mr
Weston this morning, and at the end of them he gave
me a brief account of what had happened.”

Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say,
with a little more composure-—

“ Tau probably have been less surprised than any of
us, for you have had your suspicions. I have not for-
gotten that you once tried to give me a caution. I wish
I had attended to it—but ” (with a sinking voice and a
heavy sigh) “ I seem to have been doomed to blindness."

For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was
unsuspicious of having excited any particular interest.
till she found her arm drawn within his, and pressed
against his heart, and heard him thus ﬂying, in a tone
of great sensibility, speaking low—

“ Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.
Your own excellent sense ; your exertions for your
father’s ke : I know you will not allow yourself—"
Her arm was ressecl again, as he added, in a more
broken and suidued accent, “ The feelings of the
warmest friendship—indignation—ahominable scoun-
drel l ” And in a louder, steadier tone, he concluded
with. “He will soon be gone. They will soon be in
Yorl’rfhirc. I am sorry for her. She deserves a better
fate.

Emma understood him; and as soon as she could
recover from the ﬂutter of pleasure, excited by such
tender consideration, replied—

:96 urn.

“You are very but you are miuaken,and I
must-e: you right. I am not in want of that sort of
companion. My blindnea to what was going on led
mewacthytheminawaythatImustalwayabe
aalnmed of, and I was very fooliahl tempted to ﬂy
and do many things which may w lay me open to
nnpleaaant conjectures, but I have no other moon to
regret that I was not in the secret earlier."

" Emma,” cried he, looking gerly at her, “are you
indeed .’ "—but checking himself—“ No, no, I under-
stand yon—forgive me—I am pleased that you can any
even so much. He is no object of regret, indeed! and
it will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes
the acknowledth of more than your reason. For-
tunate that your affections were not farther entangled!
——I could never, I confess, from your manners, amre
mylelf at to the degree of what you felt—I could only
be certain that there was a preference—and a preference
which I never believed him to deserve. He in a dip
gncetothenameofman. Andisheto be rewarded
with that sweet young woman I—Jane! Jane! you will
be a miserable creature."

“Mr Knightley,” said Emma, trying to he lively,
but really confused—“I am in a very extnordinary
Iituation. I cannot let you continue in your error 3 and

et, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression,

have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that
I never have been at all attached to the person we are
speaking of, as it might be natural for a woman to feel
in contesting exactly the reverse. But I never have.”

He liatened in perfect silence. She wished him to
speak, but he would not. She supposed she must say
more before she were entitled to his clemency; but it
wan a hard cane to be obliged still to lower herself in
hit opinion. She went on, however.

"I have very little to say for my own conduct. I

EMMA. 197

was tern ted by his attentions, and allowed myself to
appear peased. An old story, probably—a common
case—and no more than has happened to hundreds of my
sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable
in one who sets u as I do for Undersmnding. Many
circumstances assisted the temptation. He was the
son of Mr Weston—he was continually here—I always
found him very pleasant—and, in short, for” (with a
sigh) “let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously,
th all centre in this at last—my vanity was ﬂattered,
will allowed his attentions. Latterly, however—for
some time, indeed—I have had no idea of their mean-
ing anything. I thought them a habit, a trick, nothing
that called for seriousness on my side. He has im-
EZed on me, but he has not injured me. I have never
n attached to him. And now I can tolerath oom-
rehencl his behaviour. He never wished to attach me.
It was merely a blind to conceal his real situation with
another. It was his object to blind all about him; and
no one, I am sure, could be more effectually blinded
than myself—except that I was not blinded—that it
was my good fortune—Aha; in short, I was somehow
or other safe from him."

She had hoped for an answer here—for a few words
to say that her conduct was at least intelligible; but he
was silent; and, as far as she could judge, deep in
thoiught. At last, and tolembly in his usual tone, he
a. _

“ I have never had a high opinion of F rank Churchill.
I can In pose, however, that I may have under-rated
him. y acquaintance with him has been but triﬂing.
And even if I have not under-rated him hitherto, he
may yet turn out well. With such a woman he has a
chance. I have no motive for wishing him ill—and for
her sake, whose happiness will be involved in his good
character and conduct, I shall certainly wish him well.”

E

.Jl.
£353
-‘ WE
’35 ii-
i]: 31"

i.

E

E
E
i”
h
:-
E

31
5
ii!
§

9..

love antenna—thew“
JamFairﬁx’ldnnmrmﬁxbm
not; mytﬂnth-Emr—qnhyofﬁn'm—I

E’

' -place,g2in|hcraﬂ'eaion,cannotamwary
herbyncgligmluamt—andhadheandaﬂhil
Mywnghtmdtheworldforapuﬁctvifcforhim,
duyeonldnmhavcfonndherupcrior. Hilaunlisil
litany. Hilamtdicl. Hehuonlquuk. I-Iil
ﬁienduameagermpmmmchishaninm Hein-
Thadyiﬂ—andduymaﬂdeﬁghudmforgin

chaformnateman,indeed!”

“You aifyon envied him.”

“And doenvyhinyEmma. Inonerupectheil
dnobjectofmyenvy.”
Emwulduynomore. They-eemedmbc
willﬁnlnlfatnlenceofﬂarﬁegandherimmediatc

used
him.

man. 199

feeling was to avert the subject, if pon'hle. She made
her plan; she would speakof something totally different
—the children in Brunlwick S “are; and she only
waited for breath to begin, when r Knightley mrtled
her b taying—

“ on will not ask me what is the point of envy.
You are determined, I see, to have no curiosity.
You are wise—hut I cannot be wise. Emma, I must
tell what you will not ask. though I may wish it nnsaid
the next moment.”

“ Oh, then, don’t speak it, don’t speak it,” she eagerly
cried. “Take a little time, consider, do not commit
yourself.”

“Thank you,” said he, in an accent of deep mortiﬁ-
cation, and not another syllable followed.

Emma could not bear to give him pain. He was
wishing to conﬁde in her—perhaps to conrult her ,—
coet her what it would, she would listen. She might
assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might
give just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him
his own independence, relieve him from that state of
indecision which must be more intolerable than any
alternative to such a mind as his. They had reached
the house.

“You are going in, I suppose?” mid he.

“No,” replied Emma, quite conﬁrmed by the de-
pressed manner in which he still spoke, “I should like
to take another turn. Mr Perry is not gone.” And,
after proceeding a few weps, she added—“I
you ungraciously, jult now, Mr Knightley, andl am
afraid, gave you pain. But if you have any wish to
speak openly to me as a friend, or to ask my opinion
of anything that you may have in contemplation—
as a friend, indeed, you run command me. I will
hear whatever you like. I Will tell you exactly what I
think.”

200 EMMA.

“A: a friendl ” repeated Mr Knightley. “Emma.
that, I fear, it a word—no, I have no wish. Sta ,
yes, wh should I hesitate? I have gone too
already or concealment. Emma, I accept your offer,
extraordinary as it may seem. I accept it, and refer
myoelf to you asa friend. Tell me, th, have I no
chance of ever lucceeding 1’ ”

He ttopped in his eamestnesl to look the question,
and the expression of his eyes overpowered her.

“ My dearest Emma,” mid he, “ for dearest you will
always be, whatever the event of this hour’s conversa-
tion, my dearest, most beloved Emma—tell me at once.
Say ‘No,’ if it is to be mid." She could really say
nothing. “ You are rilent," he cried, with great
animation; “absolutely silent! at present I ask no
more."

Emma was almost ready to link under the agitation
of this moment. The dread of being awakened from
the happien dream was perhaps the most prominent
feeling.

“ I cannot make speeches, Emma,” he soon resumed,
and in a tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible ten-
der-nest as was tolerany convincing. “ If I loved you
less, I might be able to talk about it more. But you
know what I am. You hear nothing but truth from me.
I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne
it an no other woman in England would have home it.
Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest
Emma, as well as you have home with them. The
manner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend them.
God knowt, I have been a very indifferent lover. But
you understand me. Yes, you see, you understand my
ﬁeelings—and will return them if you can. At present,
I ask only to hear—once to hear your voice.”

While he Ipoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and,
with all the wonderful velocity of thought, had been

EMMA. 20 I

able—and yet without losing a word—to catch and
comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that
Harriet’s hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake,
a delusion, as complete a delusion as any of her own—
that Harriet was nothing; that she was everythin her-
self; that what she had been saying relative to arriet
had been all taken as the language of her own feelings ;
and that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her
discouragement, had been all received as discouragement
from herself. And not only was there u'me for these
convictions, with all their glow of attendant happiness,
there was time also to rejoice that Harriet’s secret had
not escaped her, and to resolve that it need not, and
should not. It was all the service she could now
render her poor friend; for as to any of that heroism of
sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat
him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as
inﬁnitely the most worthy of the two—or even the
more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once
and for ever, without vouchsaling any motive because he
could not marry them both, Emma had it not. She
felt for Harriet, with pain and with contrition; but no
ﬂight of generosity run mad, opposing all that could be
probable or reasonable, entered her brain. She had led
her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to her for
ever ; but herjudgment was as strong as her feelings, and
as strong as it had ever been before, in reprobating any
such alliance for him, as most unequal and degrading.
Her way was clear, though not quite smooth. She
yoke then, on being so entreated. What did she say?

ust what she ought, of course. A lady always does.
She said enough to show there need not be despair—
and to invite him to say more himself. He bod
despaired at one period; he had received such an in-
junction to caution and silence, as for the time crushed
every hope—4he had begun by refusing to hear him.

202 “MA.

Thechange lad perhap- bem mlnt luddaI—her
propnnloftaking anotherth renewingthe eon-
vemtion which the had put an end to, might he a
little extraordinary. She felt it: inconaiuency; but
Mr Kni htley was no obliging an to put up with it, and
neck no nher explanation.

Seldom, very seldom, doe- complete truth belong to
an human ditclocure; aeldom can it luppen that nome-
thrng in not a little disguiaed, or a little mistaken ; but
where, an in thin ﬁne, though the conduct in rnimken,
the feelings are not, it may not be very material. Mr
Knightley could not im ute to Emma a more relenta'rrg
heartthan Ihe MOT a hear: more to
a t of hie.

e had, in fact, been wholly unnupicioul of hit own
inﬂuence. He had followed her into the nhrubhery
with no idea of trying it. He had come, in hiannxiety
to nee how ahe bore Frank Churchill’s engayment, with
no tellith view, no view at all, but. of endeavouring, if
the allowed him an opening,to roothe or to counael
her. The rent had been the work of the moment, the
immediate effect of what he hard, on his feeling;
The delightful assurance of her total indifference toward:
Frank Churchill, of her having a heart completely dia-
engaged from him, had given birth to the he that, in
time, he might gain her affection himaelf; t it Ind
been no preaent hope—he had only, in the momentary
conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told
that she did not forbid hll attempt to attach her. The
wperior hope: which gradually opened were so much
the more enchanting. The affection which he had
been asking to he allowed to create, if he could. was
already hia. Within halfan hour he had paued from a
thoroughly dimmed state of mind, to lametlring so
like ect hapyineu, that it could bear no other name.

a- change wan equal. Thin one half-hour had given

Elma. 203

to each the same precious certain? of being beloved,
had cleared from each the same egree of ignorance,
'ealousy, or distrust. On his side, there had been a
cog-sanding jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the
expectation, of Frank Churchill. He had been in love
with Emma, and jealous of Frank Churchill, from about
the same period, one sentiment having probably enlight-
ened him as to the other. It was his jealousy of Frank
Churchill that had taken him from the country. The
Box Hill party had decided him on going away. He
would save himself from witnessing again such permitted,
encouraged attentions. He had gone to lawn to be
indifferent. But he had gone to a wrong place. There
was too much domestic happiness in his brother's house ;
woman wore too amiable a form in it; Isabella was too
much like Emma—differing only in those striking
inferiorities which always brought the other in brilliancy
before him, for much to have been done even had his
time been longer. He had stayed on, however, vigor-
ously, day after day—till this very moming’s post had
conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax. Then, with the
gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not
scruple to feel, having never believed Frank Churchill
to be at all deserving Emma, was there so much fond
solicitudc, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could
sta no longer. He had ridden home through the rain ;
and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how
this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite
of all her faults, bore the discovery.

He had found her agitated and low. Frank Churchill
was a villain. He heard her declare that she had
never loved him. Frank Churchill’s character was not
desperate. She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house; and [if he could
have thought of Frank Churchill then, he might have
deemed him a very good sort of fellow.

204 sums.

chasm in

HAT totally diﬂim-nt feelings did Emma take
back into the house from what she had
brought out !—she had then been only

daring to hope for a little respite of suffering ;—she
was now in an exquisite ﬂutter of happiness—and such
happiness, moreover, as she believed must still be greater
when the ﬂutter should have passed away.

They sat down to tea—the Mme party round the
same table—how often it had been collectedl and how
often had her eyes fallen on the same shrubs in the lawn,
and observed the same beautiful effect of the western
sun! But never in such a state of spirits, never in any-
thing like it; and it was with difﬁculty that she could
summon enough of her usual self to be the attentive
lad of the house, or even the attentive daughter.

cor Mr Woodhouse little suspected what was plot-
ting against him in the breast of that man whom he
was so cordially welcoming, and so anxiousl be ing
might not have taken cold from his ride. oul he
have seen the heart, he would have cared very little for
the lungs; but without the most distant imagination of
the impending evil, without the slightest percegnion of
anything extraordinary, in the looks or ways 0 either,
he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of
news he had received from Mr Perry, and talked on
with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of
what they could have told him in return.

As long as Mr Knightley remained with them,
Emma’s fever continued; but when he was gone she
hegan to he a little tranquillized and subdued, and in
the course of the Il est night, which was the tax for
such an evening, she ound one or two such very serious
points to consider, as made her feel, that even her happi-

EMMA. 205

ness must have some alloy. Her father—and Harriet.
She could not be alone without feeling the full weight
of their separate claims; and how to guard the comfort
of both to the utmost was the question. With respect
to her father, it was a question soon answered. She
hardly knew yet what Mr Knightley would ask; but a
very short parley with her own heart produced the most
solemn resolution of never quitting her father. She
even wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought.
While he lived, it must be only an engagement; but
she ﬂattered herself, that if divested of the danger of
drawing her away, it might become an increase of com.
fort to him. How to do her best by Harriet was of
more diﬂicult decision ; how to spare her from any un-
necessary pain; how to make her any possible atone-
ment; how to appear least her enemy? On these
sulziiects her perp exity and distress were very great—
an her mind had to pass again and again through every
bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever sur-
rounded it. She could only resolve at last that she
would still avoid a meeting with her, and communicate
all that need be told by letter; that it would be inex-
pressibly desirable to have her removed just now for
a time from Highbury, and—indulging in one scheme
more—nearly resolve that it might be practicable to get
an invitation for her to Brunswick S uare. Isabella
had been pleased with Harriet; and a w weeks spent
in London must give her some amusement. She did
not think it in Harriet’s nature to escape being beneﬁted
by novelty and variety, by the streets, the shops, and
the children. At any rate, it would be a proof of
mention and kindness in herself, from whom every-
thing was due; a separation for the present; an avert-
ing of the evil day, when they must all be together
again.

She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an

n. o

206 EIIIA.

employment which left her to very Icr'ions, so nearly
ad, that Mr Knightley, in walking up to Hartﬁeld
to breakfau, did not arrive at all too noon; and
half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the tame
ground again with him, literally and ﬁguratively, wu
quite necemry to reinstate her in a proper share of the
ha ineu of the evening before.

e had not left her long—by no mean: long enough
for her to have the slightest inclination for thinking of
anybody else—when a letter was brought her from
Randalla, a very thick letter; she guessed what it must
contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it. She
was now in perfect charity with Frank Churchill: the
wanted no explanations, she wanted only to have her
thoughts to henelf—and as for understanding anything
he wrote, she wan sure she was incapable of it. It
must be waded through, however. She the
Vicht; it was too surely so;—a note In Mn

eaten to herself, ushered in the letter ﬁ'om Frank to
Mrs Weston :—

“I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in
fonuarding to you the enclosed. I know what thorough
justice you will do it, and have scarcely a doubt of its
happy effect. I think we shall never materially die-
sgree about the writer again; but I will not delay you
by a long preface. We are quite well. This letter
has been the cure of all the little nervousneaz I have
been feeling lately. I did not quite like your looks on
Tueeday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though
you will never own being affected by weather, I think

y feels a north-east wind. I felt for your
dar father very much in the norm of Tuesday after-
noon and yutcrda morning, but had the comfort of
hﬂrin lat night, by Mr Perry, that it had not made
him i] .—Youn ever, “ A. W.”

euus. 207

[To Mn Wes-Ion.)

" Wrxnsan—Julj.
“My nus. Mums,—If I made myself intelligible
yesterday, this letter will be expected; but expected or
not, I know it will be read with candour and indulgence.
You are all goodness, and I believe there will he need
of even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my
post conduct. But I hive been forgiven by one who
ad still more to resent. My courage rises while I write.
It is very difﬁcult for the prosperous to be humble. I
have already met with such success in two applications
for pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself
too sure of yours, and of those among our friends who
have had any ground of offence. ou must all en-
deavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situa-
tion when I ﬁrst arrived at Randalls; you must con-
sider me as having a secret which was to he kept at all
hazards. This was the fact. My right to place my-
self in a situation requiling such concalment ls another
question. I shall not discuss it here. For my tempta-
tion to (bin! it a right, I refer every caviller to abrick
house, sashed windows below, and easements above, in
Highbury. I dared not address her openly ; my dilﬁ-
culties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well
known to uire deﬁnition ; and I was fortunate enough
to prevail, he ore we parted at Weymouth, and to induce
the most upright female mind in the creation to stoop

in charity to a secret engagement. Had she refund,
should have gone mad. But you will be ready to say,
What was your hope in doing this? What did you
look forward to 2 To anything, everything—to time,
chance, circumstance, slow elfecrs, sudden bursts, per-

sevennce, and weariness, health and sickness. Eve
'bility of good was before me, and the ﬁrst of bless-
Ings secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and corre-

208 Elm.

lpondence. If you need farther explanation, I have the
honour, my dear madam, of being your husband’s son,
and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for
good, which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever
equal the value of. See me, then, under these circum-
stances, arriving on my ﬁrst. visit to Randalls; and here
I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might havcbeen
sooner paid. You will look back, and see that I did
not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury; and as
you were the person slighted, you will forgive me
instantly; but I must work on my father‘s compassion,
by reminding him, that so long as I absented myself
from his house, so long I lost the blessing of knowing
you. My behaviour, during the very happy fortnight
which I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to
reprehension, excepting on one point. And now I come
to the principal, the only important part of my conduct,
while belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety,
or requires very solicitous explanation. With the
greatest respect, and the warmest friendship, do I men-
tion Miss Woodhonse; my father, perhaps, will think I
ought to add, with the deepest humiliation. A few
words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his
opinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable
to. My behaviour to Miss Woodhonse indicated, I
believe, more than it ought. In order to assist a con-
cealment to essential to me, I was led on to make more
than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which
we were immediame thrown. I cannot deny that Miss
Woodhouse was my ostensible object; but I am sure
you will believe the declaration, that had I not been
convinced of her indilferencc, I would not have been
induced by any selﬁsh views to go on. Amiable
and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is, she never
gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be
attached; and that she was perfectly free from any
tendency to being attached to me, was as much

nuns. 209

my conviction as my wish. She received my amen-
tions with an easy, friendly, good-humoured playful-
ness which exactly suited me. We seemed to under-
stand each other. From our relative situation, those
attentions were her clue, and were felt to be so.
Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand
me before the expiration of that fortnight I cannot say ;
when I called to take leave of her, I remember that I
was within a moment of confessing the tmth, and I then
Fancied she was not without suspicion; but I have no
doubt of her having since detected me—at least in some
degree. She may not have surmised the whole, but
her quickness must have penetrated a part. I cannot
doubt it. You will ﬁnd, whenever the subject becomes
freed from its present restraints, that it did not take her
wholly by surprise. She frequently gave me hints of it.
I remember her telling me at the ball that I owed Mrs
Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax. I
hope this history of my conduct towards her will be ad-
mitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what
you saw amiss. While you considered me as having
sinned against Emma Woodhouse, I could deserve
nothing from either. Acquit me here, and procure for
me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes
of that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so
much brotherly affection as to long to have heras deeply
and as happily in love as myself. Whatever strange
things I said or did during that fortnight you have now a
key to. My heart was in Highbury, and my business was
to get my body thither as often as might be, and with the
least suspicion. If you remember any queernesses set them
all to the right account. Of the pianoforte so much talked
of, I feel it only necessary to say, that its being ordered
was absolutely unknown to Miss F—, who would
never have allowed me to send it had any choice been
given her. The delicacy of her mind throughout the

210 ENHA-

whole engagement, my dear madam, in much beyond
my power of doing justice to. You will noon, I
eameatly hope, know her thoroughly younelf. No
delcription can delcribe her. She mun tell you her-elf
what ahe in; yet not by word, for never wan there a
human creature who would I!) designedly aupprese her
own merit. Since I began thir letter, which will be
longer than I forenw,I have heard from her. She
gives a good account of her own health; but as ahe
never complains, I dare not depend. I want to have
your opinion of her loolu. I know you will soon call
on her; she il living in dread of the visit. Perhaps it
it paid already. Let me hear from you without delay;
I am impatient for a thousand particular; Remember
how few minute! I was at Randalla, and in how
bewildered, how mad a mate: and I am not much better
yet , still insane either from happincu or misery. When
I think of the kindneu and favour I have met with, of
her excellence and patience, and my uncle’s generoaity,
I am mad with joy: but when I recollect all the un-
sineuI occasioned her, and how little I deacrve to
be forgiven, I am mad with anger. If I could but see
her again! But I must not propoee it yet; my uncle
ha; been too good for me to encroach. I mutt nill
add to this long letter. You have not heard all that
you ought to hear. I could not give any connected
detail yesterday; but the auddenneu and, in one light.
the unoeaeonableness with which the afair bum out,
need. explanation; for, though the event of the 16th
ult., on you will conclude, immediately opened to me
the happielt prospects, I should not have presumed on
much early measures, but from the very particular circum-
Itances which left me not an hour to lone. I should
myaelf have ohrunlt from anything no hasty, and the
would have felt every acruple of mine with multi lied
strength and reﬁnement: but I had no choice. grhe

EMMA. 2! l

hasty engagement she had entered into with that woman
-—here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave of
abruptly, to recollect and compose myself. I have been
walking over the country, and am now, I hope, rational
enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to
be. It is, in fact, a most monifying retrospect for me.
I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit that my
manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F.,
were highly blamable. Sb disa proved them, which
ought to have been enough. NI; plea of concealing
the truth lhe did not think sufﬁcient. She was dis-
pleased: I thought unreasonably so; I thought her, on
a thousand occasions, unnecessaril scnrpulous and
cautious; I thought her even cod. But she was
always right. If I had followed her judgment, and
subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed
roper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness

have ever known. We quarrelled. Do you remem-
ber the morning spent at Douwell? Then every little
dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis.
I was late: I met her walking home by herself, and
wanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it.
She absolume refused to allow me, which I then
thought most unreasonable. Now, however, I see
nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of
discretion. While I, to blind the world to our engage-
ment, was behaving one hour with objectionable particu—
larity to another woman, was she to be consenung the
next to a proposal which might have made every pre-
vious caution useless? Had we been met walking
together between Douwell and Highbury, the truth
must have been ted. I was mad enough, how-
ever, to resent. I oubtcd her affection. I doubted it
more the next day on Box Hill; when, provoked by
such conduct on my side, ouch shameful, inso ent, neglect
of her, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it

z [2 EHIA.

would have been impossible for any woman of sense to
endure, she a ke her resentment in a form of words
perfectly inte ligihle to me. In short, my dear madam,
it was a quarrel blameless on her side, abominable on
mine; and I returned the same evening to Richmond,
though I might have staid with you till the next mom-
ing, merely because I would be as angry with her as
possible. Even then, I was not such a fool as not to
mean to be reconciled in time; but I was the injured
person—injured by her coldness—and I went away
determined that she should make the ﬁrst advances. I
shall alwa I congratulate myself that you were not of
the Box ill party. Had you witnessed my behaviour
there, I can hardly suppose you would ever have
thought well of me again. In effect upon her appean
in the immediate resolution it produced. As soon as the
found I was really gone from Randalls, the closed with
the offer of that oﬂieious Mrs Elton; the whole system
of whose treatment of her, by the bye, has ever ﬁlled
me with indignation and hatred. I must not quarrel
with a spirit of forbearance which has been IO richly
extended towards myself; but, otherwise, I should
loudly protest against the share of it which that woman
has known. ‘ Jane,’ indeed! You will observe that l
have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that
name, even to you. Think, then, what I must have
endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltons, with
all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all the inso-
lence of imaginary superiority. Have patience with
me, I shall soon have done. She closed with this
offer, resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the
next day to tell me that we never were to meet again.
She felt lb: engagement to be a mum of repentance and
other, to web .- :5: Iii-vulva! it. This letter reached
me on the very morning of my poor aunt’s death. I
answered it within an hour; but from the confusion of

mus. 213

my mind, and the multiplicity of business falling on me
at once, my answer, instead of being sent with all the
many other letters of that day, was locked up in my
writing-desk, and I, tnmting that I had written enough,
though but a few lines, to satisfy her, remained without
any uneasiness. I was lather disappointed that I did
not hear from her again speedily; nt I made excuses
for her, and was too busy, and—may I add ?——too
cheerful in my views to be captions. We removed to
Windsor; and two days afterwards I received a partel
from her——my own letters all retumedl—and a few
lines at the same time by the post, stating her extreme

rise at not having had the smallest reply to her last;
“didjadding that as silence on such 3 int could not be
misconstrued, and as it must be equal y desirable to both
to have every subordinate arrangement concluded as
soon as possible, she now sent me, by a safe conveyance,
all my letters, and requested, that if I could not directly
command hers, so as to send them to Highhury within
a week, I would forward them after that period to her
at. : in short, the full direction to Mr Small-
n'dge’s, near Bristol, stared me in the face. I knew the
name, the place, I knew all about it, and instantly saw
what she had been doing. It was perfectly accordant
with that resolution of character which I ltnew her to
possess; and the secrecy she had maintained as to any
such design in her former letter, was equally descriptive
of its anxious delicacy. For the world would not she
have seemed to threaten me. Imagine the shock;
imagine how, till I had actually detected my own
blunder,I raved at the blunders of the post. What
was to be done? One thing only. I must speak to
my uncle. Without his sanction 1 could not hope to
be listened to again. I spoke; circumstances were in
my favour; the late event had softened away his pride,
and he was, earlier than I could have anticipated,

 

ar4 nun.

wholly reconciled and complying; and could say at
last, poor man! with a deep sigh, that he wished I
might find as much happinese in the marriage state at
he had done. I felt that it would be of a different
sort. Are on disposed to pity me for what I must
have suffered, in opening the cause to him, for my lus-

se while all was at make? No; do not pity me till

reached Highbury, and saw how ill I had made her.
Do not ity me till I saw her wan, nick looks. I
reached igh at the time of day when, from my
knowledge of their late breakfast-hour, I was certain of
a good chance of ﬁnding her alone. I was not die-
appointed; and at last I waa not disappointed either in
the object of my journey. A great deal of very rea-
sonable, very just displeasure I had to persuade away.
But it is done; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer,
than ever, and no moment’l uneasiness can ever occur
between us again. Now, my dear madam, I will re-
_ leaoe you; but I could not conclude before. A thou-
sand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness: you
have ever shown me, and ten thousand for the atten-
tions your heart will dictate towards her. If you
think me in a way to be happier than I deserve, I am
quite of your opinion. Mist W. call: me the child of
good fortune. I hope she in right. In one respect my
good fortune in undoubted, that of being able to sub-
scribe myself, your obliged and aﬁectionate Son,

“ F. C. Wee-mu Cuutcmu."

than": 13.

HIS letter must make its way to Emma's feelings.

She was obliged, in spite of her previous deter-
mination to the contrary, to do it all the justice

that Mrs Weston foretold. Au soon as she came to her

emu. 215

own name, it was irresistible; every line relating to her-
self was interesting, and almost every line agreeable;
and when this charm ceased, the subject could still
maintain itself by the natural return of her former regard
for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any
picture of love must have for her at that moment. She
never nopt till she had gone through the whole : and
though it was impossible not to feel that he had been
wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had sup-
posed ; and he had suffered and was very sorry; and
he was so grateful to Mrs Wmou, and so much in love
with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself, that
there was no being severe; and could he have entered
the room, the must have shaken hands with him as
heartily as ever.

She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr
Knighdey came again she desired him to read it. She
was sure of Mrs Wemn’s wishing it to be communi-
cated; especially to one who, like Mr Knightley, had
seen so much to blame in his conduct

“ I shall be very glad to look it over,” said he; “ but
it seems long. I will take it home with me at night.”

But that would not do. Mr Weston was to call in
the evening, and she must return it by him.

“ I would rather be talking to you," he replied;
“but as it seems a matter of justice, it shall be done.”

He began—stopping, however, almost directly to say,
“ Had I been offered the sight of one of this gentleman's
letters to his mother-in-lawa few months ago, Emma, it
would not have been taken with such indifference."

He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and
then, with a smile, observed, “ Humph! a ﬁne compli-
mentary opening : but it is his war . One man's style must
not be the rule of annther’s. e will not be severe."

“ It will be natural for me," he added shortly after-
wards, “ to speak my opinion aloud as I read. By

216 nuns.

doing it, I shall feel that I am near you. It will not
be so great a loss of time; but if you dislike it—-”
“ Not at all. I should wish it."
Mr Knighth returned to his reading with greater

alacrit .

"lie triﬂe. here,” said he, “as to the temptation.
He knows he is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.
Bad. He ought not to have formed the engagement.
‘, His father’s disposition ’—lie is unjust, however, to his
father. Mr Weston’s sanguine temper was a blessing
on all his upright and honourable exertions; but Mr
Weston earned every present comfort before he
endeavoured to gain it. Very true; he did not come
till Miss Fairfax was here.”

“ And I have not forgotten," said Emma, “ how sure
6m were that he might have come sooner if he would.

on pass it over very handsomely; but you were per-
fectly right.”

“ I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma;
but yet, I think, had you not been in the use, I should
still have distrusted him.”

When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged
to read the whole of it aloud—all that related to her——
with a smile, a look, a shake of the head, a word or
two of assent, or disapprobation, or merely of love, as
the subject required; concluding, however, seriously,
and, after steady reﬂection, thus—

“ Very bad—though it might have been worse. Play-
ing a most dangerous game. Too much indebted to
the event for his acquittal. No judge of his own
manners by you. Always deceived, in fact, by his own
wishes, and regardless of little besides his ("In con-
venience. Fancying you to have futhomed his secret!
Natural enough! his own mind full of intrigue, that he
should suspect it in others. Mystery—Finesse—how
they pervert the understanding! My Emma, does not

sun. :17

everything serve to prove more and more the heaqu
of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each
other 2 ”

Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on
Harriet’s account, which she could not give any sincere
explanation of.

“ You had better go on,” said she.

He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, “ The
pianofortel Ahl—that was the act of a very, very
young man, one too young to consider whether the in-
convenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure. A boyish scheme, indeed! I cannot com-
prehend a man’s wishing to give a woman any proof of
affection which he knows she would mther dispense
with: and he did know that she would have prevented
the instrument’s coming if she could.”

After this, he made some progress without any pause.
Frank Churchill’s confession of having behaved shame-
fully was the ﬁrst thing to call for more than a word in

n .

“ I perfectly agree with you, sir,” was then his
remark. “ You did behave very shamefully. You never
wrote a truer line.” And having gone through what
inunediately followed of the basis of their disagreement,
and his persisting to act in direct op 'tion to Jane
F airfax's sense of right, he made a ler pause to say,
“ This is very bad. He had induced her to place her-
self, for his sake, in a situation of extreme difﬁculty and
uneasiness, and it should have been his lim object to
prevent her from sulfering unnecerily. She must
have had much more to contend with in carrying on the
correspondence than he could. He should have re-
spected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such ;
but hers were all reasonable. We must look to her
one fault, and remember that she had done a wrong
thing in consenting to the engagement, to bear that she
should have been in such a state of punishment.”

2 r8 "HA.

Emma knewthatbewunowgetﬁngtothe Box
Hill , and grew uncomfortable. Her own behavi-
our been no very improper! She wan deeyl
atharned, and a little afraid of hi- next look. It wan
read, however, steadily, attentively, and without the
unelleet remark; and, excepting one momentary glance
at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear of giving pain,
no remembrance of Box Hill leaned to exit.

“There is no laying much for the delicacy of our
good friends, the Eltonu," was his next oheervarion.
“ Hie feeling: are natural. What? actually reeolve to
break with him entirely! She :felt the engagement to
be a Ionrce of repentance and misery to ach: the
dimlved it. What a view this give: of her sense
of his behaviour! Well, he must be a more extra-
ordinary—”

“ Nay, my, road on. You will ﬁnd how very much
he suffers.”

“I hope he doee," replied Mr Knight] , coolly,
and returning the letter. “ ‘ Smallridge! ' hat does
this mean ? What is all thin?”

“ She had engaged to go as governess to Mn Small-
ridge'n children—a dear friend of Mn Elton'a—a
neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by the bye, I wonder
how Mrs Elton bean the disappointment?”

“ Say nothing, rn dear Emma, while you oblige me
to read—not even 0 Mr- Elton. Only one page more.
I shall soon have done. What a letter the man
writes ! ”

“I with you would read it with a kinder spirit
towards him.”

“ Well, thereir feeling here. He does seem to have
luﬂ'ered in ﬁnding her ill. Certainly, I can have no
doubt of his being fond of her. ‘ Dearer, much dearer,
than ever.’ I hope he my long continue to feel all the
value of Inch a reconcilian'on. He is a very liberal

EMMA. 2 19

thanker, with his thousands and tens of thmmndL—
‘Happier than I deserve.’ Come, he knows himself
there. 'Miss Woodhonse calls me the child of good
fortune.’ Those were Miss Woodhouse’s words, were
they? And a line ending—and there is the letter.
‘The child of good fortune! ’ That was your name
for him, was it?”

“ You do not appear so well satisﬁed with his letter
as I am; but still you must, at least I hope you must,
think the beuer of him for it. I hope it does him some
service with you.”

“ Yes, certainly it. does. He has had great faults—
faults of inconsideration and thoughtlesrness; and I am
very much of his opinion in thinking him liker to be
hap ier than he deserves: but still as he is, beyond a
dou really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hoped, have the advantage of being constant]
with her, am very ready to believe his characmr w‘l
improve, and acquire from hers the steadiness and deli-
cacy of principle that it wants. And now, let me talk
to you of something else. I have another person’s in-
terest at present so much at heart, that I cannot think
any longer about Frank Churchill. Ever since I left
you this morning, Emma, my mind has been hard at.
work on one subject” -

The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected,
gentlemanlike English, such as Mr Knightley used even
to the woman he was in love with, how to be able to
ask herto marry him without attacking the happiness
of her father. Emma’s answer was ready at the ﬁrst
word. " While her dear father lived, any change of
condition must be impossible for her. She could never
quit him.” Part only of this answer, however, was
admitted. The impossibility of her quitting her father
Mr Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the inad-
missibility of any other change he could not agree to.

220 “HA.

He had been thinking it over most y, mot intently :
he had at ﬁrst to induce r Woodhouse to
remove with her to unwell; he had wanted to believe
it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr Woodhoune would
not suffer him to deceive himself long; and now he
confessed his persuasion that ouch a nanaplantation
would be a risk of her father’s comfort, pcrha I even of
hi. life, which must not he haurded. Mr oodhouse
taken from Hanﬁeld l—No, he felt that it ought not to
be attempted. But the plan which had arieen on the
sacriﬁce of thin, he truned his dearest Emma would
not ﬁnd in any respect objectionable; it Wu, that he
Ihould be received at Hatﬁeld ! that no long as her
father’s happiness—in other words his life—required
Hartﬁeld to continue her home, it should he hit like-
wrse.

Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already
had her own passing droughts. Like him, the had
tried the scheme‘and rejected it; but ouch an alter-
native as this had not occurred to her. She was ten-
sible of all the affection it evinced. She felt that, in
quitting Donwell, he mun be sacriﬁcing a great deal of
independence of hours and habits; that in living con-
nantly with her father, and in no house of his own,
there would be much, very much, to be borne with.
She promised to think of it, and advised him to think
of it more; but he was fully convinced that no reﬂec-
tion could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject.
He had given it, he could mare her, very long and
calm consideration; he had been walking away from
William Larkins the whole morning to have his thoughts
to himself.

" Ah! there ll one diﬂiculty unprovided for,” cried
Emma. " I am sure William Larkins will not like it.
You must get his consent before you ask mine.”

She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty

LIMA. 221

nearly promised, moreover, to think of it with the in-
tention of finding it a very good scheme.

It is remarkable that Emma, in the many, very many.
points of view in which she was now beginning to con-
sider Donwell Abbey, was never struck with any sense
of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as
heir-expectant had formerly been so tenacioust regarded.
Think she must of the possible difference to the poor
little boy; and yet she only gave herself a nucy con-
scious smile about it, and found amusement in detectin
the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr Knightley’s
marrying Jane Fairfax, or anybody else, which at the
time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude
of the sister and the aunt.

This p sal of his, this plan of marrying and con—
tinuing atrggjrtﬁeld—die more the contemplated it the
more pleasing it became. His evils seemed to lessen,
her own advantages to increase, their mutual good to
outweigh every drawback. Such a companion for her-
self in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!
Such a partner in all those duties and cares to which
time must be giving increase of melancholy !

She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet;
but every blessing of her own seemed to involve and
advance the suﬁ'erings of her friend, who must now be
even excluded from Hartﬁeld. The delightnt family
Etty which Emma was securing for herself, poor

arriet must, in mere charitable caution, be kept at a
distance from. She would be a loser in every way.
Emma could not deplore her film absence as any de-
duction from her own enjoyment. In such a party,
Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise;
but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a peculiarly cruel
necessity that was to be placing her in such a state of
nnrperlted punishment.

In time, of course, Mr Knightley would be forgotten,

II. P

222 "HA.

that is, supplanted; but this could not be expected to
happen very early. Mr Knightley himself would he
doing nothing to assist the cure; not like Mr Elton.
Mr Knightley, alwa s so kind, to feeling, so truly con-
siderate for every y, would never deserve to be less
worshipped than now; and it rally was too much to
hope even of Harriet, that she could be in love with
more than rbru men in one year.

chants: 1’1].

T wasavery great relief to Emma to ﬁnd Harriet
as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting. Their
intercourse was inful enough by letter. How

much worse had they n obliged to meet!

Harriet expressed herself very much, as might be
supposed, without reproaches, or apparent se of ill-
umge; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of
resentment, a something bordering on it in her style,
which increased the desimbleneas of their being separate.
It might be only her own consciousness; but it seemed
as if an angel only could have been quite without resent-
ment under such a stroke.

She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella’s invita-
tion ; and she was fortunate in having a suﬁicient reason
for asking it, without resorting to invention. There was
a tooth amiss. Harriet really wished, and had wished
some time, to consult a dentist. Mrs John Knightley
was delighted to be of use ; anything of ill health was
a recommendation to her; and though not so fond of a
dentist as of a Mr Wingﬁeld, she was quite eager to
have Han‘iet under her care. When it was thus settled
on her sister’s side, Emma proposed it to her friend,
and found her very pemladable. Harriet was to go;

mm. :23

she was invited for at least a fortnight. She was to be
conveyed in Mr Woodhouse’s carriage. It was all
arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in
Bninswick Square.

Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr Knightley’s
visits; now she could talk, and she could listen with
true happiness, unchecked by that sense of injustice, of
guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted her
when remembering how disappointed a heart was near
her, how much might at that moment, and at a little
distance, be enduring by the feelings which she had led
am herself.

he diﬁ'erence of Harriet at Mn Goddard’s, or in
London made, perhaps, an unreasonable difference in
Emma’s nenmtions; but she could not think of her in
London without objects of curiosity and employment,
which must be averting the past, and carrying her out
of herself.

She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed
directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had
occupied. There was a communication before her, one
which :1): only could be competent to make—the con-
fession of her engagement to her father; but she would
have nothing to do with it at present. She had re-
solved to defer the discle till Mrs Weston were
mfe and well. No additional agitation should be
thrown at this period among those she loved—and the
evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the
appointed time. A fortnight, at least, of leisure and
peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more
agitating, delight, should be here.

She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure,
to employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in
calling on Miss Fairfax. She ought to go—and she
was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present
situations increasing every other motive of good-will.

224 nuns.

It would be a um! satisfaction; but the consciousness
of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the
interest with which she should attend to anything Jane
might communicate.

She went—she had driven once unsuccessfully to the
door, but had not been into the house since the morning
after Box Hill, when poor Jane had been in such dia-
tress as had ﬁlled her with compassion, though all the
worst of her sufferings had been unsupected. The
fear of being still unwelcome determined her, though
assured of their being at home, to wait in the passage,
and send up her name. She heard Patty announcing
it; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bares
had before made so happily intelligible. No; she
heard nothing but the instant reply of, “Beg her to
walk up;” and a moment afterwards she was met on
the stairs by Jane herself coming eagcrl forward as if
no other reception of her were felt su cient. Emma
had never seen her look so well, so lovely, so engaging.
There was consciousness, animation, and warmth;
there was everything which her countenance or manner
could ever have wanted. She came forward with an
oﬂ'ercd hand; and said, in a low, but very feeling
tone—

“ This is most ltind, indeed! Miss Woodhouse, it
is impossible for me to express—I hope you will be-
lieve—Excuse me for being so entirely without words.”

Emma was gratiﬁed, and would soon have shewn no
want of words, if the sound of Mrs Elton’s voice from
the sitting-room had not checked her, and made it
expedient to compress all her friendly and all her con-
gratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of
the hand.

Mrs Bates and Mrs Elton were together. Miss
Bates was out, which accounted for the previous tran-
quillity. Emma could have wished Mrs Elton else-

Burns 22 5

where; but she was in a humour to have patience with
everybody; and as Mrs Elton met her with unusual
graciousness, she hoped the rencontre would do them
no harm.

She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs Elton’s
thoughts, and understand why she was, like herself,
in happy spirits; it was being in Miss F airfax’s con-
ﬁdence, and fancying herself acquainted with what was
still a secret to other people. Emma saw symptoms of
it immediately in the expression of her ﬁce; and while

ying her own compliments to Mrs Bates, and appear-
ing to attend to the good old lady's replies, she saw
her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a
letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to
Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold
ridicule‘ by her side, saying, with signiﬁcant nods—

“We can ﬁnish this some other time, you know.
You and I shall not want oppommities; and, in fact,
you have hard all the essential already. I only
wanted to prove to you that Mrs S. admits our apology,
and is not oﬂ'ended. You see how delightfqu she
writes. 0h, she is a sweet creature! You would
have doated on her, had you gone.—-But not a word
more. Let us be discreet—quite on our good he-
haviour.—Hush !—You remember those lines—I for-
get the poem at this moment :—

‘ For when a lady 'I in the use,
You know, all other things give place.’

Now I say, my dear, in our case, for bub, read—mum!
a word to the wise. I am in a line ﬂow of spirits, an’t
I ? But I want to set your heart at ease as to Mrs S.
III} representation, you see, has quite appeased her.”

And again, on Emma’s merely turning her head
to look at Mn Bates’s knitting, she added, in a hall"
whisper—

' A corruption of “ reticnle."—-Jomlsott‘s Dscrsoluu.

226 units.

“ I mentioned no runner, you will observe. Oh no!
cautious at a minister of state. I managed it extremely
de1)

Emma could not doubt. It was a pal le display,
repeated on every possible occasion. hen they had
all talked a little while in harmony of the weather and
Mrs Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed
with——

“Do not you think, Miss Woodhouue, our nucy
little friend here is charmingly recovered? Do not you
think her cure does Perry the highest credit ? ” here was
a tide glance of great meaning at Jane). “ pan my
word, Perry ha- restored her in a wonderful short time!

A Oh, if you had seen her, as I did, when the was at the
wont! ” And when Mn Bates was raying tome/thing
to Emma, whispered farther, " We do not lay a word
of any unit/me that Perry might have; not a word of
a certain young physician from Windsor. Oh no, Perry
shall have all the credit."

"I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss
Woodhouse,” lhe shortly afterwards began, “ since the
party to Box Hill. Very pleantIparty. But yet I think
there wan something wanting. hing: did not seem—
that it, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of
same. So it appeared to me, at least, but I might be
mistaken. However, I think it answered so far an to
tempt one to go again. What say you both to our
collecting the same party, and exploring the Box Hill
again, while the line weather lam? It must he the
same party, you know—quite the same party, not one
exception.”

Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could
not help being diverted by the perplexity of her ﬁrst
answer to herself, resulting, the supposed, from doubt of
what might be laid, and impatience to say everything.

“Thank you, dear Miu Woodhouse, you are all

emu. 2a7

kindneu. It is impossible to say—Yes, indeed, I quite
understand—dearest Jane’s prospects—that is, I do not
mean. But she is charmingly recovered. How is Mr
Woodhouse? I am so glad—Quite out of my power.
—Such a happy little circle as you lind us hem—Yes,
indeed. — Charming young man !—that is——-so very
friend] ; I mu good Mr Perry !-——such attention to
Janel ’ And from her great, her more than commonly
thankful delight towards Mrs Elton for being there,
Emma guessed that there had been a little show of
resentment towards Jane, from the Vicarage quarter,
which was now graciously overcome.—After a few
whispers, indeed, which placed it beyond a guess, Mrs
Elton, speaking louder, said—

" Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have
been so long, that anywhere else I should think it neces-
sary to apologize; but, the truth is, that I am waiting
for;I my lord and master. He promined to join me here,
an y his respects to 01L"

“What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from
Mr Elton 2 That will be a favour indeed; for I know
gentlemen do not like morning visits, and Mr Elton’s
time is so engaged.”

“ Upon my word it is, Miss Bates. He really is
engaged from morning to night. There is no end of
gople’s coming to him, on some pretence or other.

he magistrates, and overseen, and churchwardens, are
always wanting his opinion. They seem not able to do
anything without him. ‘ Upon my word, Mr E.,’ I
often my, ‘rather you than I. I do not know what
would become of my crayons and my instrument if I
had half so many applicanta.’ Bad enough as it is, for
I absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable
degree. I believe I have not played a bar this fortnight.
However, he is coming, I assure u: yes, indeed, on
purpose to wait on you all." An putting up her hand

228 EMMA.

to acreen her worda from Emma—“A congratulatory
visit, you know. Oh! yea, quite indinPenaable.”

Minn Bates looked about her no happily.

“He promised to come to me at soon a: he could
diaengage himself from Knightley; but he and Knight-
ley are shut up together in deep consultation. Mr E.
in Knightley’l right hand.’ '

Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only
laid, “Ia Mr Elton gone on foot to Donwell? He
will have a hot walk.”

“Oh no, it in a meeting at the Crown—a regular
meeting. Wemn and Cole will be there too; but one
is apt to speak only of those who lead. I fancy Mr E.
and Knightley have everything their own way.’

“ Have not you mistaken the day?” laid Emma.
“ I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown in
not till to-morrow. Mr Knightley wan at Hartﬁeld
yelterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday.”

“ Oh no, the meeting is certainly to-day," wan the
abrupt answer, which denoted the imponibility of any
blunder on Mn Elton’a ride. “I do believe,” the
continued, “this is the most troublesome pariah that
ever was. We never hard of ouch thing. at Maple
Grove.”

“ Your pariah there was small,” aaid Jane.

“ Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I
never heard the tubject talked of.”

" But it in proved by the amallnesl of the Ichool,
which I have heard you Ipeak of, an under the patron-
age of your liner and Mrs Bragge; the only school,
and not more than ﬁve-and-twenty children.”

" Ah! you clever creature, that ’a very true. What
a thinking brain you have! I say, Jane, what a r-
fect character you and I should make, if we can] be
nhaken together. My livelinean and your solidity would
produce perfection. Not that I presume to insinuate,

nuns 229

however, that will people may not think you perfection
already. But hush !-—not a word, if you please."

It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was want-
ing to give her words, not to Mrs Elton, but to Miss
Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw. The wish of
distinguishing her, as far as civility pennined, was very
evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a
look.

Mr Elton made his appurance. His lsdy greeted
him with some of her sparkling vivacity.

“Ve pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on
here, to an encumbrance to my friends, so long be-
fore you vouchsafe to come. But you knew what a
dutiful creature you had to deal with. You knew I
should not stir till my lord and master appeared. Here
have I been siuing this hour, giving these young ladies
a sample of true conjugal obedience; for who can say,
you know, how soon it may he wanted i ”

Mr Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit
seemed thrown away. Hie civilin'es to the other ladies
must be paid; but his subsequent ob'ect was to lament
over himself, ﬁsr the heat he was su ring, and the
he had had for nothing. ‘

“ When I got to Donwell," said he, “ Knightley
could not be found. Very odd! very unaccountable!
after the note I sent him this morning, and the message
he returned, that he should certainly be at home till
one."

“Donwell!” cried his wife. “My dear Mr E.,
you lave not been to Donwell; you mean the Crown;
you come ﬁ'orn the meeting at the Crown .’ ”

" No, no, that ’s to-morrow; and I particularly
wanted to see Knightley to-day on that very account.
Such a dmdful broiling morning ! I went over the ﬁelds
too” (speaking in a tone of great ill usage), “which
made It so much the worse. And then not to ﬁnd

23° stun.

himathomel I astute you I am not at allpleaaed.
And no apology left, no mange for me. The house-
declared she knew nothing of my being ex-
pected. Very extraordinary! And nobody knew at
all which way he was gone. Perhaps to Hartﬁeld,
ﬁrhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.
in Woodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightleyl
Can you explain it 2”

Emma amused herself by protecting that it Wu very
extraordinary, indeed, and that she had not a syllable
to m for him.

“I cannot imagine,” said Mn Elton (feeling the
indignity as a wife ought to do), “I cannot imagine
how he could do such a thing by you, of all people in
the world! The very last non whom one should
expect to be forgotten! y dear Mr E., he must
have left a message for you, I am sure he must. Not
even Knightley could be so very eccentric; and his
servant. forgot it. Depend upon it that Win the case;
and very likely to ha pen with the Donwell servants,
who are all, I have n ten observed, extremely awkward
and remiss. I am sure I would not have such a crea-
ture as his Harry stand at our sideboard for an con-
sidention. And as for Mn Hodges, Wright ho ds her
ve cheap indeed. She promised Wright a receipt,
an never sent it.”

“ I met William Larkins," continued Mr Elton, " as
I got near the house, and he told me I should not
ﬁnd his master at home, but I did not believe him.
William seemed rather out of humour. He did not
know what was come to his master lately, he said, but
he could hardly ever get the speech of him. I have
nothing to do with William’s wants, but it really is of
very great importance that I should see Knightley
to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very
serious inconvenience that I should have had this hot

walk to no pmpose.”

suns. :31

Emma felt that she could not do better than go
home directly. In all probability she was at this very
time waited for there; and Mr Knightley might be

reserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards
h/lr Elton, if not towards William Larkins.”

She was pleased, on taking leave, to ﬁnd Miss Fair-
fax determined to attend her out of the room, to go
with her even downstairs; it gave her an opportunity,
which she immediately made use of, to say—

“ It. is as well, perha that I have not had the pos-
sibility. Had you not sin-rounded by other friends,
I might have been tempted to introduce a subject, to
ask questions, to speak more openly than might have
been strictly correct. I feel that I should certainly
have been impertinent."

“ Oh I " cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation
which Emma thought inﬁnitely more becoming to her
than all the elegance of all her usual composure—
" there would have been no danger. The danger
would have been of my wearying you. You could not
have gratiﬁed me more than by ex rearing an interest
Indeed, Miss Woodhouse ’ (speaking more
collectedly), “ with the consciousness which I have of
misconduct—very great misconduct—it is particularly
consoling to me to know that those of my friends whose
good opinion is mom worth preserving, are not disgusted
to such a degree as to—I have not time for half that I
could wish to say. I long to make apologies, excuses,
to urge something for myself. I fee it so very due.
But, unfortunately—in short, ifyour compassion does
not stand my friend ”

“ Oh I you are too scrupulous, indeed you are," cried
Emma, warmly, and taking her hand. “ You owe me
no apologies; and everybody to whom you might be
supposed to owe them is so perfectly satisﬁed, so dc.
lighted even ”

 

 

 

232 tuna.

“You are we kind, but I know what my manner!
were ID you. a cold and artiﬁcial! I had always a
part to act It was a life of deceit! I know that I
muat have dieguued you.”

“ Pray say no more. I feel that all the apologies
ahould be on my ride. Let us forgive each other at
once. We must do whatever in to be done quicken,
and I think our feelings will lone no time there. I
hope on have pleannt account. from Windwr I "

CK

“ And the next news, I luppooe, will be, that we are
to lone yon—jun an I to know you.”

“Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be
thought of yet. I am here till claimed by Colonel and
Mrs Campbell."

“ Nothing can be actually aettled yet, perhaps,"
replied Emma, smiling—“ but, excuse me, it must be
thought 0 ."

The tmile wa- retnrned ac Jane anlwered—

“ You are very right; it has been thought of. And
I will own to you (lam lure it will be Iafe), that no
far as our living with Mr Churchill at Emcomhe, it in
aettled. There must be three months, at least, of dee
mourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will
be nothing more to wait for."

“ Thank you, thank you. This is just what I
wanted to be assured of. Oh! if you knew how much
I love everything that in decided and open l—Good-bye,
good-bye.”

EMMA. 233

theater 13]}.

RS WESTON’S friends were all made happy
by her safety; and if the satisfaction of her
well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was

by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl. She
had been decided in wishing for a Miss Weston. She
would not acknowledge that it was with any view of
making a match for her, herafter, with either of
Isabella’s sons; but she was convinced that a daughter
would suit both father and mother best. It would he a
gm! comfort to Mr Weston, as he grew older—and
even Mr Weston might be growing older ten years
hence—to have his ﬁreside enlivened by the sports and
the nonsense, the freaks and the fancies of a child never
banished from home; and Mrs Weston—no one could
doubt that a daughter would be most to her; and it
would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how
to teach, should not have their powers in exercise again.

" She has had the adwntage, you know, of pmctising
on me,” she continued—“ like La Baronne d’Almane
on La Comtesse d’Ostalis, in Madame de Genlia’
‘Adelaide and Theodore,’ and we shall now see her
own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan."

“ That is,” replied Mr Knightley, “ she will indulge
her even more than she did you, and believe that she does
not indulge her at all. It will be the only diﬂ‘ereuce.”

“Poor child! " cried Emma; “at that rate, what
will become of her?”

“Nothing very bad. The fate of thousands. She
will he disagreeable in infancy, and correct herself as
she grows older. I am losing all my hittemess against
ﬁoilt children, my dearest Emma. I, who am owing

I my happiness to Jon, would not it be horrible ingrati-
tude in me to be severe on them ?"

234 mm.

Emma lau bed, and replied : “ But I had the
nuisance of all your endeavoun to counteract the indul-
gence of other people. I doubt whether my own sense
would have canceled me without it.”

“Do you 3—1 have no doubt. Nature gave you
undermding :—Misa Taylor gave you principles.
You must have done well. My interference was quite
an likely to do harm as good. It was very natural for
you to say, ‘ What right has he to lecture me." and I
am afmid very natural for you to feel that it was done
in a dingrealﬂe manner. I do not believe I did you
any good. The good was all to myself, by making you
an object of the tenderest alfection to me. I could not
think about you to much without dotting on you, fault!
and all; and by dint of fancying ao many errors, have
been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at
least."

“ I am cure you were of use to me,” cried Emma.
“I was ve often inﬂuenced lightly by you—oftener
than I woul own at the time. I am ve sure you
did me good. And if poor little Anna enton is to
be spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do
as much for her at you have done for me, except falling
in love with her when the in thirteen.”

“How often, when you were a girll have you aid
to me, with one of your saucy looka—‘ Mr Knightley, I
am going to do oo-and-sn ; papa says I may,’ or ‘I
have Miss Taylor’s leave ’ —aomething which, you
knew, I did not approve. In such cases my interfer-
ence" was giving you two bad feeling: instead of
one.

“ What an amiable creature I was! No wonder
you should hold my speeches in such alfectionate
remembrance."

“ ‘ Mr Knightlcy,’ you always called me. ‘ Mr
Knightley ; ' and, from habit, it has not so very formal a

emu. 23 5

sound. And yet it is formal. I want you to call me
something else, but I do not know what.”

“ I remember once calling you ‘ George,’ in one of
my amiable ﬁts, about ten yarn ago. I did it because
I thought it would offend you; but, as you made no
objection, I never did it again.”

“ And cannot you call me ‘ George ’ now i ”

“Impossiblel I never can call you anything but
‘ Mr Knightley.’ I will not promise even to equal the
elegant terseness of Mrs Elton, by calling you Mr K.
But I will promise,” she added presently, laughing and
blushing, “I will promise to call you once by your
Christian name. I do not say when, but perha you
may guess where ;——in the building in which . takes
M. for better, for worse.”

Emma grieved that she could not be more openly
just to one important service which hie better sense
would have rendered her, to the advice which would
have nved her from the worn of all her womanly
follies—her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but
it was too tender a subject. She could not enter on it.
Harriet was very seldom mentioned between them.
This, on his side, might merely procccd from her not
being thought of ; but Emma was rather inclined to
attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some
appearances, that their friendship were declining. She
was aware herself that, parting under any other circum-
stances, they certainly should have corresponded more,
and that her intelligence would not have rested, as it
now almost wholly did, on Isabella's letters. He might
observe that it was so. The pain of being obliged to
£111ch concealment towards him was very little in-

rior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.

Inbella sent quite as good an account of her visitor
as could be expected; on her ﬁrst arrival line had
thought her out of spirits, which appeared perfectly

236 min.

natural, as there was a dentist to be consulted ; but since
that business had been over, she did not appear to ﬁnd
Harriet different from what the had known her before.
Isabella, to be sure, was no very quick observer ; yet if
Harriet had not been equal to playing with the children,
it would not have escaped her. Emma’s comforts and
hopes were most agrembl carried on, by Harriet's
being to stay longer; her tbrtnight was likely to be a
month at least. Mr and Mrs John Knightley were to
come down in August, and she was invited to remain
till they could bring her back.

“ John does not even mention your friend,” aid Mr
Knightlcy. “ Here it his answer, if you like to see it."
It was the answer to the communication of his intended
marriage. Emma ac it with a very eager hand.
with an impatience all ive to know what he would say
about it, and not at all checked by bring that her
ﬁ'lend was unmentioned.

“John enters like a brother into my happiness,” con-
tinued Mr Knightley, “but he ll no complimenter ; and
though I well know him to have, likewise, a most
brotherly affection for you, he is so far from making
ﬂourishes, that any other young woman might think him
rather cool in her praise. But I am not afraid of your
seeing what he writes."

“ He writes like a sensible man,” replied Emma,
when she had read the letter. “ I honour his sincerity.
It is very plain that he considen the good fortune of
the engagement as all on my side, but that he is not
without hope of my growing. in time, u worthy of your
affection as you think me already. Had he said any-
thing to bear a different construction, I should not have
believed him."

“ My Emma, he means no such thing. He only
means—"

“ He and I should differ very little in our estimation

arms. :37

of the two,”—interrupted she, with a sort of serious
smile—“ much less, perhaps, than he is aware of, if We
could enter without ceremony or reserve on the subject.”

“ Emma, my dar Emma "

“Oh!” she cried with more thorough gaiety, “if
you fanc your brother does not do me justice, only wait
till my father is in the secret, and hear his opinion.
Depend upon it, he will be much farther from doing
’0" justice. He will think all the happiness, all the

' advantage, on your side of the question ; all the merit
on mine. I wish I ma not sink into ‘poor Emma'
with him at once. I-Iis tender compassion towards
oppressed worth can go no farther.”

“ Ah! ” he cried, “I wish your father mighthe half
as asin convinced as John will he, of our having every
right that equal worth can give, to be happy together.
I am amused by one part of John’s letter—did you
notice it ?—where he says that my infon'nation did not
take him wholly by surprise, that he was rather in ex-

tation of hearing something of the kind.”

“ If I understand your brother, he only means so far
as your having some droughts of marrying. He had no
idea of me. He seems perfectly unprepared for that.”

“ Yes, yes—but I am amused that he should have
seen so far into my feelings. What has hebeen judging
by? I am not conscious of any diﬂ'erence in my spirits,
or conversation that could prepare him at this time for
my marrying any more than at another. But it was so,
I suppose. I dare say there was a dilference when I
was staying with them the other day. I believe I did
not play with the chﬂdren quite so much as usual. I
remember one evening the poor boys saying, ‘Unclc
seems always tired now.’ "

The time was coming when the news must spread
farther, and other persons’ reception of it tried. As
soon as Mrs Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit

11. Q

 

238 EIKA.

Mr Woodhouae’s visiu, Emma having it in view that
her entle mannings should be employed in the cause,
reso wed ﬁrst to announce it at home, and then at Ran-
dalls. But how to break it to her father at last! She
had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of Mr
Knighdey's absence, or when it came to the point her
heart would have failed her, and she must have put it
off ; but Mr Knighdey was to come at such a time, and
follow up the beginning she was to make. She was
forced to speak, and to cheerftu too. She must
not make It: mored ' ed subject ofrniaeryto him,by
a melancholy tone herselil She must not appear to
think it a misfortune. With all the spirits she could
command, the prepared him lint for something strange,
and then, in a few words, said, that if his consent and
approbation could be obtained—which, she trusted,
would be attended with no diﬁiculty, since it was a plan
to promote the happiness of all—she and Mr Knightley
meant to marry; by which means Hartlield would re-
ceive the constant addition of that person’s company,
whom she knew he loved, next to his daughters and
Mrs Weston, best in the world.

Poor man !—it was at ﬁrst a considerable shock to
him, and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it She
was reminded, more than once, of having alwa s said
the would never marry, and assured that it wo d be a
great deal better for her to remain single; and told of
poor Ibella, and poor Miss Taylor. But it would not
do. Emma hung about him affectionately, and smiled,
and said it must be so; and that he must not class her
with Isabella and Mrs Weston, whose marriages taking
them from Hartlield had, indeed, made a melancholy
change: but she was not going from Hanlield ; she
should be always there ; she was introducing no change
in their numbers or their comforts but for the better;
and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the

Emma. :39

happier for having Mr Knightley alwalgs at hand, when
he were once got used to the idea. id he not love
Mr Knightley very much? He would not deny that
he did, she was sure. Whom did he ever want to con-
sult on business but Mr Knightley? Who was so use-
ful to him, who so ready to write his letters, who so
glad to assist him ? Who so cheerful, so attentive, so
attached to him? Would not he like to have him
always on the spot? Yes. That was all very true.
Mr Knightley could not be there too often ; he should
beglad to see him everyday; but theydid see him
every day as it was. Why could they not go on as
the had done?

{Jr Woodhouse could not he soon reconciled; but
the worst was overcome, the idea was given ; time and
continual repetition must do the rest. To Emma’s
entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr Knightley’s,
whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind
of welcome; and he was soon used to be talked to by
each on every fair occasion. They had all the assistance
which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest
approbation; and Mrs Weston was ready, on the ﬁrst
meeting, to consider the suhject in the most serviceable
light ; ﬁrst as a settled, and, secondly, as a good one—
weJl aware of the near] equal importance of the two
recommendations to r Woodhouse’s mind. It was
agreed upon, as what was to be ; and everybody by whom
he was used to be guided assuring him that it would
be for his happiness, and having some feelings himself
which almost admitted it, he began to think that some
time or other, in another year or two. perhaps, it
might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place.

Mrs Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings
in all that she said to him in favour of the event She
had been extremely surprised, never more so, than when
Emma first opened the affair to her; but she saw in it

240 mm.

only increase of happinelo to all, and had no scruple in
urging him tothe utmost. She had such a regard for
Mr Knightley, as to think he deserved even her dearest
Emma ; and it wan in every respect to proper, suitable, and
unexceptionable a connection, and in one rapect, one
point of the highest importance, so peculiarly e igihle, so
ningularly fortunate, that now it seemed as if Emma
could not safely have attached herself to any other
creature. and that she had herself been the an ides: of
beings in not having thought of it, and wish it long
ago. How very few of thone men in a rank of life to
address Emma would have renounced their own home
for Hanﬁeld! And who but Mr Knightley could
know and bear with Mr Woodhouae, so as to make
tuch an arrangement desirable! The diﬁiculty of dis-
posing of poor Mr Woodhouae had been always felt in
her husband’s plans and her own, for a marriage between
Frank and Emma. How to settle the claims of Erw-
combe and Hartﬁeld had been a continual impediment
—less acknowledged by Mr Weston than by herself—
but even he had never been able to ﬁnish the
better than by saying—“ Those matters will take care
of themselves ; the young people will ﬁnd a way."
But here there was nothing to be shifted of in a wild
speculation on the future. It was all right, all open, all
equal. No acriﬁce on any side worth the name.
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in
itself, and without one real, ntional diﬂ'iculty to oppose
or delay it.

Mrs Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in
such reﬂections as these, was one of the happiest women
in the world. If anything could increase her delight, it
was perceiving that the baby would soon have outgrow
its ﬁrst net of caps.

The new was universally a lurprise wherever it
spread; and Mr Weston had his ﬁve minutes’ share of

EMMA. 241

it; but ﬁve minutes were enough to familiarize the idea
to his quickness of mind. He saw the advantages of
the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy
of his wife; but the wonder of it was very soon
nothing; and by the end of an hour he was not far from
believing that he had always foreseen it.

" It is to he a secret, I conclude,” said he. “These
matters are always a secret, till it is found out that
everybody knows them. Only let me be told when I
may speak out. I wonder whether Jane has any sus-
picron?”

He went to Highhnry the next morning, and satisﬁed
himself on that point. He told her the news. Was
not she like a daughter, his eldest daughter ?—he must
tell her; and Miss Bates being present, it passed, of
course, to Mrs Cole, Mrs Perry, and Mrs Elton, im-
mediately afterwards. It was no more than the princi-
pals were prepared for; that had calculated from the
ﬁme of its being known at andalls how soon it would
be over Highbury ; and were thinking of themselves, as
the evening wonder in many a family circle, with great
sagacity.

In general, it was a very well-approved match.
Some might think him, and others might drink her, the
most in luck. One set might recommend their all
removing w Donwell, and luving Hartlield for the
John Knightleys; and another might predict disagree-
ments among their servants; but yet, upon the whole,
there was no serious objection raised, except in one
habitation—the Vicarage. There, the surprize was not
softened by any tisfactinn. Mr Elton cared little
about it, compared with his wife; he only hoped " the
young lady’s pride would now be contented;” and
supposed “ she had always meant to catch Knighdey if
she could;" and, on the point of living at Hartﬁeld,
could darineg exclaim, “Rather he than I! " But

242 mun.

Mn Elton wan ve much discompoeed indeed. “ Poor
Knightley! poor allow!—nd busineu for him. She
was extremely concerned; for though very eccentric, he
had a thousand good qualities. How could he be no
taken in ? Did not think him at all in love—not in the
least. Poor Knightley! There would be an end of
all pleasant intercourse with him. How happy he had
been to come and dine with them whenever they asked
him! But that would be all over now. Poor fellow!
No more exploring parties to Donwell made for her.
Oh no; there would be a Mrs Knightley to throw cold
water on everything. Extremely disagreeable; but she
was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper
the other da . Shocking plan, living together. It
would neVer . She knew a family near Maple Grove
who had tried it. and been obliged to separate before
the end of the ﬁrst quarter.”

Chum: 1317.

IME passed on. A few more to-morrowl, and
the party from London would be arriving. It
was an alarming change; and Emma was think-

ing of it one morning, as what must bring a great deal
to agitate and grieve her, when Mr Knightley came in,
and distressing thought: were put by. After the ﬁrst
chat of pleasure, he was silent; and then, in a graver
tone, began with—

“ I have something to tell you, Emma; some
news."

“Good or bad ? " mid she, quickly, looking up in hit
face.

“ I do not know which it ought to be called.”

“ Oh, good I am sure. I see it in your countenance.
You are trying not to smile."

mus. 243

“ I am afraid,” said he, composing his features, “ I am
very much afraid, my dear Emma, that you will not
smile when u hear it.”

“Indeed! butwhy so? I can hardly imagine that
anything which plea-es or amuaes you should not please
and amuse me too.”

“ There is one subject,” he replied, “ I hope but one,
on which we do not think alike.” He paused a moment,
again smiling, with his e es ﬁxed on her face. “Does
nothing occur to you 2 0 not you recollect? Harriet
Smith.”

Her cheeks ﬂushed at the name, and she felt afraid
of something. though she knew not what.

“ Have you heard from her yourself this morning 2 "
cried he. “ You have, I believe, and know the
whole.’ ’

“No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me."

“You are prepared for the wont, I tee; and very
bad it is. Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin."

Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being
prepared; and her eyes, in eager gaze, laid, “ No, this
II in "He! ” but her lips were closed.

" t is so, indeed! ” contirled Mr Knightley; “ I
have it from Robert Martin hinuelf. He left me not
half an hour ago."

She was still looking at him with the rum speaking
amazement.

“ You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared—I wish
our opinions were the me. But in time they will.
Time, on may be sure, will make one or the other of
us think diﬁerently ; and in the manwhile, we need not
talk much on the subject."

“ You mistake me, you quite mistake me," she re-
plied, exerting herself. “ It is not that such a circum.
stance would now make me unhappy, but I cannot
believe it. It seems an I You cannot

244 emu.

mean to say that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert
Martin ! You cannot mean that he has even proposed
to her again—yet! You only mean that he intends it."

“ I mean that he has done it,” answered Mr Knight-
ley with smiling but determined decision, “and been
ace "

“Good God! " she cried. “Well! ” Then having
recourse to her work-basket, in excuse for leaning down
her face, and concealing all the exquisite feelings of
delight and entertainment which she knew she must he
expressing, she added, “ Well, now, tell me every-
thing; make this intelligible to me. How, where,‘
when? Let me know it all. I never was more rur-
prised—but it does not make me unhappy, I assure
you. How—how has it been possible?”

“It is a very simple story. He went to town on
business three days ago, and I got him to take charge
of some papers which I ma wanu'ng to send to John.
He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and
was asked by him to join their party the same evening
to Astley’c. They were going to take the two eldest
boys to Astiey’s. The party was to be our brother and
rister, Henry, John , and Miss Smith. My friend
Robert could not resist. They called for him in their
way ; were all extremely amused : and my brother asked
him to dine with them the next day, which he did, and
in the course of that visit (an I undermnd) he found an
opportunity of speaking to Harriet; and certainly did
not speak in vain. She made him, b her acceptance,
as happy even as he is deserving. lie came down by
yesterday’s coach, and was with me this morning, im-
mediately after breakfast, to report to his proceedings,
ﬁrst on my affairs, and then on his own. This is all
that I can relate of the how, where, and when. Your
friend Harriet will make a much longer history when
you see her. She will give you all the minute par-

 

muss. :45

ticulars, which only woman’s language can make in-
teresting. In our communications we deal only in the
great. However, I must say, that Robert Martin’s
heart seemed for Lin, and to on, v overﬂowing; and
that he did mention, without its 'ng much to the
purpose, that on quitting their box at Astley’s, my
brother took charge of Mrs John Knighth and little
John, and he followed, with Miss Smith and Henry;
and that at one time they were in such a crowd as to
make Miss Smith rather uneasy.”

He no Emma dared not attempt an imme-
diate repy. To speak, she was sure, wo d be to
betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness. She
must wait a moment, or he would think her mad. Her
silence disturbed him ; and after observing her a little
while, he added—

“ Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance
would not now make you unhappy ; but I am afraid it
gives you more than you expected. His situation
is an evil; but you must consider it as what satisﬁes
your friend; and I will answer for your thinking better
and better of him as you know him more; his good
sense and good principles would delight you. As far
as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friend
in better hands. His rank in society I would alter if
I could, which is ﬂying a great deal, I assure you,
Emma. You laugh at me about William Larkins ; but
I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin."

He wanted her to look up and smile; and having
now brought herself not to smile too broadly, she did,
cheerfully answering—-

" You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to
the match. I think Harriet is doing extremely well. Her
connexions may be worse than bi: : in respectability of
character, there can be no doubt that they are. I have
been silent from surprise, merely—excessive surprise.

248 nun.

The} conversation waa noon afterward- clooed by the
entrance of her father. She wan not sorry. She
Wanted to be alone. Her mind was in a late of ﬂutter
and wonder, which made it irnpouihlc for her to be
collected. She was in dancing, singing. exclaiming
rpiriu; and till the had moved about, and talked to
hemlf, and laughed and reﬂected, she could be ﬁt for
nothing rational.

Her father’t business was to announce Jma’l being
gone out to put the hone: to, preparatory to their now
daily drive to Randalll; and the had, therefore, III
immediate excu-e for die-appearing.

The joy, the gratitude, the exquin'te delight of her sen-
utionr may be imagined. The oole grievance and alloy
thus removed in the prospect of Harriet’l welfare, the
Via: really in danger of becoming too happy for Iecurity.
What had she to wish for? Nothing. but to grow
more worthy of him, whose intentionl and judgment
had been ever so superior to her own. Nothing but
that the lesson: of her past folly might teach her
humility and circumspection in future.

Serious nhe was, very aeriout, in her thankﬁilneu and
in her resolutions; and yet there wan no preventing a
laugh, Iometirnes in the very midst of them. She mm
laugh at such a close—such an end of the doleful dil-
appointment of ﬁve week- hack—cuch a heart—ouch a
Harriet!

Now there would he plea-me in her returning; every-
thing would be a pleasure; it would be a great plmre
to know Robert Martin.

High in the rank of her molt Ierioui and hartfelt
felicitiee was the reﬂection that all of conceal-
ment from Mr Knightley would noon be over. The
disguise, equivocation, myItery, lo hateful to her to
pnetiee, might noon be over. She could now look for-
ward to giving him that full and perfect conﬁdulce

emu. 249
which her disposition wan most ready to welcome a a

du .

Yn the gayest and happiest lpiritn, Ill! let forward
with her father, not alwayl linening, but alwayl agree-
ing, to what he laid; and, whether in lpeech or Iilence,
conniving at the comfortable penuanion of hi: being
obliged to go to Randall: every day, or poor Mn
Weuon would be disappointed.

They arrived. Mn Weston wan alone in the draw-
ing-mom. But hardly had they been told of the baby,
and Mr Woodhouoe received the thank for coming,
which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through
the blind of two ﬁgures pausing near the window.

“ It in Frank and Misc Fairfax," laid Mrs Weston.
“ I was just going to tell you of our a le mrprine
in seeing him arrive this morning. e stays all to-
morrow, and Min Fairfax ha been persuaded to spend
the day with us. They are coming in, I hope."

In half a minute they were in the room. Emma wu
extremely glad to see him; but there was a degree of
conﬁloion, a number of embarrassing recollections, on each
aide. They met radin and smiling, but with a con-
sciouoneu which at ﬁrst allowed little to be aid; and
having all sat down again, there was for some time
luch a blank in the circle that Emma began to doubt
whether the wish now indulged, which she had long
felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing
him with Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure.
When Mr Wemn joined the party, however, and when
the baby was fetched, there was no longer a want of
aubject or animation, or of courage and opportunity for
Frank Churchill to draw near her and say—

“I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouee, for a very
kind, forgiving message, in one of Mrs Weston’l letten.
Ihopetimehaanotmdeyoule-willingto on;I
hope you do not retract what you then eaid ? ’

a 50 um.

“No, indeed,” cried Emma, moot happy to begin;
“not in the least. I am particularly glad to nee and
ahake hand: with you, and to give you joy in pereon."

He thanked her with all hie heart, and condoned
tome time to rpeak with nerioua feeling of hit gratitude
and happincu.

“ It not the looking well 2 ” aid be, turning hil ea
toward: Jane—“better than the ever used to do? on
tee how my father and Mn Weston doat upon her.”

But his spirit. were noon rising again; and, with
laughing eyeu, after winning the ex ted mum of
the Campbells, he named the name of ixon. Emma
blushed, and forbad its being pronounced in her hearing.

“I can never think of it," she cried, “without ex-
treme shame.”

“ The shame," he anawered, “ is all mine, or ought to
be. But in it possible that you had no magician? I
mean of late: early, I know, you had none.’

“ I never had the nnalleet, I assure you.”

“That appears Trim wonderful. I was once very
near—and I with had; it would have been better.
But though I wu alwaya doing wrong thinga, they
were very bad wrong thinga, and Inch as did me no
Iervice. It would have been a much better mongrel-
sion had I broken the bond of secrecy and told you
everything.

“ It is not now worth a regret," said Emma.

“ I have tome hope," resumed he, “ of my uncle’s
being persuaded to pay a visit at Randallt; he wants to
be introduced to her. When the Campbell: are re-
turned, we thall meet them in London, and continue
there, I trust, till we may carry her northward; but
now, I am at such a distance from her—is not it hard,
Min Woodhouee? Till thi- moming, we have not
once met since the day of reconciliation. Do not you
pity me 2 "

sum. 2 51

EW spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a
sudden accession of gay thought, he cried—

“Ah! by the bye,” then linking his voice, and
looking demure for the moment, “ I hope Mr Knightley
is well?” He She coloured and laughed.
“I know you saw my letter, and think you may re-
member my wish in your favour. Let me return your
congratulations. I assure you that I have heard the
news with the warmest interest and satisfaction. He is
a nun whom I cannot resume to praise.”

Emma was deligh , and only wanted him to go on
in the same style; but his mind was the next moment
in his own conceml and with his own Jane, and his
next words were—

“ Did you ever see such a skin? such smoothness,
such delicacy, and yet without being actually fair. One
cannot call her fair. It is a most uncommon com-
plexion, with her dark eyelashes and hair—a most dis-
tinguishing complexion! So peculiarly the lady in it.
Just colour enough for beauty.’ ‘

“I have always admired her complexion,” replied
Emma, archly; “but do not I remember the time
when you found fault widi her for being so pale?
When we ﬁrst began to talk of her. Have you quite
forgotten ? ”

“0h, no!—what an impudent dog I was l—how
could I dare ”

But he laughed so heartily at the recollection that
Emma could not help saying—-

"I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities
at that time, you had very great amusement in tricking
us all. I am sure you had. I am sure it was a con-
solation to you."

“Oh, no, no, no! how can you suspect me ofsuch I
thin i I was the most miserable wrench.”

“gNot quite so miserable as to he insensible to mirth.

 

a 52 Elm.

I am cure it wan a eouroe of high entertainment to you,
to feel that you were taking ua all in. Perhaps I am
the mdier to mspect, because, to tell you the truth, I
think it might have been lame amusement to myoelf in
the name lituation. I think there in a little likeness
between us.”

He bowed.

"If not in our diepoeitione,” the presently added,
with a look of true aentibility, “there it a likeneea in
our destiny; the destiny which bids fair to connect in
with two character: In much superior to our own.”

“ane, true,” he anlwered, warmly. “ No, not
true on your ride. You can have no mperior, but most
true on mine. She is a complete angel. Look at her.
Is not the an angel in every gesture? Observe the turn
of her throat. Oboerve her eyel, an the is looking up
at my father. You will be glad to hear ” (inclining his
head, and whispering eerioualy) “ that my uncle mane
to give her all my aunt’a jewels. They are to be new let.
I am resolved to have some in an omameut for the
head. Will not it be bautiful in her dark hair?"

“Very beautiful, ind " replied Emma; and ahe
lpolte so kindly that he gratefully burst out—

“ How delighted I am to nee you again i and to ace
you in such excellent looks I I would not have "listed
this meeting for the world. I should certainly have
called at Hartﬁeld had you failed to come.”

The other- had been talking of the child, Mu
Weston giving an account of a little alarm the hadbeen
under the evening before, from the infant’a appearing not
quite well. She believed the had been foolish, but it
had alarmed her, and she had been within half a minute
of sending for Mr Perry. Perhaps she ought to be
athamed, but Mr Weston had been almost an uneasy as
herself. In ten minutes, however, the child had been
perfectly well again. This was her history; and par-

muss. 2 5 3

ticularly interesting it was to Mr Woodhouse, who
commended her very much for thinking of sending for
Perry, and only regretted that she had not done it.
“ She should always send for Perry, if the child appeared
in the slightest degree disordered, were it only for a
moment. She could not be too soon alarmed, nor send
for Perry too oﬁen. It was a pity, perhaps, that he
had not come last ni ht ; for, though the child seemed
well now—very we considering—it would probably
have been better if Perry had seen it."

Frank Churchill taught the name.

“ Pe ! ” said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke,
to catch 'ss Fairfax’s eye. “ My friend Mr Perry!
What are they saying about Mr Perry ? Has he been
here this morning? And how does he travel now?
Has he set up his carriage?"

Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and
while she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane’s
countenance, that she too was really hearing him, though
tryin to seem deaf.

“ uch an extraordinary dream of mine! ” he cried.
“I can never think of it without laughing. She hm"
us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. I see it in her
cheek, her smile, her vain auempt to frown. Look at
her. Do not you see that, at this instant, the very
passage of her own letter, which sent me the report, is
aiming under her eye; that the whole blunder is spread

ore her; that she can attend to nothing else, though
pretending to listen to the others ? ”

Jane was forced to smile completely for a moment;
and the smile partly remained as she turned towards
him, and said in a conscious, low, et steady voice—

“ How you can hear such recollections is astonishing
to me. They will sometimes obtrude; but how you
can tour! them 2”

He had a gmt deal to say in return, and very enter-

". R

254 nuns.

tainingly; but Emma's feelings were chiefly with Jane
in the argument; and on laving Randalls, and falling
naturally into a comparison of the two men, the felt,
that plmsed alshe had been to see Frank Churchill, and
really regarding him as she did with friendshi , she had
never been more sensible of Mr Knight ey’s high
superiority of character. The happiness of this most
happy day received its completion in the animated con-
templation of his worth which this comparison produced.

chants: 117.

F Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for
Harriet, a momentary doubt of its being possible
ﬁn her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr

Knightley, and really able to accept another man from
unbiasaed inclination, it was not long that she had to
suffer from the recurrence of any such uncenainty. A
very few days brought the party from London; and she
had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone
with Harriet, than she became perfectly satisﬁed, un-
accountable as it was, that Robert Martin had thoroughl
supplanted Mr Knightley ; and was now forming ail
her views of hap lint-us.

Haniet was a iittle distressed—did look a little foolish
at ﬁrst: but having once owned that she had been pre-
sumptuous and silly, and self-deceived before, her pain
and confusion seemed to die away with the words, and
leave her without a care for the past, and with the fullest
exuhatiou in the present and future: for as to her
friend’s approbation, Emma had instantly removed every
fear of that nature, by meeting her with the most un-
qualiﬁed congnltnlations. Harriet was most happy to
give every particular of the evening at Astley's, and the

EMMA. s 5 5

dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the
utmost delight. But what did such particulars explain?
The fact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that
Harriet had always liked Robert Martin ; and that his
Continuing to love her had been irresistible. Beyond
this, it must ever be unintelligible to Emma.

The event, however, was most jo ﬁr]; and every
day was giving her fresh reason (in thinking so.
Harriet't parentage beanie known. She proved to be
the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to aﬂ'ord her
the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers,
and decent enough to have always wished for conced-
Inent. Such was the blood of gentility which Emma
had formerly been so ready to vouch for! It was
likely to be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a
gentleman: but what a connection had she been prepar-
ing for Mr Knightley, or for the Churchills, or even
for Mr Elton! The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached
by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.

No objection was raised on the father‘s side; the
young man was treated liberally ; it was all as it should
be; and as Emma became acquainted with Robert
Martin, who was now introduced at Hartlield, she fully
acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and
worth 'which could bid fairest for her little friend. She
had no doubt of Harriet’s happiness with any good-
tempered man; but with him, and in the home he
oﬁered, there would be the hope of more, of security,
stability, and improvement. She would be placed in
the midst of those who loved her, and who had better
sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and
occupied enough for eheerfulness. She would he never
led into temptation, nor left for it to ﬁnd her out. She
would be respectable and happy; and Emma admitted
herto be the luckiest creature in the world, to have
created so steady and persevering an aﬁ‘ection in such

2 56 mus.

a man; or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield- only to
herself.

Haniet, necessarily dmwn away by her engagements
with the Martins, was less and less at Hartlield, which
was not to be regretted. The intimacy between her
and Emma must sink; their friendship must change
into a calmer sort of good-will ; and, fortunately, what
ought to be, and must be, reerned already beginning,
and in the most gradual, natural manner.

Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet
to church, and saw her hand bemwed on Robert
Martin with no complete a satisfaction, as no remem-
brances, even connected with Mr Elton as he stood
before them, could impair. Perhaps indeed, at that
time, she scarcely w Mr Elton, but as the clergyman
whose blessing at the altar might next fall on herself.
Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple
engaged of the three, were the ﬁrst to be manied.

Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was
restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the
Campbelll. The Mr Churchills were also in town;
and they were only waiting for November.

The intemediate month was the one ﬁxed on, as far
as they dared, by Emma and Mr Knightley. They
had determined that their marriage ought to be con-
cluded, while John and Isabella were still at Hartlield,
to allow them the fortnight’a absence in a tour to
the sea-side, which was the plan. John and Isabella,
and eve other Friend, were agreed in approving it.
But Mrraloodhouse—how was Mr Woodhouse to be
induced to consent ?—he, who had never yet alluded to
their marriage but as a distant event.

When ﬁrst sounded on the subject, he was so miser-
able that they were almost ho less. A second allu-
sion, indeed, gave less pain. began to think it was
to be, and that he could not prevent it—a very promis-

EMMA. : 57

ing step of the mind on in way to resignation. Still,
however, he was not happy. Nay, he a peared so
much otherwise that his daughter’s courage ' ed. She
could not bear to see him suﬁ‘ering; to know him
fancying himself neglected; and though her under-
standing almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the
Mr Knightleys, that when once the event were over,
his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated—she
could not proceed.

In this state of suspense, the were befriended, not'
by any sudden illumination of r Woodhouse’s mind,
or any wonderful change of his nervous system, but by
the operation of the same system in another way. Mrs
Weston’s poultry-house was robbed one night of all her
turkies—evidendy by the ingenuity of man. Other
poultry-yards in the neighbourhood also (inferred. Pil-
fering was bourterling to Mr Woodhouse’s fears.
He was very uneasy ; and but for the sense of his son-
in-law’s protection, would have been under wretched
alarm every night of his life. The strength, resolution,
and presence of mind of the Mr Knightleys com-
manded his fullest dependence. While either of them
protected him and his, Hartﬁeld was safe. But Mr
John Knightley must be in London again by the end
of the ﬁrst week in November.

The result of this distress, was, that, with a much
more voluntary, cheerful consent than his daughter had
ever presumed to hope for at the moment, she was able
to ﬁx her wedding—day; and Mr Elton was called on,
within a month from the marriage of Mr and Mrs
Robert Martin, to join the hands of Mr Knightley and
Miss Woodhousc.

The wedding was very much like other weddings,
where the nice have no taste for linery or parade;
and Mrs lton, From the particulars detailed by her
huband, thought it all extremely shabby, and very in-

258 mum.

ferior to her own. “Very little white atin, very few
lace veils ; a meet pitiﬁnl bueineu! Selina would are
when she heard of it.” But, in Ipite of then: deﬁci-
enciel, the vii-hen, the hopee, the conﬁdence, the pre-
dictiont of the mull band of true friends who witnessed
the ceremony, were fully mwemd in the perfect happi-
ncu of the union.

les.

 

wlunuu. um "Ins, Plll‘rl‘ls. lam-luau.

This preservation photocopy was made
at BookLab. Inc. In compliance with copyright law.
The paper meets the requirements of ANSI/N150
23948-1992 (Permanence of Paper)

Austin 1995

 

