MANSFIELD PARK.

+

Chapter J.

BOUT thirty years ago, Mill Maria Ward, of
Huntingdon, with only seven thouaand undn,
had the good luck to captivate Sir 'Homaa

Bertram, of Minefield Park. in the county of Nor-
thumpton, and m be thereby rained to the rank of .
baronet’l Indy, widi all the comfort- and conaequencea
of an handsome houne and large income. All Hunt-
ingdon exclaimed on the greatness of the match, and
her uncle, the law er, him-elf, allowed her to be at
last three thouan pound: ahort of any uitahle claim
to it. She had two linen to be bargained by her
elevation; and euch of their acquaintance an thought
Mile Ward and Min Frances quite a hande an
Mile Marin, did not temple to redict their marrying
with Ilmoat equal advantage. ut there certainly are
not no many men of large fortune in the world u there
are pretty women to deaerve them. Min Ward, at the
end of half-a-dozcn yearn, found heraelf obliged to be
attached to the Rev. Mr Norria, a friend of her
brother-in-lavl, with mrcely any private fortune, and
Min France: fared yet wone. 'Miu Ward’l match,
indeed, when it came to the int. wan not contempt-
_ ible; Sir Thom being happily able to give his friend

I lANSFlEl—D PARK.

an income in the living of Mansﬁeld; and Mr and Mrs
Norris began their alter of felici with very
little less than a thousand a-yur. Bot Frances
married, in the common phrase, to disoblige her family,
and by fixing on a lieutenant of marines, without educa-
tion, fortune, or connections, did it very thoroughly.
She could hardly have made a more untoward choice.
Sir Thomas Bemsm had interest, which, from principle
as well as pride—from a general with of doing right,
and a desire of seeing all that were connected with him
in durations of respectability, he would have been glad
to exert for the advantage of Lady Bertram’s sister;
but her huIband’s rofession was arch as no interest
could reach; and ore he had ﬁne to devise any
other method of assisting them, an abeolute breach be-
tween the sisters had taken place. It was the natural
result of the conduct of each party, and such as a very
impntdent marriage almost always producee. To save
herself from useese remonstnnce, Mrs Price never
wrote to her family on the till actually married.
Lady Bertram, who was a woman of very tranquil
feelings, and a temper remarkably e and indolent,
would have contented herself with me:ly giving up her
sister, and thinking no more of the matter; but Mr:
Non-is had a spirit of scu'vity, which could not be satis-
ﬁed till she had written a long and angry letter to
Fanny, to point out the folly of her conduct, and
threaten her with all its possible ill consequences. Mrs
Price, in her turn, was! injured and angry; and an
answer, which comprehended each sister in its bitter-
ness, and beKowed such very dis reﬂections on
the pride of Sir Thomas, as Mrs orris could not pos-
piny keep to herself, ut an end to all intercourse
between them for a considerable period.

Their homes were so distant, and the circles in
which they moved no distinct, as almost to preclude the

menu of ever baring of each other’a exiatence during
the eleven following yearn. or, at lean, to make it very
wonderful wSirThomythatMraNorrinhmtld ever
haveitin her powertotell them,uahenowand then
did, in an angry voice, that Fanny had got another
child. By the end of elem yarn, however, Mr!
Price could no longer afford to cheriah pride or relent-
ment, or to looe one connexion that might poolith
anti: her. A large and atill increasing family, an huh
hand diaahled for active oervice, but not the lean equal
to company and good liquor, and a very amall income
to Inpply their wanu, made her eager to regain the
friend: the had so careleaaly acriﬁced; and the ad-
dre-ed Lady Bertram in a letter which spoke In much
oontrition and devpondence, such a ruperﬂuity of child-
ren, and Inch a want of almoat everything else, as
could not but dilpoae them all to a reconciliation. She
waa reparing for her ninth lying-in; and after hewail-
in; circumstance, and ' luring their conntaulnce
u upon-on to the expected child, ahe could not conceal
how important Ihe felt they might be to the firmre
maintenance of the eight ahead in being. Her eldeat
wan a boy of ten year! old, a ne tpirited fellow, who
longed to he out in the world; but what could the do?
Wu there any chance of hit hein hereafter uaeful to
Sir Thoma 1n the conoeml 0 hi: Welt Indian
propert P No aitnacion would he beneath him; or
what 'd Sir Thoma: think of Woolwich? or how
could a boy he aent'out to the Eat?

The letter wu not unproductive. It re-eetabliahed
peace and kindness. Sir Thoma- aent friendly advice
and profeuionl, Lad Bertram dirpatched money and
bah -linen, and Mn orril wrote the lenen.

nch were in immediate effects, and within a twelve-
month a more im mnt advantage to Mn Price re-
nrlted from it ll: Norrie wan often oheerving m the

other: that the could not get her poor inter and her
familyoutofherheld.aodthnt,nurchu had-1|
doueforhu,the|eerned tobe wantingto omore;
and atlengththeoouldnot butownitto heherwieh,
thatpooerI Priceuhould berelievedfromthechurge
andexpeneeofonechildurtirelyoutofhergrut
number.

“What ifthey were unnngthem to undertake the
care of her eldeet daughter, a girl now nine yearn old,
ofanageto uirernoreuttentionthanherpoor
mother could pounth give? The trouble and expenee
of it to them would be nothing, com with the
benevolence of the action.” Lady mm agreed
with her instantly. “I think we cannot do better,"
Iilld she; “ let uc tend for the child."

Sir Thoma- could not give no inuntnneoue and un-
qualiﬁed a content. He debated and hesitated: it war
a Ierioua charge; a girl to brought up mutthe adequately
provided for, or there would be cruelty intend of kind-
neu in taking her from her family. ’He thought of
hit own four children, of hi- two tone, of cousin: in
love, 81¢. ; but no aooner had he deliberately begun to
state hi- objcctiont, than Mn Norrie interrupted him
with I reply to them all, whether mated or not.

“ My dear Sir Thoma, I perfectly comprehend you,
and do jmtice to the generotity and delicacy of your
notione, which, indeed, are quite of a piece with your
general conduct; and I entirely agree with you in the
main an to the propriety of doing everything one could
by way of providing for 1 child one had in n manner
taken into one’t own handr; and I am cure I should he
the lat person in the world to withhold my mire upon .
ruch an occasion. Having no children of my own,
who nhauld I look to in an little matter I may ever
have to bestow, but the childvren of my cistern? and I
am our: Mr Norris is too jun—but you know I am a

woman of few worda and profeuiom. Do not let us
be frightened from a good deed by a aide. Given
girl an education, and introduce her yroperly into the
world, and ten to onebnt the has the mean- of healing
well, without farther expenle to anybody. A niece of
nur’e, Sir Thonua, I may lay, or, at lean, of pair,
would not grow up in thin neighbourhood without many
advantage; I don’t lay Ihe would be to handaome as
her cousin. I dare say die would not; but the would
he introduced into the of this country under
Inch very favourable circnrnuncen u, in Ill human
E'robability, would get her I creditable embliuhment.
cu are thinking of your soul; but do not you know
I that of all things upon earth tba! it the lent likely to
happen, brought up II they would be, alwayu er
like brother- and amen? It in morally impo-ib e. I
never knew an inaunce of it. It in, In fact the only
lure way of providing again: the connection. Suppole
her a pretty girl, and seen by Tom or Edmund for the
lint time seven yeart hence, and I dare say there would
be mischief. The very idea of her having been mffered
to w up It a dittance from we all in poverty and
negfeicot, would be enou h to make either of the dear,
Iweet~tem boy: in ion with her. But breed her
up with em from this time, and 5e hereven to
have the beauty of an angel, and the ' I never be more
to either than a liner.”

“There in a great deal of truth in what you lay,”
reylied Sir Thomar, “ and far be it from me to throw
any fanciful impediment in the way of a Plan which
would be I0 continent with the relative "nation: of
each. I only meantto obeerve, that it ou ht not to be
lightl en in, and that to make it really aervieeahle
to hire me, and creditable to aunt-Ives, we mutt
aeeure to the child, or conlider ourselm engaged to
accure to her hereafter, ll circumatanoel may urine, the

6 nrmsnun Melt.

provision of s gentlevronun. if no such emblishlneot
should oﬂ‘er as you are so sanguine in ex ' g."

“ I thoroughly understand you,” c ' Mrs Norris;
“you are everything thst is generout and oonsiderste,
sndIsmsnreweslnllneverdingreeonthis 't.
Whatever I an do, u you well ltnovl, I am ways
readyenough Iodoforthe good of those I love; and,
though I could never feel for this little girl the hundredth
pan of the regard I hear your own dear children, nor
consider her, in any respect, so much my own, I should
hste myself if I were capable of neglecting her. Is not
shenlster’schild? andoould I bear to see her want
thileIhad a bit of breadtogiveher? MydeerSir
Thoma. with sll my faults I have a warm heart, and,
poor as I am, would rather deny myself the necessaries
of life than do an ungenerous thing. So, if you are not
against it, I will write to my poor ﬁlter to—morrow,
sod make the proponl; and, as soon as matters sre
nettled, I will engage to get the child to Mansﬁeld; you
shall have no trouble about it. My own trouble, you
know, I never regard. I will send Nanny to London
on purpose, and she may have a bed at her couin the
toddler‘s, and the child be appointed to meet her there.
They may asily get her from Portsmouth to town by
the coach, under the care of any creditable person that
my chance to be going. I dare say there is alny
some reputable trudcsman’l wife or other going gp."

Except to the attack on Nanny's cousin, Sir homu
no longer nude any oh'ecu'on, and n more respectable,
though le- econnmi rendezvout being accordingly
substituted, anything wa- considered as settled, and
the pleasures o In benevolent a scheme were slready
enjoyed. The division of gratifyin senntions ought
not, in strict juatice, to have been equa ; for Sir Thomas
was fully resolved to be the real and eminent patron
of the selected child, and Mrs Norris had not the least

umsnew mu. 7

intention of being at any expenae whatever in her
minteunoe. AI fara- wnlkin talking, and conniving
ruched, the wan thoroughly evolent, and nobody
knew betteer to dictate hbenlity to other” hither
love of money wu nnl to her love of directing. Ind
Iheknewquiteu howmnveherownumrpend
that of her friendl. Hlving married on I narrower
inoomethanlhehadheenunedto lookfarwnrdto,nhe
had,froni the tint, ﬁnded a very etrict line ofeoonamy
neoenuy; and what wu begun I: a matter of pmdenee,
noon into a matter of choice, In an object of that
needlﬁlnulvolicimde which there were no children to
apply. Had there been 1 family to provide for, Mn
Nome might never have lived her money; but having
no are ofthat hind,therewunothing toimpedeher
fru ‘ty,urleeuentheomnfonufmakin Iyarly
a 'tion to en income which theyhad never ’ved up to.
Under thin infemting principle, counteracted by no reel
nﬂ'ectionforherl'nerutwaimpo-ihleforher to aim
at more than the credit of projecting and arnngin no
expensive I charity| though perhapa the might to little
knowhenelf,“ to walkhome to tliePanOnage,Iﬁer
- thin convention, in the happy belief of being the moat
libenl-minded inter and hunt in the world.

When the aubject wu brought fnmrd again, her
views were more fully criplained 5 and. in reply to ley
Benn-i" calm inquiry 0 “Where Ihall the child come
toﬁmilterﬁo you or to In?” Sir'l‘honul heard
with come vurprile, that it would be totally out of Mr-
Norria’a power to take lay there in the pemnal cha e
of her. He had been concidering her an a particular y
welcome addition at the Pamnnge, an a deunhle com-

ion to an aunt who had no children of her own ; but
tenfonnd him-elf wholly minken; Mn Non-in wae
carry to uy, that the little girl’r mying with them, at
least u thinge then were, wu quite out of the queetion. ‘

8 IlANSl’llu) nu.

PooerNorria'n indiﬂ'autmeofhnkhnndeiun‘
infill!“ he cmddnomorehelrthenoileofl
eh: thnnhecouldlly; iﬁhdeﬁheéonldeverget
well ofhinganty mplainmitwonld hendill'erent
matter; lhelhnuld thenhe gladmtahe hummind
thinknothingoflheinconvenience; butjnnnow,poor
MrNon-ietooknp emymmentolhutimlnd the
verymentionofnchathing thew Inlewoulddin-
tracthim.

“'I‘hmdaelndbeuercomelou,"nidlady
Ban-am, with the mm mm After I ahon

SirTbomulddedvith di ' , “Ya; lether
homeheinthiehouee. Wewill vourtodnour
duty by her, And the will, It least, have the ldunhge
ofmmpnnbneofherownagqmdofnmgnkrin-
menus."

“Very one," cried Mn Nomi. “which In both
very' tconnidentiona;anditwillhejunlhe
ummequhedmnhehuthreegirlltomh.
oronly two—there can be no diference. I only with
Icoiddbemonureﬁxl;butymleeIdonlllnmy
power. lumnotoneofthocedutrpuetheirm
trouble; and Nanny Ihlll fetch her, however it my -
put me to inconvenience to have my chief counlellor
amyforthreedayl. Iuppoueﬂhenyouwillpmthe
child in the little white mic, near the old nuneriel.
Itwillhemnchdiebenplaceforher,aonear MiuLee,
and not far from the girlu, and close by the hounenuidl,
who could either of them help to die. her, you know,
Ind take care of her clothel, for l apron: you would
not think it fair to expect Elli: to wait on her I: well
a the othen. Indeed, I do not see that you could
pouth plicehzrnnywhere clue."

L yBeru-Im mdenoappoaiticn.

“l ho Ihe will prove I wdl-dinpond girl," con-
tinued N}: Norrie, “and be nenuible of her uncommon
good fortune in having such friendl."

MANSFIELD PARK. 9

“Should her disposition be really had," said Sir
Thmnaa, “we must not, for our on children’s nke,
continue herin the familyvribnt there is no mmto
expect so great an evil. e shall probably see much
towiahaloeredin her,snd munprepure ourselves for

i cesome meanness of inigugand very
of msnner; binapthese are not in-
cunhlefaults;nor,1 trust.” theybe dangerous for
her Inociam. Had my daughters been Ma than
herself, I should hive canddemd the introduction of
sachaoompmionasamatterofveryserioummt;
Muithlhopetherennbenodiingmfearfor
(build everything whope for hr, from thesssocis-
ﬂan,

‘4 That is exactly what I think," cried Mn Norris,
“ and what I was sayin to my husband this morning.
It will be an education or the child, said I, on] being
with her cousins; if Miss Lee taught her nothing, she
would learn to be good and clever from than."

“I shewillnotteasem r "said
.Lm‘ly".Bea‘tr'ain’ho?e : “I have but just it
alone.

“ There will be some difficulty in our way, Mrs
Norris,” absent: Sir Thomas, “1: to the distinction

to be between the 'r s as w :
hm preserve in the minds of Ely dwg‘lgagtre c3:-
sciousne- of what they are. without making them think
too lowly of their cousin ; and how, without depresl'ng
her too far, to make her remember that she is not
a m Ber-mm. I should wishtoseerhem verygood
friends. Ind would, on no necount, authorize in my girls
the smallest degree of arrogance townrds their relation;
but still theycannot be uals. Their rank, fortune,
rights, and expechtions. vi always be different It is
a point of great delicacy, and you must nu‘st us in our
eodesmn to choose exactly the right line of conduct.”

IO IAHSHILD PARK.

Mn Norrie vu quim It hil Ierviec; end though the
perfectly agreed with him a In it: being I met diﬂicult
thin enoonmgedhimtohope thatbetweenthernit
w d be aily managed. _

It will he reedin believed thlt Mn Norrie did not
writeto her limerin vein. Mu Price Ieemed nther
urprinedthat: girl amid be ﬁxedva ahetnd
wnnnyﬁnehoyyhut woepted the oﬁr man thank-
fully, wring them of her daughter‘s being: very well-
diepoeed, good-humoured girl, and tnming they would
never have mine to throw her of. She uptake of her
farther u somewhat delim and puny. hut wu Ingnine
in the hope of her being materiall better for clunge of
Ill‘. Poor woman l Ihe pmba y thought change of
air might Agree with many of her children.

Chapter I].

HE littlegirl rformedherlon ' in
T nfety ; and at” Northampton wgmyMn
Norrie. who thu- regaled in the credit of being
foreman tn welcome her, and in the importance of lend-
ing her in to the otherl, and recommending her to their
kindneu.

Finny Price war at thin time In years old, and
though there might not be much in her Em cc
to captivate, there wu, at lent, nothing to digult her
relan'one. She w Irnall of her age, with no glow of
com lexion, nor any other Itriking beauty ; exceedingly
ti ‘ and ehy, and uhrinking from notice; but her air,
though ewkward, w not vulgar, her voice wu tweet,
and when the rpoke her countenance was p . Sir
Thoma- and Lady Bertram received her very 'ndly;
and Sir Thoma, Ieeing how much the needed encour-

HANSle PARK. 1 l

agernent, tried tohe all thatI'aa cooeiliah'ng: but he
hadmworltagainatamoetuntovardgnvityofdeport-
ment; and Lady Bertram, without taking half-n much
tronhle,or 'ngonevordwhereheapoheten.by
the mere ' of u good-humoured unilc. became im-
mediatelydiele-awﬁllcharaeterofthetwo.

The young people were all at home,and mutained
their share in the introduction very well, with much
goodhumonr,andnoemharramrent,atleaatonthe
part of the tone, who, at aevmteen and aixteen, and
tall of their age, lud all the grandeur of men in the
eyea of their little coun'n. The two girlt were more at
a lo- fmm being younger nnd in gmrtcr mole of tlwir
father, who addressed them on the occasion with rather
an injudicioua particularity. But they were too much
rind to company and plain, to lure anything like

' natural ah ; and their conﬁdence increal'ng from
thu'r counn’l total want of it, they were soon able to
take a full may of her Face and her frock in my

They were a remarkably line family, the lone very
well-looking the daughterl decidedly handlome, and
all of them well-grown and forward of their age, which
produced an atrilting a difference between the couan in
penon,naeduationhad totheiraddm; andno
one would lave mppoeed the girls In nearly of an age
In they really were, There van in fact but two year:
between the youngeet and Fanny. Julia Bertram waa
only twelve, and Maria but a year older. The little
viaitor meanwhile wan an unhappy u 'ble. Afraid
of everybody, uharned of heraelf, an longing for the
homeahehad left.ahe knewnot howto looltup,and
could neareer Ipuk to be heard, or without crying.
Mn Norrie had been talking to her the whole way '
from Northampton of her wonderful good fortune, and
the extraordinary degree of gratitude and good behaviour

I. n

Nonildnzlhewmddheu girl;inuindidLady
Bemmlnﬂeandmkgherixmdleﬁﬁ'ithF
and andninwacmtheiglu ape-duly
unmgivingktcomﬁmglbemldnmdy
walbvmmnhfuhbd’ueuninmwdher,and
ll mmhgmhekrﬁhbﬁﬂdxmnhn
to ninhhet-ononinbed. “Mn

“'l‘liailnotn pmn'ingbegiuning," ‘
Noni-,when ijyhadkﬁlhemom. “ARE!”
thatluhlwlmunmdmblthoulh‘ﬁe
would have behaved hunt; I w how mand-
mightdcpend hencuim‘n walla! m.
Imummnu. itdzgulkinulofumper—
herpoormhcrhldugooddnl:butvemmmke
alhwancellbrudaachild;—andldonotknowthn
herbeinglorrymkavehahomeinullyupinn her,
for,withllliuﬁulu,itwherhome,mdlheunno¢
uynundumndhovmuhuhchuchngedforthe
beueributdmdnniumduau'oniuallthingl."

It nquinda longerﬁmghovevernhanMn Norris
windincdtoallow,mnconcile Faun mthenovelty
of Mansﬁeld Parhnnd the ‘on m anybody
nhchadbeenundm. Hcr edinguvmvetylcutc,
andtoo lild: undeﬁned lobe properly amdgdm.
Nobody mnttobeunkind,bm nobody punhcmnlm
outoftheirwaymmnhercomfon.

TheholidayallowedtozheMi-Bermmnhenext
day, on purpoetoaﬁ‘ard ld-uefor getting acquainted
with, and mnaining their young coun'n, produced
littlcnnion. Wmuldnocbutboldherchupon

u/msnew Hunt 13

ﬁndingthetlhehad hnttwontheyandhad never
leunedFrench;andv1hentheyperea'vedhertoheliul2
muckwith the duetftheyJVereoo good an play,
theycould donolnore thanmke heragenemua pre-
Ientoflomeofdrirleaﬁvalnedtoyyandleuveherto
herself, while they ldjourned to whatever might he the
favourite holiday sport of the moment, making artiﬁcial
ﬂowen or wanting gold peper.

Fanny, whether near or from her conﬁne, whether
in the school-room, the drawing-room, or the Ihruhhery,
wan equall forlorn, ﬁnding something to fear in every

and She wu dilheartened by Lady
m5 silence, IVIEd by Sir Thoma-’I grave loolu,
and uite overcome by Mn Norrit'l admonition;
Her elder caution mortiﬁed her by reﬂection. on her
lite, and ahuhed her by noticing her ehyneal: Mill
Lee wondered at her ignorance, and the maid-tenant-
meeredat herclothee; andwhento the-e ounovnwu
added the idea of the brother. and deter: among whom
the had alwayI been important I: playfellow, inmo-
ueaa, and nune, the despondenoe that ounk her little
hean war Ievele.

The grandeur of the home utnniahed, but could not
coulole her. The room- vlere too la for her to
move in with ease; whatever Ill: touch the expected
to injure, and she I: t about in conotant terror of
aornethingor other; 0 muting toward: her own
chamber tocry; and dielittle girl who wan spoken of
in the drawing-mom \vhen Ihe left it at night, an eeeln-
iug no desirably vemible of her uliar good famine,
ended every day’u narrow- hy ' g her-elf to deep.
Aweekhad panedinthinwaynod nonupicionof it
conveyed by her quiet parive manner, when Ihe was
found one morning by her couein Edmund, the youngeu
ofthe none, litting crying on the attic min.

' “ My denr little cousin," hid he, with Ill the gentle-

l4 ‘ mill“) PARK.

ne- ol'ao excellent nature, “what can he the matter?”
And ﬁtting down by her. wu at great ‘ to over-
comeheraharlneinb‘egrgeou riled, perluadeher
wlpealt . “ aaahei lorwuanhodyangry
with herde ll): quarrelled with Julia?
or wu Ihe uled about anything in her lee-on that he
mld explain? Did ahe, in short, want anything he
could ponith get her, or do for her?" For a long
while no lower could he obtained beyond a “ no, no—
not at all—no, thank you," but he otill persevered;
and no boner had he begun to revert to her own home,
than her increased ache explained to him where the
grievance lay. He tried to coneole her.

"You are lorry to leave mamma, my dear little
Fanny," laid he, “ which ahowr you to he a very good
girl: but you muot remember that you are with rela-
tion! and ricmlu. who all love you, and wiah to make
you ha y. Let in walk out in the park, and you
Ihall l me Ill about your brother: and linen."

0n purvuing the lubject, he found that, dear an all
there brother: and linen generally were, there waa one
among them who ran more in her thoughta than the
rent. It ma William whom Ihe talked of moat, and
wanted moot to lee. William, the eldeet, a year older
thAn herself, her contrant corn ion and friend; her
advocate with her mother of w om he war the darling)
in every dimers. “William did not like the should
come away; he had told her he' ehould miu her very
much indeed.”—“ But William will write to you,
dare I: .”—“ Yea, he had promiaed he would, ut he
had tod bar towrite ﬁnt."—-“ And when shall you
do it?” She hung her head and answered, heaitat-
ingly, “ She did not know; the had not any
PM" . . .

“If that be all your drﬂiculty, I will fumth you
with paper and every other material, and you may

MANSFIELD PARK. ' I 5

write your letter whenever do“ ehoOte. Would it
make onhtppymwriteto illinm?"
u qm’

“Thus let it he done now. Come with me into
the hretkfut-moln, we thall ﬁnd everything there, and
he titre of having the room In onrtelvet."

"But, coutin, will itgomthepott?"

“Yegdepaldnponmeitthall: it-hallgowith the
otherlettert; Ind, ll your uncle will frank it, it will
con William nothing}

I ILMy uncle!” reputed Fanny. with a frightened
00

“Yet, when you have written the letter, I will take
it to my father to frank.”

Funny thought it I hold mature, but olfered no
farther reﬁnance; and they went together into the
hmkfmroom, where Edmond prepared her paper,

'and niled her linet with all the good-will that her
brother could hilntelf have felt, and probably with
tomewhat more exutneu. He continued With her
the whole time of her writing, to attitt her with hit
penknife or hit orthography, at either were wanted:
Ind added to thete attendant, which the felt wry
much, t kindnett to her brother which delighted her
beyond tll the rett. He wrote with hit own hand hit
love to hit coun'n William, and tent him half a guinea
under the teal. Fanny'l l'eelingt on the union were
Inch II the believed her-elf incapable of expren'ng; but
her countenance and a few lrtlett words fully conveyed
all their gratitude Ind delight, 1nd her cousin began to
ﬁnd her In interetting object. He talked to her more,
and, fmm Ill that the laid, in convinced of her having
Ill nifeetionm heart, and n ttrong denim of doing right;
Ind he could perceive her to be farther entitled to
attention, b great tentihility of her tittutinn, and great
timidity. {he had never knowingly given her pnin,

r6 ummtto PAIL

buthenow feltthttnherequiredmorepouitive kindne-
Indwiththatvieweodetvonredﬁntheﬁruphoqto
leuenherfeanofthemnlhmdgeveher ' ye

imtdealofgoodedvioeutopla'gwith nrinund
ulil.|ndhein nmerryupon'
Fmthil Funnygrewmorecomforuhle. She

feltthntlhehednﬁiend,nndﬂiekindmofher
couin Edmund gave her better Ipiritl with everybod
clue. The place became le- mnge,tnd the peope
leu fonm'dnble; end if there were none among: them
whomehe could not oeue to [eon-he began It Inn
to know their wnyl, 1nd to catch the but manner
of conforming to them. The little rulicitiel and
nwltwudneuel which had It ﬁrst made grieva inde
on the tnnquillity of all, and not lent of herself;
nL-cmrily wore away, and the was no longer materi-
ally ﬂuid to nppear before her uncle, nor did her
Aunt Norril't voice make her mrt very much. To
her connin- Ihe became oceadonally an acceptable com-
panion. Though unworthy, from inferiority of age
and urength, to be their conuant associate. their
plenum and scheme. were eometirnel of n nature to
make a third very uteful, eupecially when tlut third wan
of an obliging, yielding temper; and they could not
but own, when their aunt inquired into her faulte, or
their brother Edmund urged her claim to their kind-
neu, that “ Fanny wan good-natured enough."
Edmund wan uniformly kind himeelf; and the had
nothing worle to endure on the pan of Tom than that
tort of merriment which a young man of seventeen will
:1ny think fair with I child of ten. He wu
entering into life, full of rpiriu, and with Ill the libernl
dilpoeimn- of an eldeot nun, who feel- horn only for
expente and enjoyment. Hi: kindness to hie little
couein wan con-intent with hi- Iituation and right: : he
made her tome very pretty pretenu, and laughed at her.

"‘_“"I

MANSFIELD PARK. l 7

At her true-mu Ind ' 'u ' roved, Sir Thom
and Mrt orrit dmnghtzilth gmrrtter ntitftction of
their benevolent plan; tnd it wuprettytoon decided
between them, that though fu- fmm clever, the thawed
a humble ditpnn'tion, and teerned likel to give them
littletmuble. Ametnopinion ofher ilitietwatnot
conﬁrm] to [been Fanny could reed, work, and write,
but the had been taught nothing more; and at her
con-h found her ignorant of many thingt with which

had been lon familiar, they thought her pro-
digiouly torrid, for die Em two or three weelu
were continually bringin tome freth report of it into
the drawing-room. “ r mtmrna, only think, my
Cﬂllin cannot put the map of Europe ether—or my
contin cannot tell the rinciptl river: in atria—or the
never heard of Alia hiinor—or the doet not know the
dference between waner-coloun and crayont! How
MEI Did you ever hear anything to Itnpid?”

" y dear,” their contidente aunt would reply, “ it
ieverybtd,bnt you mutt not expect eve bodyto be
tr forward end quick at learning at yonrtel .”

“ Bugaan the it really to very rgnomnt! Do you
lmow, we uked her lut night, which way the would
to to et to Ireland; and the taid. the thould crott
In the ale of Wi ht. She thinkt of nothing but the
Itle of Wight, and the callt it lb: lrlaud, at if there
were no other itland in the world. I am ture I thonld
have been alumed of mytelf, if I had not known
better long before I VIII to old at the it. I cannot
remember thetime when I did not know a rent deal
thtt the hi! not the lutt notion of yet. ow long
ago it it, tnnt, tince we uted to at the chrono-
lt;_giul order of the kingt of Englan with the datee
o thdr accettion, and mott of the principal eventt of
their reignt l ”

“Yet,” added the other; “and of the Roman

18 msnnu) max.

emperonulowu Sevenlnheichlaglutdalot
the lwathen thologyﬂndall themetaltnemi-metak.

platen, and druinguuhed philoenphen."
“Very true, indeed, my dean, but you are blend
with wonderful memories, and your con-'1 Ital

Probably none It all. There in a mt of diﬂ'aence
in memories, an well a- in everything elae, and therefore
you muat make allowance for your cumin, and pity her
deﬁciency. Andrernemher that, if you are ever In for-
ward and clever youreelvea. you thould alwayl be
Went; for, much a you know already, there in I
great deal more for you to learn.”

“ Yet, I know there it, till I am seventeen. Bat
I mun tell on another thing of Fanny, to odd and
no nupid. 0 you know, the Iaye ahe doe: not Walt

' to learn either music or drawin ."

“To he sure, my dear, that u very atupid indeed. and
Ihowa a great want of geniua and emulation. But, ll
thinga oontidered, I do not know whether it in not a
well that it Ihould be to, for, though you know (owing
to me) your papa and mamnu are no good-I to bring
her up with you, it in not at all neceanry that alte ehnull
he a accorn liehed at you are; on the contrary, it ii
much more eairahle that there Ihould he a dilference."

Such were the counlela by which Mn Norrie unlisted
to form her niecea’ minda; and it ll not very wonderful
that, with all their promiling talent: and early informa-
tion, they ahould be entirely deﬁcient in the leu common
acquirementt ofeelf-knowledge, generoeit , and humility.
In everything but diapoeition, they were adl'rnirahly taught.
Sir Thoma: did not know what wan wanting, became,
though a truly anxioua father, he wae not outward]
aﬂ'ectionate, and the reaerve of hit manner repreued l
the ﬂow of their iriu before him.

To the education of her daughter! Lady Bertram
yaid not the amalleat attention. She had not time for

HANS!!!“ PARK. 1 9

lichens. She wan awornanwhoepent herdayuin
icing, nicely due-ed, on a uofa. doing acme long piece
of needle-work, of little nae and no bunny, thinking
more of her pug than her children, but indulgent
tothelatter,whenitdidnotputhenel tom
venience, ' ineve in im mnt Sir

and in mllergmd’deonoernaw‘ll‘y ger flower. ad_ the poo-
udgruterleiwmfnrtheurvioeofhergidgahe
would prob-Hyhave mppoaedit unneoe-nry,for they
wereunderdieunofagoverneqwithpmperrnuten,
and could want nothing more. At for Fauny’a being
stupid at leurning, “ Ihe could only any it wan very un-
l , but some people were unipid, and Funny miut
take morepaine: thedid not knowwhat elpe wan to
bedone; tnd,exoept her hein I0 dull.ahe munudd
uhe lav! no harm in the r 'ttle thing, and dwaya
found her very handy, a quick in carrying meninges,
and fetching what the wanted."

Fanny, with all her faults of ignonnce and timidity,
wu ﬁxed at Mmeﬁeld Park, and learning to munfer In
it: favour much of her atuchment to her former home,
grew up there not unhappily among her conﬁne. There
val no poaitive ill-nature in Marin or Julius and
though F Inny wn often mortiﬁed by their treatment
of her, the thought too lowly of her own claim to feel
injured by it

From about the time of her entering the family,
Lady Dem-am, in conuequeuoe of a little ill-health, and
a glut dul of indolence, gave up the home in town,
wln'ch the had been need to occupy every ring, and
remained wholly in the country, leaving Sir to
attend hia duty in Parliament, with whatever inemue
or diminution of comfort might urine from her :buence.
In the country, therefore, the Mill Bertram. continued
wexerciltheir memories, radian thdr dmnnd
grow tall and womanly: and) their father at them

ao runs'nlw nu.

becoming in perlon, manner, and
everythingthatoouldutiafyhilanxiety. 'elden
non m carele- and extra-gent. and had Already given
himmuchuneainar; hut hiaother children promired
him nothing but good. Hi1 deughterl, he felt, while
they retained thename ofBennnymuntbegivingit
new grace, and in quitting it, he muted, would extend
in relpectahle alliances; and the character of Edmund,
hilrtrunggoodlemeand uprighmeerofmind,hidmo¢
fairly for mility. honour. and he ine- tn him-elf and
allhilconnecuonl. Hewuto aclergymnn.
Amid the cam and the complacency which hi- on
children suggested, Sir Thoma. did not forget to do
what he could for the children of Mn. Price: he
notiﬁed her lihenlly in the education and of
her none In they became old enough for a determinate
unit: and Funny, though almost totally neparated
In her family, wu renrihle of the threat Iatilfnctinn
in hearing of any kindneu toward: them, or of anything
at all promiring in their rituation or conduct. Once,
and once on] in the coune of many yearn, had Ihe the
happiueu of ‘ng with William. Of the not the law
nothing; nobody reemed to‘ think of her ever going
amongrt them again, even for a virit, nobody at home
reemed to want her; hut William determining. loan
after her removal, to be a railor, was invited to Ipend a
_weelt with hie uirtcr in Nonhamptonuhire,,hefore he
went to on. Their eager affection in meeting, their
exquiaine delight in hein together, their ham 0 hang:
mirdm, and moment: 0 lei-inns conference. may
imagined; I: well u the mguine View: and rpintr of
the boy even to the Ian. and the milery of theng when
he left her. Luckily the vilit ha nod in the hrirtmar
holidayr, when the could di y look for comfort to
her courin Edmund; and he told her ruch charming
thingr of what William wan to do, and be hereafter,

msrrnm' mum. - :u

in coneequence of hit profession, an made her grad-
ually admit that the Icpantion might have tome nee.
Edmund'a friendahip never failed her: his leaving
Eton for Oxford made no change in hit kind die-

'tion, and only afforded more uent reunitiea
gnawing them. Without an may ofopdgi’ng more
than the rec, or any fear of ing (on much, he wu
alwaya true to her intent, and comide of her
feelingl, trying to make her good qualitie- undemood,
and to conquer the diﬂidence which prevented their
béng more apparent; giving her advice, oomlation,
and encouragement.

Kept back an the wu by everyhod clue, hia linglc
mppon could not bring her forward ; t hie attention-
were otherwiae of the higheat importance in editing the
improvement of her mind, and extending in pleasure;
He knew her to be clever, to have a nick a prehenaion
ll well at good mile, and a fondness r reading, which,
{lle directed, mutt he an education in itself. Mill

ee mught her French, and heard her read the daily
portion of himry; but he recommended the booltl
which charmed her leirure hourr, he encouraged her
um, and corrected her judgment: he made reading
uaeful by talking to her ofwhat Ihe read, and heightened
it: attraction by judicioua pnite. In return for Iuch
Iervicee, the loved him better than anybody in the
world except William : her heart waa divided between

the two.

(beam '33}.

HE 5m event of any‘ im runce in the family
was the death of Mr orria, which happened
when Fanny wu about ﬁfteen. and neceaearily

introduced alteration and noveltiea. Mn Norrie, on

ﬂ IANS'lIl—D PARK.

quittingthe Panona ,removed ﬁrt to tlleParhaud
afterward. to a home of Sir Thoma’e in the
village, and connoled henelf for the loan of her
huhnd by contidering that ﬁre could do very well
withouthim; and for her reducan of income bythe
evident ueceelity of uricner economy.

The living wan hereafter for Edmund; end, had hie
uncle died a few yearn aooner, it would have been
duly given to name friend to hold till he were old
enough for orden. But Tom’l extravagance had,
preﬁoumtbatﬂennbeenwgrugutomdera
diﬂ'erent of the next preaenutioo necenry,
and the younger brother must. help to ply for the

on of the elder. There wan another family
iving actually held for Edmund: but thmrgh thre
circumetance had made the arrangement eomewhat
euier to Sir Thomae’l comeience, he could not but
feel it to be an act of injuatice, and he enmenly tried
to impreel hil eldest ran with the name conviction, in
the of in producing a better effect than anything
heha etbeenahletoaa ordo.

uI lueh for you, om," laid he, in hi- moat
digniﬁed manner ; “I blth for the expedient which I
am driven on, and I out I may pity your feelings In a
brother on the occation. You have robbed Edmund
for ten, twenty, thirty yam, perhapa for life, of more
than half the income which ought to be hie. It may
hereafter be in my power. or in your’s (I hope it will),
to yrocure him better referrnent; but It muat not be
forgotten, that no bene t of that tort would have been
beyond hie natural claims on on, and that nothing can,
in fact, be an equivalent for the certain advantage which
he in now obliged to forego through the urgency of your
dehta."

Tom liltened with tome theme and tome narrow;
but eocaping an quickly at pouible, could roan with

msnm PAIR. 23

dedemIﬁthnthehndnotbeen
halfnomnchindebtunomeofhinfrienduidlyﬁhn
hinﬁtherludnndenmmttirmmepieceofwork
ofitymd, 3dly,dt.hnt:lllxefimreincumhuv, whoever
lrevni the,wonl in ,dieveryloon.
Onghdr Nonin’l denth,thepruentalion beam the
right oanrGr-nnt, who came eoneeqnenllynonide
uMnnﬁeldrlndon vingtoheeh inmof
forty-ﬁve, leaned Io di-noint Mr ’-
calculation.- Bnt “no, he we: 1 than-necked,
apapleaic sort of fellow, Ind, plied well with good
thin wouldaoonpopof."
had Iwife Ibont ﬁfteen yearn hiljunior.hutno
childrerulndtheyenmeddieneighbourhoodwiththe
nml fair report of being very relyectnble, agreeable

le.

l,O‘Zr‘he time was now come when Sir Thoma expected
his liner-in-law to cllim her there in their niece, the
change in Mr: Norril’v situation, and the improvement
in Fannie Ige, leeming not. merely to do away any
fomrer objection no their living together, but even to
giveitthemoctdecidede"hili ;nnduhisovm
circummnoee were rendered ir than heretofore.
hy tome recent lone: on his West India mm, in
addition to hie eldelt Inn’l exmugnnce, it became not
undeniable to himself to be relieved from the exfenee
of her airport, and the 0in ' of her future proudon.
In the fnlneev of hit belie that ouch n thing mun be,
he mentioned in prob-bilin to hi. wife; end the lint
time of the mhject'a occurring nn her again, hnppening
whewhen Fennywn pmengdie almlyoheervedto
her, “So, Funny, I are going to leave in, end live
withmyu'ner. owlhnllyoulikeiti"

Funny wu too much lurPrined to do more than
reps: hernunt'l wordn, “Gan to leave you?"

“Yen, my dean why Ihmﬁ you be noninhed?

24 IANS'I'ILD PARK.

Ynulnveheen ﬁveyennwith mendniyl'nernlwlyl
mntmukeyonwhen Mr Non-iodied. Butyou
meninenpunduckonniy Illdietarnt.’

Themewuudhglmlﬁnnyuithd
heenunexpected. She had never nodvedkindnen
ﬁnmherunntNmrignndconld notlove her.

“IIhnllhevery Inrrytn go away,” nidlhe, with:
faltering voice.

“Yes, I dare y you will; tbal’: namnl mongh.
Inuppoeeyou have had :- little to vexyouinoeyou
came into this home no any creature in the world."

“I hope I am not ungrateful, aunt," aid Fanny,
modenly.

“No, my dur; I hope not. I have alny found
you I very good girl."

“ And am I never to live here again 2"

“ Never, n1 dun but you are lure of I comfort-

ehle home. It can make verylinle dili'erenoetoyou.
whether you an.- in one home or the other."
From left the room with I very nomwful heart:
the I:le not feel the diﬂ'erenoe to he I0 Imam-he
could not think of living with her aunt with anything
like ntiefaction. AI loan a the met with Edmund,
the told him her diltreu.

“Cousin,” laid Ihe, “something in going to hop
which I do not like It all; and though you have 0 en
penunded me into being reconciled to thing- thnt I
dinliked at lint, you will not be nble to do it now. I
mi going to live entirely with my nunt Norrie."

“ Indeed l "

“Yen: my aunt Bertram hu 'un. told me no. I:
ll quite Iettled. I am to leave eld Park, and go
to the White Home, I mppoee, at noon in Ihe in
removed there.”

" Well, Fanny, and if the plan were not unpleannt
to you, I should call it an excellent one."

MANSFIELD PARK. 25

“ 0h, oouninl "

“It but everything elne in its fevnnr. My aunt in
ncu'ng like I eennible woman in winhing for yon. She
i- choouing 3 friend nnd co ion exactly where the
ought.1nd Inm lad her ovenfmoneydoelnot
interfere. You wil be wht you ought to he to her.
I it doen not dim you very much, Funny?”

“ ndeed it does: I cannot like it. Ilove thin house
Indeverything in it: I shall love nothin there. You
know how uncomfortable I feel with her. ’

“Icannynodﬁngforhermannertoyonanchild;
but itwu the me with ueall,or nearl to. She never
knew how to he pleuant to children. ut you are now
ofln tobetmttdhemer;1thinknheirbehaving
better ready; and when you are her only companion,
you m! be important to her."

“ I can never beliruporunt to any one.”

“ What in to prevent you?”

“ Everything. My duration, my foolinhneu, and
awkwardnean.”

“ Al to your foolishnes- Ind Iwkwardneu, my dear
Fanny, believe me, you never have a lhadow of either,
but in using the word- lo im ropcrly. There in no
melon in the world why gin ould not be important
where yon ere known. on have good tense, and l
tweet te r, and I um cure you have I grateful henrt,
that never receive kindneu without within to
return it. I do not know any better qualiﬁcation-
ﬁ-iend Ind companion.”

“ You Ire too kind," aid Funny, colouring at such
pnine; “how Ihnll I ever thunk yon u I ought. fur
thinkin unwell of me. Ohl con-in, if I m to go
away, shall remember your goodneu to the lat
moment of my life.”

“ Whyﬁndeed, Fanny, I Ibould hope to be remembered
at such I dime: an the White House. You lyeakal if

26 11mm nu.

youweregningtwohundred milea oﬂ'innnd ofonly
acrontheparkghutymwillhelongtomalnmu
much-lever. Thetwol'amiliuwill hemeeting
dayintheyur. Theonlydiﬂ'elencewillbe,tlut
linng with your aunt, you will neeelarily he brought
forwuduynnonghno he. Hugtherearetoonuny
whomyouran hide behind; hntwith her youwill he
fomed to Apeak for your-elf."

“Ohl do may no.”

“I mun yit,and nyitwith pleasure. Mn Norrie
ll much better ﬁtted tlnn my mother for having the
charge of you now. She in of a temper to do n great
deal for anybody ahe really intereu hernelf about, and
ahe will force you to do 'unice to your natural powers."

Fanny sighed, and and, " I cannot nee thing- ” you
do; but I ought to believe you to he right rather than
myaelf, and I am very much obliged to you for trying to
reconcile me to what mun be. If I could u my
aunt real] to care for me, it would he delight to feel
myaelf o connequence to anybody. Hm, I know, I
am of none, and yet I love the place on well."

“ The place, Fanny, in what you will not quit. though
you quit the home. You will have a: free a command
of the park and garden: at ever. Even your conan
little hem need not take fright at such a nominal
change. You will have the lame VIth to frequent, the
lame library to chooae from, the lame people to look at,
the name home to ride."

“Very true. Yes, dear old grey ponyl Ah!
cousin, when I remember how much 1 need to dread
riding, what terron it gave me to hear it talked of as
likely to do me good (oh! how I have trembled at my
uncle’a opening hit lip- if hornet were talked of), and
then think of the kind pain you took to realon and

made me out of my fean, and convince me that I
ohould like it after a little while, and feel how right you

_"‘_'1

murmur: run. 57

yoved to he, I am inclined to hope yon-may always
pro]:th I: well."

“And I m quite convinced that. your being with
Mr! Norrie will be II good ﬁrr your rnrnd II riding hat
been_for your health. end at much for your ultimate

Mn
0 ended their ditcourle, which, for my very a m-
rine tervioe it could render Fanny, might at well ve

oerred, for Mn Norrie had not the ermllett inten-
tion tnking her. It had never occurred to her, on
the' latent oceuion, but u t thing to he cueﬁzlly
tvni . To prevent in being expected, the had ﬁxed
on the unallett habitation which could rnnlt a tee]
among the buildin of Mtntﬁeld parith, the hit:
Houte being only Jutt large enough to receive her-elf '
Ind her tervnnts, and allow a tyne room for I friend, of
which the made a very particular point. The
room: It the Pamntge had never been wanted, but the
ebtolnte neoeuity of : tpare room for a friend wet now
never forgotten. Not ell her precaution, however,
could tnve her from beingztntpected of tornethin better;
or, perhapt, her yofthe importance 0 e tpme
room might have milled Sir Thoma to mypote it renlly
intended for F nnny. Ltdy BertrIm toon brought the
nutter to t certainty, by ctrelettly observing to Mn
Non-it—

“I think, titter, we need not keep Mite Lee any
longer, when Funny goet to live with you."

Mn Norrie ulmott tuned. “Live with me, dear
LIdy Bertram! what do you menu?"

“It the not to live with you? I thought you htd
settled it. with Sir Thom"

“Mel never. I never tpoke a I llahle about it to
Sir Thoma, nor he to me. Ftnny ive with me! the
lan'thing in the world for me to think of, or for anybody
to win that reelly known In both. Good heaven! what

I. C

28 ‘ nursan PARK. -

could I do with Fanny? Mel a poor, helpless, forlorn
widow, unﬁt for anything, my Ipiriu quite broke down;
wlutcouldIdowithagirlnthertimeoflife? Agirl
ofﬁﬁeen! the veryugeofnll othen tn needmottatten-
rim and we, and Put thecheerfulle‘ apiriu to the neat!
Sure Sir Thoma could not Ieriounlyngs-«t Inch I
thing! Sir Thomas in too much my ' Nobody
diatwidielmewelhlunwe,wmldpropoeeit.
How came Sir Thom- torpeak to you shoot it!”

“ Indeed, I do not know. I uppoae he thought it
belt."

“ But what did he lay? He could not my be whbd
mmuke Fanny. Imminhilhearthecoddnot
with me to do it."

“ No; he only Hid he drought it very likely; and I
thought I0 too. We both thou ht it would be a com-
fort to you. But if you do not ike it, theme in no more
to he laid. She in no incumbnnce here."

“ Dear litter, if you oomider my unhappy rate, how
can Ihe be any comfort to me? Here am I, a poor
delolate widow, deprived of the hen of hulbandl, m
halth gone in attending and mining him, myepirin
wone, all my peace in thin wnrld destroyed, with hardly
enough to mpport me in the rank of a gentlewoman,
and enable me to live to at not to dilgnce the memory
of the that departed—what pouihle comfort could
have in taking arch a charge upon me u Fann P "I
could with it for my own uke, I would not o lo un-
qut a thing by the poor girl. She in in good hunde.
and cure of doing welL I mutt mggle through my
narrow and difficultiel at I can." ‘

" Then you will not mind living by younelf quite
alone i "

“Dear Lady Bertram, what am I lit for but Joli-
tude? Now and then I Ihall hope to have a friend in
my little cottage (I Ihall alwayl have I bed for a

“SHED PARK. ' 39

friend); butthe moot plnoflnyfntun dlylvill be
wtmmndnlion. Iflmbut nuke hothendl
meet, that’u all 1 uk for." -

"I , ll‘tl’, thingl He not no very-bed with you
neither?an Sir Thoma aye you will have it
hundred 1-year."

“ley Bertram, I do not complain. I know I
unnot live a I have done, but I mun retrench where
Imlndlelmlobea bettermger. Ibmkma
lihenl houeekeeper enough, but I shell not be uhuned
to ynctile economy novl. My duration in In much
Illered u my income. A rest my thing- wele due
frompooerNorriyu- nofthepuiellﬁhlt
cannot be expected from unknown hovl much
in. con-med in our kitchen by odd comen and goers.
At the White Home, matter- muet he better looked
diet. 1 ml live within In income, or I dull be
uni-arable; end I own it woul give mgmtntilfaction
to beahlclo do nmerpomto laybya little attheend
of the year.”

“ I dare my you will. You alwaye do, don't you?"

“Myobjecv, Lady Bertram,iltoheof unetotlmoe
um come after me. It ll for your children’a good that
I Willl to be richer. I have nobody elm.- to can: for;
but I Ihould be very glad to think I could lave a little
triﬂe among than worth their having."

“ You are very good, but do not trouble younelf
about them. They are sure ofbeing well provided for.
Sir Thoma will take are oftlnt.”

“ Why, you know. Sir Thoma-’I mean. will be
ntherunitened ifthe Antigua mate in to nuke Inch

I return."

“Ohl (Mwﬂl noon be Iettled. Sir Thoma bu
been wriﬁn that it, I know."

“Well, d Bertram," laid Mn Norris, movingto
go, “Io-no ynythatmylnledeeireiltobeofme

30 ' MUM PARK.

byoorﬁmily:nnd mifSirThouudaouldever
epakagainahommyukingFanny,ywvillbeaﬂelo
aytlmrnyhenltlland "In it uiteomofthe
quelimgheidudm, nhoﬁd haven
bedto’givehcr,for1mknepaqueronmfofn
friend.’ .

takenhiol'ner-in-lav'n View" and Ibewnlfmrn that
moment perfectly cafe from all ex don, or II:
slightest alludonraizfmrnhim. coulan hue
wonderatherreﬁuinglodoanylhingforaniecewhom
Iheludbeenroforwmlm- ibugalhemok
enrlycareto Innkehim,uw an Lad Bertram,
undemand that whatever rhe pone-ed wan «Ligned for
their funily, he noon grew reconciled to n dininetion
which, at the came time that it via. advanqu and
complimentary to them, would enable him bmer to pro-
vide for Funny himeelf.
ann noon learn: how unneceunry had been her
fear- 0; a removal: end her Iponlaneonn, untaught
felicin on the dilcovery, conveyed home conaolncion In
Edmund for hie dinppoinunent in who: he had ex-
ﬁcted on be no essentially serviceable to her. Mn
orril took poo-union of the White Home, {he Grant-
nrrived a: the Panonage, and there event- over, every-
thin I: Man-ﬁeld went on for rome time u wual.
he Granu showing I dirpocition m be friendly and
locinble, gave great ntiefaccion in the main among their
new acquaintance. They had their fanlu, and Mn
Norrie noon found them out. The Dr. wa- very
fond of eating, Ind would have a good dinner e
day; and Mn Grunt, instead of conniving to grlng'z
him I: little expenae, gave her cook In high wage-I I.
ll: did It Manrﬁeld Park, and was marcer ever leen
in r oﬁicea. Mn Norri- could not weak with any

IANSHILD PARK. 3!

temper of such nor of the quantity of butter
and eggs that were regularly coururned in the houae.‘
" Nobody loved plmtyand hoepiulity more than her-
Ielf; nobody more hated pitiful doing" the Panonage,
the believed, had never been wanting in comfom of any
rort,hadneverborne a had character in ber Ibu,but
thir wua way of goingon that the could not under-
rtand. A ﬁne lady in a country pamnage war uite
out of Her store-mom. the thought, might ave
been good enau h for Mn Grant to go who. Enquire
where the wonl the could not ﬁnd out that Mn Grant
had ever had more than five thourand poun "

Lady Bertram listened without much interest to thin
rort of invective. She could not enter into the wron
of an eoonomin, but the felt all the iu'urier of beauty In
Mr: Gmnt’t being to well aettled in ife without being
handaome, and exprened her monirhment on that int
almoet an often, though not no diﬂ'uaely, at Mn oni-
diacu-ed the other.

There 0 inionr had been hardly cauvmed a year,
before another event aroae of arch importance in the
family, at might fairly claim tome place in the thoughta
nnd converratron of the ladies. bir Thoma found it
expedient to go to Antigua him-elf, for the better
arrangement of hit afl'airv, and he took hie eldert non
with him, in the hope of detaching him from name had
connection. at home. They left England with the pro-
bnbility of being uarly a twelvemonth abaent.

The neceaeity of the meuure in a pecunia light1 and
the hope of ita utility to his m, reconciled ir Thomas
to the eﬂ'ort of quitting the rert of hi. family, and of
leaving hi: daughter. to the direction of otherr at their
present molt interedng time of life. He could not
think Lady Bertram quite equal to rupply hi- place
with them, or nther, to rfonn what thould have been
her own; but, in Mn onir’r watchful attention, and

3! IMSI‘IILD PA“.

in Edmund’e judgment, he had uﬂia‘enl conﬁdence to
make him go without fear: {or tha'r conduct.
LIdyBennmdidnotnelllikerohuveherhumnnd
lenveher; hunhewu not din-rbed byenyularmfor
hie Inky,“ lolicirude for hie comfort, being one of
drone whozhinknothingcanhedmgeronlor
dillicu I, or fatiguing. In enybody but them-eva
Them-Emmanuch to he on the
occalion; notfordreirlonow,bulfortheirwmofit.
Theirfatherwu no object oflove to them; he had
nevereeernedthefriend ofcheirplumnudhin
absence we: unhappil most welcome. They were
relievedbyitfrom minnmdwizhouzuimingut
one gratiﬁcation do: would probably have been forhidden
by Sir Thoma, they felt thermelvu immediately or.
their own dinpoul, and to have every indulgence vmhin
their ruch. any'l relief, end her nonunion-rue of
it, were quite equal to her oouuina’; but u more tender
nature mggened that her feelings were ungrateﬁrl, and
the rally grieved became Ihe could not grieve. " Sir
'I‘lwmaywhohaddoneeomuchforherandher
bmthergand who wan gone perhapnever no return!
that the Ihould see him without a earl it we: I
shameful inaenlihiliry." e had aid to her, moreover,
on the very in! morning, that he hoped Ihe might nee
William ngniu in the mute of the enmin winter, and
had chIrged her to write and invite him to neﬁeld, at
noon u the nadron wwhichhebelonged Ihouldheknown
tobein Eng nd. u'I‘hiewuoothoughtful-millianl "
and would he only have smiled upon her, Ind called her
“ my dear Fanny,” while he mid it, every former frown
or cold Iddreu might have been forgotten. But he had
endedhinlpeeehinnwa wlinkherinsadmoni-
ﬁuﬁon, by Idding. “ If illiam doee come to Maui-
ﬁeld, I hope you may be able to convince him that the
my yeorl which have named line you paned have not

IANSI'IILD PARK. 33

been Ipent on ide entirel withouti rovernent;
though, I fear, mint ﬁnd hilyliater at £35... in tome

mo much like_hil inter at ten.” She cried
hittaiy over thi- reﬂecﬁon when her uncle wan gone;
and her minqon aeeing her with red eyee,Iet her
down In a hypocrite.

than: 317.

OM BERTRAM had of late rpent no little of
hi time at home, that he could be only nomin-
ally mined; and Lady Bertram war noon

“ﬁnished to find how very well they did even without
hie father, how well Edmund could mpply his place in
carving, talking to the steward, writing to the attorney,
Iettling with the eervanu, and equally Iaving her from
all ponible fatigue or exertion in every particular, but
that of directing her letters '

The adieu Intelligence of the travellen’ nfe arrival
at Antigua, after a favourable voynge, was received ;
though no: before Mn Norrie had been indulging in
very drurI'ul foam, and trying to Make Edmund porti-
cipote then whenever she could get him alone; and n
she depended on being the Gm per-on made acquainted
with any ﬁml Wire, the had already arranged the
manner of breaking It to all the othen, when Sir
We Illumcel of their both being alive md well,
mode it meet-try to lay by her Igitation and affectionate

ry Ipeechee for a while.

he winter came and passed without their being

ﬁlled for, the accounta continued perfectly good; and
Mn Norrie, in promoting 'etiet for her nieces, auieting
their toilets, dirplaying their accomplithmenu, and look-
ing abort for their future hulbandl, had to much to do,

34 lAlSnl‘l-D PARK.

an in addition to All her on household um. tome
interference in thooe of her ﬁner, and Mn Grant'-
waeﬁrldningrtoondoohleftherverylinleooaion
tobeoccrmiedinfeanforthelhlent.

TheMimBertmnawerenovfullyeauthIedamong
the belles of the neighbourhood; and a they to
beauty and brilliant acquirementt a manner naturally
any, and carefully formed to general civility Illl oblig-
ingnell, they poorest-d it. favoura well u it: admiration.
Their vanity waa in arch good order, tint they learned
to be quite free from it, and gave thennelvelno ain;
while the attending loch behaviour, necured
and brought round by their aunt, nerved to mngthen
them in believing they had no faulu.

Lady Bertram did not go into public with her
daughter: She war no indolent even to use]! I
mother’- gratiﬁcation in witncuing their accent and
enjoyment at the expenae of any personal trouble, and
the charge was made over to her litter, who desired
nothing better than a poet of loch honourable relate-ent-
ation, and very thoroughly reliahed the mean: it afforded
her of mixing in Iociety without having bones to
hire.

Funny had no than in the festivities of the union;
but the enjoyed being avowedly uuel'ul at her aunt'-
com nion, when they called away the rest of the
funiy; and, at Mill Lee had left Mamﬁeld, the
naturally became everything to Lady Bennm during
the night of a ball or a She talked to her,
liatened to her, rad to her; the u-anquill'ty of llch
eveningl, her perfect Iecurity in Inch I [uni-m: from
any eound of unkindneu, wan unlpealubly welcome to a
mind which had aeldom known a paule in iti alarm. or.
embanaumenu. Al to her courim' gaietiel. he loved
to hear an account of them, erpecially of the hallo, md
whom Edmund had danced with; but thought too

museum run. 35

lowly of her own iuno‘on to imagine the Ihonldever
be admitted to the lame, and linened, therefore, without
aniduofnnyneareroonoeminthem. Uponthe
whole, it w I comfortable winter to her; for though
it hmu ht no Willinm to Englnnd, the never-failing
holy]: hie nrrivnl wu worth mud»
he envning rpring d rived her of her valued friend
theoldgreypony; Ind orlornetimenhewuindanger
offoeling thelo- in herheelth'u well u in her
eﬂ'eetiom; for in spite of the neknowledged importance
ofher riding on horseback, no rneuuree were taken for
mounting her again, “ became," an it wu oboerved by
her Inna, “ the might ride one of her coulim’ hone- ll
on time when did not want them," and u the
'l Bertram! re y muted their hornet every line
day, Ind had no idea of «trying their obliging manner:
to the uncrilice of any outﬁt-lame, that time, ofooune,
never came. They took ‘ cheerful rides in the line
mornin of April and May; and Fanny either not at
home e whole da with one aunt. or walked nd
her men at the Inltigntion of the other; Lady er-
tmn hol 'ng exercioe to be u nnneceln for everybody
at it wu unplealant to herself; and fl Norrie, who
we. vnlking all day, thinking everybody ought to walk
u much. Edmund wan aboent at thil time, or the evil
would hive been enrlier remedied. When he returned.
to understand how [F Inny] wu Iituated, and perceived
in ill effects, there aeemed widl him but one thin
tohe done; and that “Fanny mutt have n hone,’
no the retohrte decllretion with which he oppooed
whatever could be urged b the mpinene- of hi:
mother, or the economy a his aunt, to make it
Ippﬂl’ unimportant. Mn Noni: could not help think-
ing that name Iteady old thing might be found among
the number! helongmg to the Park, that would do
vutly well; or, that one might be homwed of the

36 IANSPIILD PARK.

steward; or that perhaps Dr Grant might now and'
thenlendthemthe nyhesenttothepost. She
could not but con ' r it as absolutely unnece-ry,
and even improper, that Faun should have s-regnlsr
lady'shnneofherown,in euyleofhereousins.
ShewassureSirThonus had never intended it; and
shemusthy,thattohemsking suchs purchase in his
absence, and adding to the great expenses of his stable,
at a time when a large part of his income was unsettled,
seemed to her very un‘ustiliahle. “ Faun must have.
I horse," was Edmund I only reply. Mn orris could
not see it in the same light. Lady Bertram did: she
entirely agreed with her son as to the necessity of it,
and as to its being considered necesnry by his father;
the only pleaded against there being an hurry; she
only wanted him to wait till Sir Thomas s return. and
then Sir Thomas might settle it all himself. He would
he at home in September, and where would he the
harm of only waiting till September?

Though Edmund was much more displeased with his
aunt than with his mother, as evincing east regard for
her niece, he could not help paying more attention to
what she aid, and at length determined on a method of
proceeding which would obviate the risk of his father’s
thinking he had done too much, and at the same time
procure for Fanny the immediate means of exercise,
which he could not hear she Ihould be without. He
had three horses of his own, but not one that would
can-y a woman. Two of them were hunters; the
third, a useful road-horse: this third he resolved to
exchange for one that his cousin might ride; he knew
where such a one was to he met with; and having once
made up his mind, the whole business was soon com-

leted. The new more proved a treasure; with a very
little trouble, she became exactly calculated for the pur-
poae, and Fanny was then put in almost full possession

IIANSHILD PARK. 37

of her. She had not auppond before, that In thin
could ever auit her like the old grey pony; hit In:
delight in Edrnnnd’a mare was far beyond any former
pleasure oftheaort; and the addition it waa ever re-
oa'ving in the con-ideration of that kindneaa from
which her yleuure aprung, waa beyond all her word;
to expren. She regarded her (:0an u an example of
everything good and u poaauaing worth, vhich
no one but her-elf d ever appreciate, and u entitled
to Inch gratitude from her, aa no feelinga could be
mg enough zip-mike untimentlmgdmrda
were co 0 that In , le u ,
eonﬁdingn,‘lmandnd tender. ' 8“
Al the hone continued in name, me well aa fact, the
mpert of Edmund, Mn Norri- could wlente in
being or Fanny’a nae; and hid Lady Bertram ever
thought about her own objection again. he might have
been excueed in her eyea for not waiting till Sir
Thomar‘a reunn in September, for when September
cam, Sir Thornu waa nil] abroad, and without In
near Wet of ﬁnishing hia Maine's. Unfavoun
tireummncea had ruddenl ariaen It a moment when
he vm beginning to turn all hie thoughta tonrda Eng-
land; and the very great uncertainty in which every-
thing war then involved determined him on aending
home hia anu, and waitin the ﬁnal arrangement by
himaelf. Torn arrived n? . bringing In excellent
account of hia futher'u hulth; but to very little pur-
, u far aa Mn Norri- waa concerned. Sir
I'horma’uending aweyhil aonaeemed to her-o like
a t’a can, under the inﬂuence of a foreboding of
ev to hiuuelf, that the could not help feeling dreadful
preaentimenta; and an the Inn eveniuga of autumn
cameonuvuao terriblyhann byrheae ideaa,inthe
nduoliurineuofhercotuge,u to beobliged to take
daily refuge in the dining-room of the Park. The re-

38 xaxsnnm PARK.

turn of winter engagementa, however, wan not without
in elfeet; and in the ooune of their progren, her mind
became ao leanmly occupied in nu rintending the
fortune: of eldest niece, u tolera l to quiet her
nerves. “ If r Sir Thomaa were ted never to
return, it w d be peculiarly coneoling to lee their
dear Maria well married," the very often thought;
alwaye when they were in the company of men of for-
tune, and particularly on the introduction of a oung
man who had recently oucceeded to one of the argeat
crates and ﬁnest placer in the country.

Mr Ruahworth wu from the ﬁre: atruclt with the
beauty of Miss Bertram, and, being inclined to marry,
noon fancied himself in love. He war a heavy young
man, with not more than common aenae: but at there
war nothing disagreeable in hit ﬁgure or addreu, the
young lady waa well pleaaed with her conqueat. Being
now in her twenty-lint year, Maria Bertram wan begin-
ning to think matrimon a duty, and at a marriage with
Mr Ruahworth woul give her the enjoyment of a
larger income than her father’t, as well an enrure her
the home in town, which waa now a prime object, it
became, by the name rule of moral obligation, her evi-
dent duty to marry Mr Ruohworth if ahe could. Mn
Norrie wan molt zealoua in promoting the match, by
every tuggeltion and contrivaoce likely to enhance in de-
ainhlencu to either party; and, among other meant, by
aeeking an intimacy with the gentleman’s mother, who at

resent lived with him, and to whom ahe even forced
goody Bertram to go through ten milea of indifferent
mud to pay a morning vitit. It waa not long before a
undermnding took place between thia lady and
henelf. Mn Ruahwonh acknowledged heraelf very
detiroua that her aou Ihould marry, and declared that
of all the young Iadiel the had ever aeen, Mira Bertram
seemed, by her amiable qualitiea and accomplilhmenta,

murmur nun. 39 ‘

thebeetadaptedtornahehimha y. MnNorria
aeoeptedrhecomplimengandadmi thenicediacern-
ment of character which could to well diaringuiah merit.
Maria wa- indeed the pride and delight of them all—
perfecgy fauldeHn angel; and, of courae, In our-
rwnd byadmiren, mun be dimcult in her choice:
mu farqu-Norriacouldallowhenelfto

' on an ahort an acquaintance, Mr Ruahwonh
appured preciaely the young man to deserve and attach
her.
After dancing with each other at a proper number
of hallo, the young peijrle juuiﬁed theoe opiniona, and
an engagement, with a ue reference to the ahaent Sir
Thoma, waa entered into, much to the ratiafaetion oi
their rerpective families, and of the general lockers-on
ofthe neighbourhood, who had, for many week: Ht,
felt the expediency of Mr Ruahwonh’a marrying 'ra
39mm. .

It Wu aome month: before Sir Thomar’a cement
could be received; but. in the meanwhile, in no one
felt a doubt of hia moot cordial plenum in the connec-
tion, the intercourse of the two familiet wan carried on
without reﬁnint, and no other attempt made at aecrecy,
than Mn Norriu't talking of it everywhere at I matter
not to be talked ofat preeent.

Edmund wan the only one of the family who could
aeeufaultinthebul'neaubutno mentationofhie
aunt’a could induce him to ﬁnd Mr uahworth a delir-
able companion. He could allow hia liner to he the
bent judge of her own happineal. but he won not pleated
that her ha ‘neal ahould centre in a large income; nor
could he Erin from oﬁen crying to himself, in Mr
Ruahwnrth’a compuny—“ If thi- rnan had not twelve
tbouaand a year, he would be a very nupid fellow.”

Sir Thom", however, war truly happy in the proc-
pect of an alliance Io unqueetionahly advantageoua, and

hillnnuhunynoncmencewueonnyeduenon-

I0

,ofwhom Mn Gnntknevnmhinylhehnd
namelyeeen (laminae. In their uncle’c home '13
had found a kind home. Admiral and Mn Cnvl’o ,
though agreeing in nothing elne, were uniued in Iﬁ'ection
for these children, or, at lent, were no further ndvene
in their feelingl dun that each had their favourite, to
whom diey Ihowed the grated fondue. of the two.
The Admiral delighted in the boy, Mn Crawford dented
on the girl; and it w die lady'l death which now
obliged her Magic, after some montlu’ further trial at
her nncle’l home, to ﬁnd another home. Admiral
Crawford war a nun of victim. conduct, who choee,
instead ofrmining hie niece, to bring hie mime- under
hi. own roof ; Ind to thin Mn Grant wu indebted for
her liner‘l propoul of coming to her, a mature quite

l

mmsnnm run. V 4r

uwelcomeonone ideuitconldbe expedientonthe
other; for Mn Grunt. lnving by this time run through
the null reeourcee of lade Riding in the country
without a family of children—having more than ﬁlled
her favourite lining-room with pretty furninue, and
made a rhoioe collection of plants and poultry—w
very much in want of me variety at home. The
arnvnl, therefore, of a liner whom ahe hadalwny- loved,
andnow toreuigilwithherulongunhele}
mained in e, wan hi a hie; and her chie
anxiety war, lent Manage]! ammo“ eatirfy the habit:
of a young woman who had been moetly used to
London. v

Mi- Crawford wan not entire] free from similar
a rehenlione, though they aroee principally from doubt:
0 her Iiner'l Iter of living and tone of Iociety; and it
was not till after the had tried in "in to penuade her
brother to nettle with her at hie own country-home,
that the could resolve to hazard henelf among her
other relationu. To anything like a ence of
abode, or limitation of eociety, Henry nwford had,
unluckily, a great dialike; he could not accommodate
bin litter in an anicle of web importance; but he
cecon her, with the utmost kindness, into Northam
ton-hire, and an readin engaged to fetch her away again,
at half an hour’l notice, whenever the were weary of
the lace. ’

he meeting was very latilactory on each tide.

Mi- anford found a sister without predeeneu or
rusticity—a Iiuer’e husband who looked the gentleman.
and 1 home commodiour and well ﬁtted up; and Mr:
Grant received in than: when Ihe h to love better
than ever, a oung man Ind woman o ve W
in appeuancye. Mary Crawford war remarrlyu ly pretty;

enry, though not hundnome, had air end countenance;
the manner- of both were lively and plea-ant, and Mn

4 a MANSFIELD PARK.

Grant immediately gave them credit for everything elac.
She was delighted with each, but Mary waa her dareat
object; and having never been able to glory in beauty
ofher own, the thorou hly en' yed the wer ofbeing
roud ofher niuer’a. hehadlonotwai her arrival to
ook out for a suitable match for her; ahe had ﬁxed on
Tom Bertram; theeldeataonofabaroaetwaanottoo
good for a girl of twenty thouaand poundl, with all the
elegance and accompliahmenn which Mn Grant forelaw
in hen and being a warm-hearted, unreaerved woman,
Mary had not been three hourl in the home before Ihe
told her what the had planned.

Mia- Crawford waa glad to ﬁnd a family of each
convequence .0 very near them, and not at all divpleaaed
either at her ainer'a early care, or the choice it had
fallen on. Matrimony wzll her object. provided the
could marry well: and having teen Mr Bertram in
town, she knew that objection could no more he made
to hit peraon than to hia Iituation in life. While ahe
tmted it an a joke, therefore, ahe did not forget to
think of it aerioualy. The scheme waa noon repeated
to Hen . ‘

“Add, now,” added Mn Grant, "I have thought
of Iomcthingto make it complete. I ahould dearly love
to nettle you both in thiacountry ; and therefore, Henry,
you ahall marry the youngest Miu Bertram, a nice,
handaome, good-humonred, accomplilhcd girl, who will
make you very happy.”

Henry bowed an thanked her.

“ My dear litter,” said Ma , “ if you can penuade
him into anything of the tort, It will be a freah nutter
of delight to me to ﬁnd myself allied to anybod no
clever, and I Ihall only regret that you have not half-a-
dozen daughter: to dispose of. If on can grenade
Henry to marry, you must have the ad of a much-
woman. All that Englilh abilitie- can do ha: been

msnm PAIL 43

tried a] . I lave three ‘ friend: who
havebzdnylldyhgforhimin rum-udan-
whichtheyﬁkitmhen verydeverwomen),uvell
umydﬂrumtand ,lnveukenmrummu,
ormkhimimomnyinbiaincmceinblel Heie
themhon'ille Iinthat can beingined. Ifyonr
Mi-Bertnmedonot liken) have dmr hem; brute,
let them :vu'd Hairy."

“Mydurhrodnr, I will nothelievethind'you.”

“No,qulnre oummogood. You'illhe
onwillallowfordnedmbuof
ymhlndinexperience. Inmﬁnaﬁmumpa,
Ind willing to rink my happinul in I hurry. Nobody
unlhinkmon highlyofdlemauimonialnatedun
myuelf. Iconiderdnbledngofawifeumj y
dwindinthooe dimetlineeoftbeyoet ‘Henvenu
kl! M 8%, II

“There, Mn Gmyyoulee hovluedvellaon one
word,md onlylookathia unile. Iamre you he in
very deteuble; the Adminl'u let-om lnve quite
Iponled him."

“ I pay. very little regard," laid Mn Grunt, “ to
what any young penon lays on the subject of mam'ngc.
If they profe- I disinclination for i; I only eat it down
that thz have not yet Ieen the right penon."

Dr mt laughineg congratulated Mi- Crawford
on feeling no ditinclination to the stale hemlf.

“Oh yeul Inm noun-ll ulmnedofir. 1 would
have everybody marry ifthey can do it frude : I do
not like to have people throw theme: m away : but
everybody ahould mn’y ll noon an they can do it In
advantage." ‘

44 uwsnun run.

chum U.

HE youngroplewere each other
fromthe rt. 0n uch I'de therewu much
to attract, and their uainnnce anon ‘

u all an intimacy an gnoiicqmannen wouldpmmwamm.
Mi- rawford'r bunny did her no diner'vine with the
Min Bemam They were too handsome themadm
todidihmywnmforhdngnmandwerealm
umuchclnrmed utheirbmthenwith herlivelydark

, clear brown and general pretunun'
Eddie beentall,ﬁill fonned,undfair,it mighthave
beenmoreofacrial: butuit mthemcouﬂ be no
enmpamn' n; and-hewaamnnallovnbl alweetpretty
girl, while they were the ﬁner: youugywomen in the
country.

Her brother wan not handnome; no, when they ﬁm
aw him be war abeolulely plain, black and plain; but
nillhewuthegentlelnan,withapleaingaddm
The aecond meeting moved him not no very plain; he
wan plain, to be sure, tthen hehadaomuch counten-
ance,andhiateeth were no good,and he wan unwell
made,th noon forgo: hewaa plain; and after a
third interview, aﬁer dining in company with him at the
Parsonage, he wu no longer allowed to be called no by
anybody. He we, in fact, the most agreeable young
man the listen had ever known, and they were equally
delighted with him. Mi- Bemarn’l engagement made
him in equity the property of Julia, of which Julia wu
fully aware; and before he had been at Manrﬁeld a week,
the war quite ready to be fallen in love with.

Maria’s notion: on the lubject were more conﬁned
and indistinct. She did not want In nee or undermnd.
“ There could be no harm in her likin an agreeable
man—everybody knew her uituation— Crawford

MANSHILD PARK. 45

‘rmut hke cue ofhirruell'." Mr Crawford did not
mnntoheinan danger] tliehﬁuBertnmIv/ere
worth pleuing. nudwere ready to be pinned; and he
hﬁln with no objectbut ofrn-kingthem like him. He
d' not want them to die of love; but with Ienee end
temper which ought to have made him judge and feel
better, he Illowed him-elf great latitude on such points

“ I like your Min Bertram exceedingly, liner,"
llld he,“ he returned from attending them to their
carriage nﬁzr the aid dinner visit; “theynre very
eleglnt, agreeable girll."

“So they are,indeed,end I um delighted to hear
you lay it. But you like Juli: beet."

“Oh yea! I like Julia hen.” -

“ But do you really? for Min Bertram in in general
thought the handsome-t."

“So I Ihould mppoee. She h» the advauu in
every feature, and I prefer her countenance; but like
Julia belt; Min Bertram it certainly the handnorneat,

. and I hlve found her the moot ogreeahle, but I nhall

Ilwayl like Julia beet, became on order me.”

"I Ihall not talk to you.I'leury, but I know you

«all like her bet at lam."

“ Do not I tell you that I like her but off"! P "

“ And beddee, Min Bertram ll engaged. Remem-
ber that, my dear brother. Her choice in made."

“Yen, and I like her the better for it. An engaged
woman ll nlwayl more a reable than a disengaged.

She in “tidied with h . Her care- are over, and

Ihe feel- that the may exert Ill her powers of planing
without Iuepicion. All in ufe with a lady engaged:

no harm on he done."

“Why, a to that, Mr Rulhworth ll 3 very ’good
eort of young man, and it in a gmt match for her. ’
“ But Min Bertram doeI not care three mm for

him; lbalilyour of your intimate friend. I

46 _ mm PARK.

do not Iii-cribe to it. I m are M'nn Bertram is
verymchattachedtoMardrworth. I oooldue
itinlcrequhenhewumenﬁoned. Ithinktoo
wellofMi-Benrarnrou’noeelhe would ever give
her ham: without her heart. ' P

" , how dull we nnnage him "

“Wemleavehhntohinnelﬁlhelievr. Talking
doe-nogood. Hewillbetakeninatlan."

“Bmeonldnot hnhimtdear'w;l would
nothavehimdnped;lwouldlnveitallﬁirand
honouraHe."

“Ohdarl lethimlandhilchanceandbehlen
in. It will do unwell. Everybodyia taken in
at acme period or other."

_ “Not alwaya in marriage, dear M .”

“In marriage apedally. With ll due rupeet to
ruch of the pmwmt company In chance to he nnn'iL-tl,
my dear Mn Grant. there in not one in a hundred of
u'ther sex who in not taken in when they marry. Look
whereIwill, Ineethatititeo; andIfeelthatitmm
beEIo, when I connider that it in, of all tnnncu'ona, the
one in which people expect moot from others, and are
lean hone: themaelvel.’

“Ahl You have been in a had Ichool for matri-
mony, in Hill-meet."

“ My poor aunt had certainly little mine to love the
«are; but, however, Ipuking from my own observa-
tion, it is a‘mancuvring Maine-a. I know so many
who have married in the full expectation and con-
ﬁdence of name one particular advantage in the con-
nection, or accompliahment, or good quality in the
pemn, who have found themaelvel entirely deceived,
and been obliged to put up with exactly the mane.
What in thin but a take in i ”

“ My dear child, there mutt be a little imagination
here. I beg your pardon, but I cannot quite believe

MANSFIELD PARK. 47

you. Dependuponigyoueee but half. You-eethe
evil, but you do not ice the consolah'on. There will
be little mhe and dirapptinunenu everywhere, and we
are all [Pt to ex cet too much; but then, if one Icherne
of happth ﬁll, human nature tum to nnotherr if
the lint alculnion in wrong. we nuke a necond better;
we ﬁnd comfort nomewhem—and those evil-minded
obeerven, dearest Mary, who make much of a little,
Ire more taken in and deceived tlnn the partial them-
eelvel." v

“ Well done, lilerl I honour your up"? in «up.
When Inmawifqlmnntohejuatumnnch
mytelf; and I wilh my friendl in general would he
to too. It would save me many a heart-ache."

“You are u had a your brother, Mary; but we
will cure yon ‘ooth. Mansﬁeld rhall cure on both,
and without any taking in. Sky with u, an we will
cure on."

The Crawford» without wanting to be cured, were
very willing to my. Mary was ratiﬁed with the
Pareonage :- a pment home, and Henry equall ready
to lengthen his vilit. He had come, inten ing to
spend only I few day- with them; but Mineﬁeld
promin well, Ind there wan nothing to call him elle-

r where. It deli hted Mn Gnnt to them both
with her, and r Grant wu exceedingy well con-
tented to have it so: a talking reuy young woman
like Mien Crawford in alwayl pennant eociety to an
indolent, nay-ata-home man; Ind Mr Crawford'r
being hie guent wu an excuae for drinking claret every

The Miss Bertraml’ admiration of Mr Crawford w
more npulroun than anythin which Min anford’r
habit: made her likely to l. She acknowledged,
however, that the Mr Bertram were very ﬁne young
men, that two Inch young men were not often eeen

C

ofa higheraump,forhe had aaymammexcellent
spirita,a euquaintance,audagreatdealto-y;
and the reunion of Mansﬁeld Park. and a buonetcy,
did no harm to all this Min Crawford noon felt that
he and hi! situation might do. She looked about her
with due conddemion, and found almon everything in
hiafamr,apark,arealpark,ﬁvemilaronnd,a
spacious modem-built home, so well placed and well
acreened as to deterve to be in any collection of
engraving: of gendemen'a seat. in the kingdom, and
wanting only to be comyletely new furnished—plenum
liners, a quiet mother, and an agreeable man himaelf—
with the advantage of being tied up from much gaming
It pretent, by a promiae to hit father; and of being Sir
Thomaa hereafter. It might do very well; she believed
Ihe ahould accept him; and she began accordingly to
interett henelf a little about the horse which he had to
run at the B raeea.

Thea: races were to call him away not long after
their acquaintance began; and n it apyeared that the
family did not, from his usual goings on, expect him
back again for many weeks, it would bring his Passion
to an early proof. Much ms laid on hia aide to
induce her to attend the ncee, and achemes were made

 

MANSFIELD :PAR K. 49

ﬁnal: wrhern,withtllthe mettof
inelinatiofhilritywmdd only do to he alkali;

And Fanny, what was :5: doing and thinking all
thia while? and what wta bet 'nion ‘of the new-
comerti‘ Few young ladiet of eighteen could be leta
celled on to speak their opinion than Funny. In a
qaiet way. very little attended to, the paid her tribute
of tdmiration to Mitt Crawford’t beauty; but u the
Itill continued to think Mr Crawford very plain, in
qaite of her two coutint having repeatedly proved the
contrary, the never mentioned Mar. The notice which
the excited hertelf, wat to thin effect. “ I begin now
to understand you tll, ex Mitt Price.” tnid Min
Crawford, at the wat walking with the Mr Bertram.
“Pray, it the out, or it the not? I In: puzzled. She
dined at the Partonage, with the rut of on, which
teeme‘d like being our .v and yet the up 00 ittle, that I .
can hardly tupp0te the ir."

Edmund, to whom thin wat chieﬂy addretted, lied,
“I believe I know what you mean, but I '1 not
undertake to antwer the question. My coutin it grown
up. She hat the age and tenet of awoman, but the
ontt and not cure tre beyond me."

“And in genenl, nothing can be more utily
tac ' The diatinction ll lto broad. Manner: at
well u at tre, generaly tpeaking, to total]
idiﬁ'erent. lill now, I could not have uppoted
potible to he mittakm at to a girl't hang out or not.
Agirl not out,haa alwayl the tame tort ofdrett: a
done bonnet, for inttance; look: very demure, and
never tayt 1 word. You may mile, but it it to, I
atvureyon; and exc t that it it tometimet carried n
little too ﬁr, it it very proper. Girls thould be

niet and modem. The moot objectionable part it,
am the tlteration of mtnnera on hein introduced into
company it frequently too tndden. gl‘hey aornetimet

 

. ex"-

5° IANSHELD PARK.

pa. in ouch very little time from reserve to quite the
appetite—to conﬁdence! The: in the faulty part of
the yreeent Iyltem. One doel not like to nee a girl of
eighteen or linemen Io immediately up to everything—
and perlnpc when one hu Ieeo her hardly able to
meek the year before. Mr Bertram, I dare any you
have armame- met with such changel."

“I believe I have, but thi- il hardly fair; I nee
what you Ire at. You are quilting me and Mill
Andenon."

“No, indeed. Mi- Andenonl I do not know
who or what you mean. I am quite in the dark. But
I will quit you with a gmt deal of plea-ore, if you will
tell me what about.”

“Ah! you carry it of very well, but I cannot be

uite to far impoted on. You mun have had Min
ludcnon in your eye, in dclcribing an alterchoung
lady. You paint too accurately for miltake. t w
exactly '0. The Andenonl of Baker Street. We
were tpeaking of them the other da , you know.
Edmund, you have hard me mention harlee Ander-
son. The circumstance wu preeiaely as thin lad has
represented it. When Anderson lint introdu me
no llll family, Ihout two year: ago, hll liner we not
.out, and I could not get her to epeak to me. I at
there an hour one morning waiting for Andenon, with
only her and a little girl or two in the room, the
govemeu being tick or run away, and the mother in
and out every moment with letter: of huuineu. end I
could hardly get a word or I look from the young lady
—nothing like a civil answer—the ecrewed up her
mouth, and turned from me with euch an airl I did
not see her again for a twelvemonth. She was then
out. I met her at Mn Holford’t, and did not recollect
her. She came up to me, claimed me an an acquaint-
ance, cured me out of countenance, and talked and

runsrllu) run. * 5 r

lunghed rill I did not know which wny to look. I
feltthltlmnnbethejeotofdreroornltthetime,
and Mia Crlwfor'd, it in plain, hu heard the Kory."
“And I very pretty Itory it in, end with more truth
in it. I due lay. then doel credit to Mint Andenon.
It in too common I hull. Mothere certainly have not
at got quite the right we, of numging their doughten.
ldonotknowwhere the errorliee. Idonotpretend
m letpeople ﬁghghut 1 do lee um theyare oﬁen
wrong. '

“Thooe who are thawing the world what fermle
nunnerl rbould be," said Mr Bennm gdhndy, “ore
doinng greet den] to let them right”

“ he error in plain enouiglw aid the leer courteorre
Edmund; “ouch girl: are ' brought up. They Ire
given wrong notion: from the beginning. They ere-
alwayu Icing upon motives of vanity, and there it no
more In] Inodeny in their behaviour Mm they appear
in public than afterwards.”

“I do not know," Mi- Crawford, heuiut-
ingly. “Yet, I cannot agree with on there. It in
mainly the rnodeneet part of the hirlneu. Itil much
woree to have girl: not and, give themaelm the-nine
tin and take the name lihertieo u if they were, which
I have nee done. That it wane than anything—quite
diogultingl ”

“Yet, that in very inconvenient, indeed," mid Mr
Bertrlrn. “ It leads one my; one does not know
what to do. The dose bonnet Ind demure air
deecribe In well (and nothing was ever jnner), tell one
whethexpeeted;but1got into I dreadfulocn Int
yar from the want of them. I went down to rot-
gum {or I week with a friend lat S , jun after
my rietnrn from the Went Indieu. y friend Sneyd—
yon have heard me of Sneyd, Edmund—hie
father, nod mother, a listen, were there, ell new to

5 1 KAISI'IBLD PAR K.

m. WhmvelunbdAlion Phagdleyvenout;
“mt-Mutuandfmmddmonlheliﬂ:
Mnlnddktvlo Mi- Sneydl. widzodxenoftheir
Icquinunce. Indemybo'informganduMl-u
Sneydwummdbymmachedmpdfmm
ofhudaughlayvalkedbyhaideallthenyhom,
Mmdemynlfuagmubleulmldilheywng
My,perfecdy in hammmdumdym
ﬂlumﬁmafhadmanlﬁdonmlculdbe

.doing an ‘n wron. 'I‘hqlooked'undxe-me:
girlnbutllftu'wudlfwndthulbadhtengivingdl
mylmﬁmmdnmvhowmdﬁndhd
mexneu'vdyo lhedden. Mi-Augm
htmmhnbmnadccdfonhcnenixmth;
1n M'mSnedebdiaqhamerfotgimm"

“That was had, inked. Poor Mi- She’d!
Thoughlhavemyomgerinenlfadforhu. To
hnqkmdbefonone'ldmemube vendor;
mitvnmdnlylhgmhu’u fluk'x-Augm
aofldhanbeenvithhugom Sod:me

' nevu- pmger. But no. I and be
-m Mia- Pnce. Does be In IIIIII?
Dmthedimulevuyvhugu nanny
Mn?”

“No.” Edmund: “I do not. (Enligh-
everhteumahalL Mymhernldongouinm
myhaulﬁuddimnovhuehmﬁdaﬂn
Gnnganann nylnhonevithb."

“91!! than pointiadelr. M‘nl’ticeinu!
out.’

MANSFIELD PARK. 53

Chutn- 17].

R BERTRAM set of for , and Miss
Crawford wss prepsred to ﬁnd I t clam
in their society, sod-to rui- him 'dedl in

the meetings which were now becoming elm 'y
between the Emilia; and on their Ill dining together
nttllePsrksoon sfter hisgoing,sheretookherchosen
nesr the bottom of the table, fully expecting to
s moot melancholy difference in the change of
mm Itwould he: veryﬂntbnl'nenylhewu
sure. In with his brother, Edmund would
have nothing to ﬂy. The son? would be sent round
in I most. epiritless manner, wine drunk without sny
miles or ngreuble triﬂing, Ind the venison cut up with-
out snyplylng one plea-Int sneodote of my former
hannch, or a sin entertaining m , shout “my friend
Inch-hone.” he most ﬂy to Imnsement in what
was psssing st the upper end-of tbe uble, and in
obuerving Mr Rushvrorth, who was now making his
I nnce at Mansﬁeld for the lint time since the
nvlfords’ sninl. He had been viiting s friend in
the neighbouring county. sntl that friend having recently
had his grounds laid out by In in: ver, Mr Ruh-
worth we returned with his hesd of the aubject.
and very eagelrdto be improving his own place in the
someway: thonghnotu' muchtothe ,
could talk of nothing elwyl'lighe
nlreldy handled in the dnwin doom; itwu revived
in the dining-parlour. ‘ ﬁertnrn’a mention and
opinion was evidently his chief nim; snd though her
rtrnent showed nrher conscious superiority than
my solicitade to oblige him, the mention of Sotherton
Conn-ndtbeidmsmcbedwiggsvebernfeelingof
mplncency, which prevented her from being very
nngrscrons.

 

54 IANSHBLD‘ PARK.

-“IwiahyoncouldveeCompton,"nidhe,“itia
themcompletetlingl Inevernvlpboeen.
alteredinmylrfe. ItnldSmithIdidnntknowwhere
Ivlu. Theeppvuchuwﬁnoneoftheﬁnenthingl
intheoonntry:ynu|eediehmneindlemo¢nrrprie—
ingrrunuer. Ideclare,\vhenIgothecktnSotherton
yenerd’alyﬁtlooked like aprinnn—quitea dim] old

“0h,fornlnnrel"eriedMn Noni..- “A '
indeed? Sotherton Court in the nobles old pl:oein'
the world."

“It wants improvement, ma’un, beyond anything.
Inevernwaplzce that wantedeomnch improvement
inrnylife: and it in to forlorn,that I do not know
what can be done with it."

“No wonder that Mr Rudlworth should think In
It ment," raid Mn Grant to Mn Norrie, with n

' i “ but depend upon it, Sothertnn will hnve ever}
improvement in time which hi- hart can desire.”

“I mun Hymn do Inlnething with it," lid Mr
Rnnhworth, “ I do not know what. I hope I
Ihnll have rome good friend to help me."

“Your best riend upon such an occasion," aid
Bertram ulmly, “would be Mr Repton, I
imagine.”

“That in what I vial thinking of. A.- he he done
no well by Smith, I think I had better have him at
once. Hie term- arv: ﬁve guinea: a day.” -

“ Well, Ind if they were In," cried Mn NorrirI “ I
aran need notre it. The ex need not
be any impediment. f I were you, should not
think of the expenoe. I would have everything done
in the hevt le, and made as nice a povlible. Such
a place a therton Court delervee everything that
mute and mo can do. You have cc to work
upon there, an ground: that will welT‘reward you.

manna) run. 55

Formyownyanﬁfl had-nythingwithinlhe ﬁftieth
panofthe inofSodnenm,ldIouldhealwayI
plantingmdilnpmvin for, man]! , I am naively
foodofit. Itwon hem" formem
ammpt mythiugwhcnl m nonvith mylitdehalf
um. Itwouldhequhenburluqln. ButifIhnd
mmlﬁwldnkcilrodigiomdelightinim-
pmviugandplnnting. We ' amdmlinthntway
nthePInomge: wemadeitqniteadiﬁ'mtplaoe
fmmvhatitwuvhenweﬁmhndit Youyoung
one- do notnnmnbermchaboutit, perhapubut
ifdur SirThomuvne hem,heoonld|ell youwhat
impvmemenu we made: and: t dell mom would
hnbundmhutfor r Norrin’undmol
health. Hemld yevergetougpoormanﬂo
enjoy mydﬁngmdtbudhhanmed me fmndoin
mMymtSknmandlmdm talk .
Ifit hadnotheenfor Ital,wedmldhave carriedon
thegavdznwulhlndmdethc ' tolhuxout
the church-yard, I: Dr rInt ha- dme. We
were alway- doing something u it was. It “only
the spring twelvemonth before Mr Noni-’I death, that
we put in the Ipricot agaimt the “able wall, vhich in
nowgmnmhanohlcuce,andgctﬁngmmchper-
faction} ir," Iddrnu'ng henclfthcn Io Dr Grant.

“The me thrives well, nd a doubt, madam."
uplicdDr Grunt. “The ' in good; and Inner

it without regretting that the fruit Md he no
gimme trouble ofgatheling.”

“Sir, it in a Moor-park, we bought it as : Moor-
park, Ind it colt uI—chat igit was I ymtfmm Sir
Thoma, but I an: the bill—and I know itoouoevcn
dillin Indra! chugeduaMoor-p-rk."

“ﬂmimpond on, nu’am," replied Dr Grant:
“the: have a much ch: ﬂavour of: Moor-
purklpricotuthefnitﬁomthtm Itinminipid

56 "ANSHILD max.

fruit at the heat; but a good apricot ia arable. which
none from my are."

“The truth It, ma’am," mid Mn GrantI pretending
to whiqer ecmaa the table to Mn Non-in. “that Dr
Grant hardly knowl what the natural rate of ouraprioot
ll: be in urcelyever indulgedwith one,for it into
valuable-fruit; with ahakﬁmmandouﬂil
ouch a remarkably large, fair tort, that what with early
tamandpreeerveymyoooheontrimtogetthem
all.”

MnNoniywho hadhegunto redden,wuappeued;
and, for a little while, other luhjecu took place of the
improvements of Sotherton. Dr Grant and Mn
Norrie were Iddom good friend” their ac uaintanoe
had begun in and their 'te were
totall die-imilar.

A r a thort interruption, Mr Ruahworth began
again. “Smith’a place ll the admiration of all the
country; and it vm a mere nothing before Repton
took it in hand. I think I shall have Repton.”

“Mr Ruahworth." laid Lady Bertram, “ if I were
you, I would have a very pretty ahruhhery. One like:
to et out into a Ihruhbery in ﬁne weather."

1' Ruahworth wan eager to auure her ladyuhip of
hil acquieacence. and tried to make out aomething com-
plimentary; but. between hie Inbluiuion to ba- late,
and hi. having alwayr intended the nine hinuelf, with
the auperadded ohjecu of rofeuing attention to the
comfort of lade in general: and of insinuating that
there was one only whom he wan anxioua to pleale, he
grew pulled, and Edmund wu glad to put an end to
hit lpecch by a propmal of wine. Mr Ruahworth,
however, though not uaually a great talker, had Itill
more to lay on the subject next hie heart. “Smith
has not much above a hundred acrea altogether, in bi-
groundl, which it little enough, and make: it more

umsrrnu: run. 57

lurpri-‘ng that the place can have been ‘0 imyroved.
Now, at Sotberton, we have a good Ieven hundred,
withoutrecknningthewatermeadowl; IothatIthink,
ifoo much could he done atConrpton,we need not
deep-in There have been two or three lineold trees
cut down, thatgrewtoo nearthe honae,and it open:
the proapecternau'ngl,which nuke-metbink that
Repton, or anybody 0? that tort, would certainly lave
the avenue at Sothermn down; the venue that lead:
fmnthewufronttothetopofthehill,yon ,”

min to Mi- Berttum particularly n he lpoke. But
Mi- thought it not becoming to reply—

“The avenuel Oh! I do not recollect it. I
really know very little of Sotherton."

Faun , who wan n'ttin on the other ide of
Edmun exactly ‘te in Crawford, and who
hnd been attentively 'Itening, now looked at him, and
laid, in n low voice— _

“Cut down an avenue! What a pi: i Doe: it
not make you think of Cowper? ‘Ye en avenues,
once more I mourn your fate unmeriud.’ ”

He amiled at he anawered, “ I am afraid the avenue
mnda a had chance, F army.”

“ I Ihould like to lee Sotherton before it ir cut
down, to lee the lace an it in now, in it. old name; but
I do not mppore shall.”

“Have you never been there? No, you never can;
and, unluckily, it in out of dietance for a ride. I with
we could contrive it.” ‘

“Oh! it dounot Ii ' . WheneverI doaee it,
you will tell me how it hu altered.”

"I collect," aaid Mill Crawford, “that Sotherton
in an old place, and a lace of none grandeur. In any
puniculnr Ityle of huilrgng ? "

“ The home we built in Eliuheth’l time, and in a
large, regular. brick building; heavy, but respectable

' Id
he’luelﬁulieilavdl-bndmybemkulhhaof
IL'

“Idonot'idiminﬂli-Rlﬂlwonh,”he
maimed; “bughadllplwemneI-ﬁdﬁayl
uhouldnoc tm intolhelundnofan'mplwu’.
Ivonldnﬂrhggraninfaiordegmeofbanq,of
mymchoioe,lnd yogic-'VHLI
ndmnhidebymym undergdnnby ' "

"Tuvonldkmwvhatywvemabongofcoum;
butdntvonldnotmitu. Ihﬂenoqeoringenui?
formhmmbutulheylnbcfomm;mdhd
I placeofmyovn in the cwnu-anhouldhe no:
thankful to any Mr Rayon who would nodenake it.
ndgivennummhbautyuheoouldformynmq;
. undIIhmldncveI-look nit ﬁllitwucompleme."

“Itwmﬂdbedelightﬁulwumnezhepmgmof
it. Ill,” laid Fanny.

“ , havebeen h: wit. hmno
pan Jsdumﬁon;u:°ud§e :Irydonlmhd,
being adminimrd by not the ﬁr: favourite in the
world, has made In: consider improvemenu in M an
the 3mm of uni-nee; Thine yean ago, the Ad-
minl,m honoured uncle, bought: cottage It Twick-
enham rmallmqendournmmin;mdm
aunt 1nd I went down no it quite in npmm; ha: 1:
being excessively punyﬁtwnoon found necemryto
beimpmnd,mdforthnemomhawemdldinnnd

i

manna nu.- 59

conﬁnion, without a eel walk to up on, or n’hench
fitforuae. Iw haveeverythingueompleteu
pouihle in the country, ahmbberiee and ﬂower-garden".
and rude at: innumerable: bntit muatall be done
without my care. Henry ia diﬂ'erent, he loves m be

doing.” A
Edmund wa- eorry tn hur Min Crawford, whom he
wu mnch ' to ndmire, apeak to freely of her

uncle. It ' notuithiaeeneeof n ,andhe
' wu I'lmeed, till induced by further liveli-
nel, to put the nutter by for the resent.

“Mr Bertram," laid ahe. “ have tidingl of my
hat]: I! luv. I am “lured that it it Info It North-ml»-
ton; and there it hu lumbeth been theeeten dayl, In
apite of the Iolemn amnncee we have to often received
to the .” Edmund expreued hil pleamre Ind
Inﬁnite. “ he truth in, that our inquiriee were too
direct; we rent a tenant, we went ounelvel: thiI will
not do twenty miles from London; but thin morning
we head of it in the right way. It we. seen by tome
farmer, and he told the miller, and the miller told the
lunchf’r, and the butcher‘l aon-in-law left word at the

“I am glad that on have heard ofit, what-
ever meanl'fzd hope theie will he no farther dbleylay."

“ I am to have it to-morrow; hut1 how do you
thinkitiato beconveyed? Notbyawnggonorcart:
oh no! nothing of that kind could be hired in the
village. I miyht a well have naked for porter: and a

-hnrrow.’ '
V “You would ﬁnd it difﬁcult, I dare lay, juat now,
in the middle of a very late hay harvest, to hire a hone
and cart 2 "

“ I wu amnilhed to ﬁnd what a piece of work wu
made of itl To wnnt a honennd cartin the country
teemed impouible, lo I told my maid to Ipealt for one

I. I

55%;: Egg: ‘

3%; E
?%§S§‘ 5531”
3? €35 Egg:
E1 E5"? ﬁg:
“=aéE5mE1J

%
g
E3
3
E

, mun
oflunnanydme nghnot IIDGII’I’WIIP-
gourfzrlncnufnotin

i

8.2.
f
E
8‘
E
E
E
'8
i

conveyed?"

Edmund upoke of the Imp :- hi! favoulim inlan-
mengand hopqilobemnallovedmhurlnr.
Fannyhadneverhuldlhe hﬂpllllLInd'iM for
it much. .

37.1.»: heme-t hnmto hym you both," aid
Mil Crawford; “ll Inna Lag:- you can like to
linen: probably much Inga-Jot I dndylme IIIIIIiC
myuelf, Ind when the mum! mil ml theplayer
mutnlwuyabcbeuoﬁforoheingn' inmonewlyl

msnm PARK. » 6:

than one. Now, Mr Bertram, if you write to your
brother, I entrust you-to tell him that myharp ircnme;
he hard to much of my misery about it. And you
may lay, if you plane, that I dull prepare my melt

lnnn've airl agarnat hie return, in companion to hit
Icelin u I know hi- horee will lone."

“1% write, I will any whatever you with me; but
I do not, at preterit1 foresee any occuion for writin ."

“No,l dare ny,nor ifhewereto be gone atwe ve-
rnouth, would you ever write to him, nor he to you, if

A it could he helped. The occasion would neverhe fore-
aeen. What mange creaturea brother! are I You
would not write to each other but upon the moat urgent
neoeuity in the world; and when obliged to take up
the to n that Inch a hone it ill, or ouch a relation
deer; in one in the fewest pouible words. You
have but one ater among you. I know it perfectly.
Henry. who ll in every other reapect exactly what a
brother should be, who love. me, con-ultl me, conﬁde:
in me, and will talk to me by the hour together, he
never yet turned the page in a letter; and very nfmn it
in nothing more than—'Dear Mary, I am jun arrived.
Bath Ieeml full, and everything u ulual. Yourl oin-
cerely.’ That iI the true manly style; that in I
oo lete brothel”! letter."

“ hentheynreatadintanoefromalltheirflmily,"v
laid Fanny, colouring for William’a lake, “they can
write long letterl." '

“Min Price ha a brother nt lea,” aid Edmund,
“ whoee excellence u a oorrelpondent makea her think
you too nevere upon ua."

“At lea, haa the? In the king’| aervice, of
course i " .

Funny would rather have had Edmund tell the nory,
hut hie determined Iilence obliged her to relate her
brother’- aittlation ; her voioewu animated in apeaking

62 ' umnlu) max.

nfhiaprofeao'on,and the foreign nation- he hadheen
on; hatehecouldnotrnenﬁon thenurnlnrofyeanthat
hehadheeunheentvithmttearlinhereyel. Mi-
Cnvllgor‘l civillywiehedhimenearlyprornotion. ’

“ onknowan ' ofm ooulin’lcapmn' ?'
Iid Edmyund; “Captamnhally? You haven large
acquaintance in the on , I conclude?"

“Among admiraln, enough; hm," with-nail-
ongnndenr, “we knovl verylittle oft}; infenor' nnh.

ma ‘ ma he loft 0 men, but

.10an myu. I mld l
youafrutdeelynfthuuanddmeirﬂagyandthegnda—
don 0 their , and their bickeringu and jenlmniea.
Bngin gmerll:a canal-ureyou that theyare all paled
over, and all very ill need. Certainly, In home at my
uncle'l brought me a uainted with a cin: e of admin-ale.
0f Rear: and Vim, lav! enouph. Now do not be
lumngmofapumlenuuh'

undagainfeltgnve,nnd onlyreplied, “ltiaa
noble fe-ion.”

“ ea. the profusion in well enough under two cir-
cnmnnceu ifit maltethe fortnne,end there hedia—
cretion in Ipending it; but. in ahort, it it not a favourite
profe-ion of mine. It has neverworn an aminhle form
lo we."

Edmund reverted to the harp, and van again very
happy in the proopect of hearing her lay.

he abject of improving gronn I. meanwhile, wan
still under 'conaideration among the other- ; and Mn
Grant could not help addruain her brother, though it
Wu calling hil amnion from ill Julia Bertram.

“ My dear Henry, have you nothing to ray? You
have been an improver younelf, and from what I hr
of Everingham, It may vie with any piece in England.
It- natunl beandel, I am sure, are glut. Even'ngham,
u it and» be, wu perfect in my estimation; Inch 3

nusnnn nut. 63

happy fall of ground, and ouch timber] Wlm would
I not give to nee it uguin."

“ Nothing muld be on gnu'fying to me a to hear
youropinion ofit,” wahio mower; “but I far there
wouldbe tome disappointment: you would not ﬁnd it
equnlto your prelent idea. In extent, it in a mere
nothing; you would be surprised at in inoignilicance;
and, no for improvement, there wan very little for me
to do—too little; I Ahould like to have been buoy
much longer.”

“ You lie {and of the con of thing ? " mid Julia.

" Exoeuively 3 but what with the natural advmtngel
ofthe ground. which pointed out, era: to a very young
eye, what little remained to be done, and my own con-

uent relolutionl, I had not been of lg: three monthl
gore Everinghzm VIII all that it in now. My plm wan
laid It Westminster, 3 little altered, perhapc, at Cam-
bridge, and at one-and-twent executed. I om inclined
to en Mr Ru-hwnrth for ving l0 much happiness
yet be ore him. I have been a devourer of my own."

“Thole who nee quickly, will reeolve quickly, and
act quickly,” laid Julia. “ You can never went employ-
ment. Iii-tend of envying Mr Ruhworth. you ahould
mitt him with your opinion." ,

Mn Grunt, hearing the loner port of thin Ipeech, en-
forced it warmly; perwaded that no ’udgrnent could be
equal to her brother'n Ind Is Mine caught at
the ideu likewine, and gave it her ﬁill luppoﬂ, declaring
that, in her opinion, it was inﬁnitely better to conrult
with friendl 1nd disinterested ndvioen, than immediately
to throw the bulineu into the hands of a pmfeuional
roan, Mr Ruhworth \vu very ready to not the
fevour of Mr anford'l alliance; and Mgr-Mord,
ufter properly deprecating hi- own Ibilitieo, wu quite It
hi: eervice in any my that could be useful. Mr Ruh-
Wortll then begin to propooe Mr anford’l doing him

64 unrsrrlu: PARK.

tlnhouonr ofoomingovertoSothertou,and taking 3
bedthere; when MnNorrigu ifrendingin her two
nieoel’mindltlrirlittlen tion ofnplnn which
was to take Mr anfo any, inter-pound with In
nrnendment.

“ There an be no doubt of Mr anford'l willing-
neu; but why thould not more of u- go? Why Ihould
notwennke nlittle Party? Hereuemnnythatwould
be interested in your IIIngan my dear Mr Ruh-
worth, and that woul like to her Mr Crawﬁrd’l
opinion onthe rpot,nnd that might be of Iona: mull
not: to you with tba'ropiniom; and for my own part, I
have been long withing to wait upon your good mother
again; nothing but having no home of my own could
luvemademenoremiu; hltnoonouldgoaodlitn
few hour: with Mn Runhworth, while the rent of you
walked about and Iettled thing; and then we could all
return to a late dinner here, or dine at Sotherton,jut
as might be moat ngreubleto ur mother,nnd have
a plea-ant drive home by moo 'ght. I dare any Mr
Crawford would take my two niece: and me in his
barouche, and Edmund can go on horseback, you know,
liner, Ind Fanny will my at home with you.”

Lady Bertram made no objection; and every one
concurred in the going wan forward in expressing their
ready concurrence, excepting Edmund, who heard it all
and Hid nothing.

chum: ‘93].

" ELL, Fanny, and how do you like Min
Crawford now I" laid Edmund the next
day, after thinking tome time on the ruhject

himself. “ How did you like her yesterday?”

“Very well—very much. I like to hear her talk.

IANSHILD PARK. 65

She entertain: me; and Ihe i- no extremely pretty,
that I have grat pleasure in looking at her."

“ It in her countenance that in lo attractive. She
he a wonderful play of featurel But war there no-
thing in her converaation that much you, Fanny, aa not
quimgght?" d“ h

“ h, eel on t not to have ken of her
uncle an all did. I wgaa quite An uncle
with whom Ihe ha been living on many yearn, and
who, whatever hie faulu may he. in to very fond of her
brother, treating him, they lay, quite like a non. I
could not lave believed it I ”

“I thought u would he struck. It waa very
wron 1 very i oroua.”

nd ungrateful, I think.” ‘
. “ Ungra ia a atrong word. I do not know that
her uncle haa any claim to her gratitude; hie wife cer-
tainly had; and it iI the warmth of her for her
auntu memory which uni-leads her here. he in awk-
wardly circumunced. ‘With such mm feeling: and
lively upiriu it my: be diﬂicult to do justice to her
alfecu'on for Mn Crawford, without throwing a shade
on the Admiral. I do not Pretend to know which
was moot to hlunc in their diva memcnu, though the
Admiral’a preaent conduct might incline one to the side
of hi. wife; but it in natural and amiable that Mina
Crawford ahould acquit her aunt entirely. I do not
oenaure her opinion.- hut there certainly i: impruyriety
in making them public.”

“ Do not you think,” raid Fanny, after a little con-
u'dention, “that thil impropriety la a reﬂection ind!
upon Mn Crawford. an her niece ha been entirely,
bmughtu byher? She cannot have given her right
notion: what wan due to the Admiral.”

“ That in a ﬁir remark. Yea, we mutt mppoae the
fault: of the niece to have been thooe of the aunt; and

5. mg]: m ﬁe. _ n 4.3%. a.
WWW “NEWMmeme mmmmmﬂm
.. Mm h gum-um WWW» mm Mwmumm. m? ..
mam .1?“ d... .m “ RTE. n
m mm may“ mmmmm Mm EWme
1% a“: r h w a“ _ ﬂ 3?
mm" Em w Wyn“,ka
m am; . m2..m...m www.mnmwmmmw
“ Lmu .mmumwm. “hémgnm «.wuummmmmmw

.
Interim PARK. 67

tecuredan inviution for the next; for the lady could
not he unwilling to have a linener, and everythang we:
too; in a {air train. Ind d

oun woman, , ' , with a II c-
nearaw' w,cut
down to the ground. and ing on a little lawn,
ntnouuded by thrubt in dumb foliage of lunmer,
wuenoughtocttchun nun’theart. Theteaaou,
the-oene,theair,vere favomhletoteoduuettand
tentiment. Mn Grant and her tamhour frame were
not without their rue: it wtt all in harmony; and II
everything will turn to tecorrnt when love u once tot
going, even the undwich tray, and Dr Grant doing the
honoura of it, were worth looking It. Without ttudy-
iug the buiuett, however, or knowing what he wat
about, Edmund wan hegiunin at the end of a week of
nehiutenwmtohea dealiulovegundtothe
credit of the lady it may be added, that, without hit
being a man of the world or an elder brother, without
any of the am of ﬂattery or the gaietiet of email talk,
hehegantohe tgreeahleto her. She feltittoheto,
thou h the had not foreteen. and could hardly under-
ttaurlg it; for he wu not plenum by any common rule;
he talked no nonaerue; he ' no complimeutt; hit
opinion. were unbending, hrt attendant can uil and
ntnple. I1Iere was a charm, perm in hit noeerity,
hie tteadineu. hit integrity, which Crawford night
he equal to feel, though not equal to ditcuat with her-
telf. She did not think very much about it, homer:
hepleaaed herfor the preterit; the liked whavehim
near her; it tvat enough.

Fanny could not wonder that Edmund Ina at the
Panonage every morning; the would gladly have been
there mo, might the have gone in umnvited and un-
notioed,toheartheharp;ndtheroouldthetvouder
that, when the evening ttroll vat over, and the two

68 umnew PARK.

familiel parted spin. he thonld think it right to mend
Mn Grunt end her ﬁner to their home, while Mr
anford wu devomd to the ladies of the Pork; but
the thought itn verybud exchnnge; end if Edmund
wennottheretonu'xthevinelndwnterforher,
wouldnthergowithoutit than not. Shewn nlittle
Iurpricedthnhecould gender) manyhounwithmn
Crawford, and not tee more of the tort of fault which
he lud dread observed, and of which :5: wu almost
nlwnyI by n tomething of the nine nntnre
whenever the van in her company; but to it Vial.
Edmnnd wu fond of speaking to ha of Mine Crawford.
but he seemed to think it enough that the Admiral had
since been upon-d; and the torupled to point out her
own remark-to him, let it Ihould nypear like ill nature.
The first let-u] pain which Mitt Crawford occationed
her wu the contequence of In inclination to learn to
ride, which the former caught noon nfter her being
nettled at Man-ﬁeld, from the example of the young
hdiet It the Park, and which. when Edmund- ac-

unintanee with her increased, led to hi: encouraging
ate with, end the oﬁ'erof his own quiet mate for the

rooteofherﬁmatumpguthebenﬁttedforn
Edginner, that either mhle could fuminh. No pain, no
injury, however, wu detigned by him to hit cousin in
thin offer: :11: was not to lone n day't exerciee by it.
The mare wu only to be taken down to the Panooagc
half an hour before her ride were to begin ; and Fanny.
on it: being ﬁnt propoced, to far from feeling slighted.
VIII nlmoat overpowered with gratitude that he should
be taking her leave for it.

Mine Crawford nude her lint any with great credit
to henelf. and no inconvenience to Fanny. Edmund,
who had taken down the mare Ind pmided at the
whole, returned with it in excellent time, before either
Funny or the Rudy old coachman, who alwayt attended

unsnm mm. 69

herwhen be rodevithomha oouine,were randy»
Ietforvard. The-econd day'ltrinl 'Il notwgnilt-
len. Mi- Cnvfon‘l’l enjoymentof riding we. arch,
thatire didnot knowhowtn leavenﬁ‘. Active Ind
fade-.Mmonghmhermlhmglymldghe
leaned mredfornhmmornnnnndwrhepnre
genuine leunrenftheexerc'ugnmethingvufm-
blbly'ldded in Edmund'l attendant: and inn-notions,
Indlomething morein thecnnvictionofverylnnch ur-
pul'ng her-ex ingenenlbyherurlymtn
nukehernnwillin todi-nonnt. Funnywmdylnd
ﬁn‘npundMn orﬁnmheginningtonoldherfor
notan goue,|nd still no hone“- unnounoed, no
Edmundglppeued. To avoid her aunt, and look for
him, Ihe want out.

The houmthongh rcarcelyhalfnrnile mm
not within ﬁght ofuch other; but. by ' g ﬁfty
yal'drfromthehalldoor,rheoouldlpokdownthe
Indonrnmnd-viewotthel’mgeend its
dernernu, gently ridng beyond the village rod; end in
Dr Grant’s meedow the immedle new the group:
Edmund and Min Crawford both on homback, riding
ride by ride, Dr and Mr! Grant, and Mr anford.
with two or three grooms, ﬁnding ebont and looking
on. A happy party it appeared to her, Ill interelzd in
one object: cheerful beyond I doubt, for the wand of
merrlrnent Intended even to her. It um I tound. which
ﬁanmakeba-cheerfnl; rhewonderndtbat Edmund
dronld forget her, Ind felt a pang. She could not turn
her from the meadow; she could not help Witch-
ing that parted. At lint Mi- anl’ord Ind her
com ion made the circuit of the ﬁeld, which war not

It I both pace; then, It be- rppurent Ingestion,
they moe into 1 cancer; end to any'l timid nature it
wumooteuoniohingmreehowwell the-L After.
few minutes, they stopped entirely. Edmund wu clone

3"

7° IlAllSﬂIl-D PARK.

whenhewaomakingtoher; hemevidently
directing hermanngetnentofthe bridle; he had holdof
herhend; shenawit, orthe uppliedwhat
the eye could not leech. She mun not wonder at all
thinwlntcmrldhernorenamnlthanthatEdmlmd
Ihould be making himaell' uaefirl, and proving hia good
naturehry any one? She could not. but think. indeed.
that Mr Crawford might at well have caved him the
truuhle;thatitwouldhaveheeupaniculnrlyp and
becoming in a brother to have done it Mr
Crawford. with all hie honed good-nature, md all hia
couchrnanahip. probably knew nothing of the mater. md
had no active kindneu in corupariaon of Edmund. She
heganto think it ruther hard upon the mare to have
euch double duty; if ohe were forgotten, the poor mare
ehould he remembered.

Her feelin I for one and the other were noon a little
mntﬂilized, Ieeing the party in the meadow dilpene.
and in Crawford Itill on honehack, hut attended by
Edmund on foot. pull through a gate into the lane, and
I0 into the park, and make towards the spot where the
ﬂood. She begun then to he afraid of appearing rude
and impedent; and walked to meet them with a great
anxi to avoid the mpicion.

“ y dear Min Price." laid Min anford, II
loonuahewuat allwithin hearing, “I am come to
make my own apologiea for keeping you waiting 5 but I
have nothing in the world to la for myself. I knew
it via: very late, and that I wan hehaving extremely ill;
and therefore, if you pleue, you must forgive me.
Selﬁlhncu mult alwaya be forgiven, you know, hecauae
there in no hope of a cure."

Fanny’a anlwer was extremely civil, and Edmund
ndded hie conviction that the could he in no hurry.
“ For there in more than time enough for my min to
ride twice an far a the ever goee," aid he, “ end you

IANSHILD' PAIRS . 11

lave been g her comfort I) reventing her from
letting of dn-hour sooner: I: olids m now coming
up,nodebevli.llnot mﬁ'erfmrn the heat asshewould
havedone then. [wish you may not he fitignedby
Iomnehexercise. Iwishyou had nvedyounelf this
walk home."

“ No yon ofit fatigues me but getting olfthis hone,
I Home on," nid ahe,u she Ipnng down with his
help; “l m mung. Nothing ever fatigues me,
but doing what I do not like. Ml- Priee, I give way
to ouvrith: badgnce;butI-'.noerel ho
vii have I plant ride, and that I may mic
but good to hear of this dear, delightful, beautiful
mind."

The old ooachman, who had been woiu'ng about with
his own hone, now é'Ioining them, Fanny wan lifted on
hen,endtheyaet 0 across another putof thepark;
her feelings of diocomfort not lightened by seeing, as
the looked heck, tint the other: were walking down the
hill Iogetherto the village ; nor did her attendant do her
much good by his comments on Min Crawford’s greet
clevemess ua honewoman. which he had been watching
with III interest almost equal to her own. '

“hie: lensuretaseellldywithsuchngood
hurt for ridmgl" aid he. “I never see one site
horse better. She did not seem to have I thought of
fear. Very diﬁ'erent from you, min, when you ﬁrst
began, six year! ago come next Easter. Lord blew
yonl how you did tremble when Sir Thoma: lint had
you put on I "

In the drawing-room MisrCnv/ford was Ill) cele-
hmed. Her merit in bein gifted by Nsmre with
etvength and coon , was epprecinted by the Mill
Bent-ins; her deight in riding wad like their own;
her early excellence in it was like their own. and they
had great pleum'e in praising it. -

72> WHILD PARK-

“Iwulurelhewould ridewell,"uid1ulia; “ohe
huthenukeforit. Herﬁgureiauneatuherhmthei’o."

“Yet,” added Maria, "end her quiriu Ire at good,
and the ban the ume energyofcharaeter. I cannot
but think that good honemanahip hat a great deal to do
with the mind. ’

When they parted It night, Edmund aaked Funny
whether the meant to ride the next day.

“ No, I do not know—not if you want the mare,"
was her answer. “I do not want herat all for my-
self,” aid he; “hut whenever you are next inclinedto
may at home, I think Mm Crawford would be glad to
have her a longer time—Jor a whole morning, in then.
She has a great. delire to get u l'ar an Man-ﬁeld Com-
mon; Mn Grant ha been telling her of in ﬁne view,
and I have no doubt of her being perfectly equal to it.
But my morning will do for thin. She would be cx- .
tremcly lorry to interfere with ou- It would be very
wrong if nhe did. Sb: ride. 0 y for plenum; you for
health."

“1 nhall not ride to-mormw, certainly,” nid Fanny;
“ I have been out very often lately, and would rather
nay It home. You know I am mug enough now to
walk very well.”

Edmund le aked plea-ed, which must he F anny'l
comfort, and the ride to Mansﬁeld Common took place
the next morning: the party included all the young
people but herself, and won much enjoyed at the time,
and doubly enjoyed again in the evening diacualion. A
niece-Jul lcherne of thin aort generally brings on another;
and the having been to Maneﬁeld Common ' them
all for going oomewhere elae the da after. here were
many other view: to be than 5 an though the weather
war hot, there were shady lane: wherever they wanted
to go. A young party ll always provided with a ahndy
lane. Four ﬁne momingo aucceuively were lpent in this

MANSFIELD PARK. 73

manner, in thowing the Crawford: the country, and
doing the honoun of ita ﬁneat ta. Everything
an-wered ; it wan all and humour, the heat
only rupplying inconvenience enough to he talked of
with plenum—till the fourth day, when the happineu
of one of the party wan exceedineg clouded. Mina
Bertram w the one. Edmund and Julia were invited
to dine at the Panonage, and :5: van exduded. It
was meant and done by Mn Grant, with perfect good
humour, on Mr Rurhworth'n account, who we partly
expected at the Park thuday 5 but it waa felt an a very
gnevoua injury, and her manncn were severely
taxed to conceal her vexanon and anger till the reached
home. AI Mr Ruthworth did not come, the injury
wu increued, and she had not even the relief of thew-
ing her wer over him; Ihe could only he tullen to
her mgr, aunt, and couain, and throw a great a
gloom u po-ihle over their dinner and deuert.

Between ten and eleven, Edmund and Julia walked
into the drawing-room. freeh with the evening air,
glowing and cheerful, the very reverse of what they
found in the three ladiel lining there, for Maria would
ecarcely nice her eye: from her book, and Lad Bcr~
tram vat half aaleep; and even Mn Norrie, 'ecom-
pared by her niece’e ill humour, and having uked one
mired”: about the dinner, which were not im-

' ylmdedtoueemedllmoetdetenninedwny

no more. For a few minutes, the brother and liner
were too eager in their nine of the night and their
remark-on the mu: ' k beyond thermelvel; but
when the tint pauae came, Edmund, looking around,
laid, “But where ll Fanny? II ahe gone to bed?”

“No, not that I know 0,” replied Mn Norrir;
" the wee here I moment ago."

Her own tle voice Ipeaking from the other end of
the ro'om,w 'ch wu eve long one, told them that
Ihe we on the sofa. Mr: arril began ecolding.

74 ' HANSIIILD nu.

“That in I very foolinh trick, Fann , to be idling
away all the evening upon a tofu. y cannot you
come and it here, and employ youreelf u we do? If
you have no work of your own, I can eup ly you from
the poor basket. There in all the new co, the was
bought Int week, not touched yet. I am lure I almost
broke my back by cutting it out. You Ihould learn to
think of other le : and take my word for it, it is a
shocking trick or a young pemn to be olwaye lolling

n a sofa."

Before half thi- wu id, Fanny war returned to her
lent at the table, and had taken up her work again; and
Julie, who wan in high good humour, fro the Plea-
eurel of the day, did her the 'uetice of ex: aiming, “ I
mutt uy, ma'am, that Funny 1: at little upon the Iol'a an
anybody in the home.”

“ F Inn ,” laid Edmund, after lookin at her atten-
tively, “ am sure you have the headach. ’

She could not den it, but aid it was not v bod.

“ I can hardly be Ieve you!" he replied; “ know
your Iookl too well. How long have you had it i ”

“ Since I little before dinner. It in nothing but the
heat.”

“ Did you go out in the heat?”

“Go out! to be lure Ihe did,” said Mn Norris:
“ would ou have her my within luch a ﬁne day II
thil? “yen not we all out? Even your mother wao
out to-day for above an hour."

“Yes, indeed, Edmund,” added her ladythip, who
had been thoroughly awakened by Mrs Norril’n oh:
reprimand to F anny; “ I wae out above an hour.
lat three quarter: of an hour in the ﬂower-garden,
while Fanny cut the roles, and very leuant it was, I
allure you, but very hot. It wan Ihndy enough in the
alcove,’ but I declare I quite dreaded the coming home
again.’

MANSFIELD PARK. 75

“ Fanny has been cutting roses, has the i "

“quand I am afraid theywill bethe last thisyur.
Poor thingl Sb: found it hot enough ; but they were
so full blown that one could not wait."

" There was no help for it, cerhinly," rejoined Mrs
Norris, in a rather softened voice; “but I question
whether her headach mi hr not be caught (lien, sister.
There is nothing so like y to 've it as mding and
Hooping in a hot sun; but I say it will be well
to-morrow. Suppose you let her have our aromatic
vinegar ; I always forget to have mine ﬁl ed."

“ She has got it,” said Lady Bertram; “she has
had it ever since she came came back from your house
the second time.”

“ What! " cried Edmund; " has she been walking
as well as cutting roses, walking across the hot park to
Kim house, and doing it twice, ma’am? No wonder

r head aches."

Mrs Norris was talking to Julia, and did not hear.

“ I was afraid it would be too much for her,” said
Lady Bertram; " but when the roses were gathered,
your aunt wished to have them, and then you know
they must be taken home."

" But were there roses enough to oblige her to go
twice P ”

“ No; but they were to be put into the spare room
to dry; and, unluekily, Fanny forgot to lock the door
of the room and bring away the key, so she was obliged
to go again."

Edmund got up and walked about the room, saying,
" And could nobody be employed on such an emnd
I but Fanny? Upon my word, ma’am, it has been a '
very ill-managed business."

“IamsureIdonotknowhowitwaslo have been
done better," cried Mrs Norris, unable to be longer
deaf; “ unless I had gone myself, indeed, bur. I cannot

I. F

16. nutsrrm PARK.

heintwoplaoetatoneetendlvmtalﬂngtoMr
Greenetthatv tirneahontyottrrnother’edairymaid,
hyber deire,an had romieedJohn Groom towrite
toMrIJeﬁ'erieaahmthr-aon,and the poorfellowwu
\vniting for me halfan hour. I think nobodycan junly
eccuae me of eparing mytelf upon any occu'ou, but
really I cannot do everything at once. And II for
Fanny’ajnu neppingdown to myhmneforme—it in
notmuchahove a quanerofennle—lcannotthinhl
wan unmahle to uk it. How oﬁendo I pace it
three times a-day, earl and late, ay, end in all weathen
too, and y nothing mic?"

“ I wiah Fanny had half your mngth, ma’lm."

“ If Fanny would be more regular in her exemiee,
thewouldnot he knocked up to noon. She ha. not
been out on honehack now thin long while, and I urn
pounded, that when the doe: not ride, the ought to
walk. If the had been riding before, I thould not
have uked it of her. But I thought it would rather
do her good after being lumping among the meet; for
there it nothing to refreshing n a walk after a fatigue
of that kind; and though the sun wan Itrong, it wan not
to very hot. Between ounelvu, Edmund," nodding
tigniﬁcantly at hie mother, “ it wu cutting the rues,
and dawdlrng about in the ﬂower-garden, that did the
mitchief.”

“ I am afraid it wu, indeed,” laid the more candid
Lady Bertram, who had overheard her; “I am very
much afraid the caught the headach there, for the heat
wan enough to kill an body. It Wu In much an I
could hear rnyrelf. Sitting and calling to Pug, and
trying to keep him from the ﬂower-beds. we: almost
too much for me.”

Edmund raid no more to either lady; but going
quietly to another table, on which the nu r tray yet
remained, brought a glut of Madeira to any, and

unusuan max. 77

obliged her to drink the greater part. She wished to
be able to decline it; but the turn, which a variety
of feeling- created, mode it eacier to Iwallow than to

Vexed an Edmund war with his mother and aunt, he
wan nil! more angry with himself. Hi- own forgetful-
neu of her wan worse than an thing which they had
done. Nothing of this would ve hip ed had Ihe
been properly considered; but the had u left four
dayl together without any choice of companions or
exercile, and without any’excuoe for avoiding whatever
her unremnable nunu might uire. He won nlhamed
to think thnt for four day: to er ohe had not hid the
power of riding, and very Ieriounly renolved, however
unwilling he mutt be to check a pleasure of Min Craw-
ford’e diet it Ihmild never ha again.

Fanny went to bed with er heart In full at on the
ﬁret evening of her arrival at the Park. The mate of
her apiriu had probably had it: there in her indi ti-
tion; for she had been feeling neglected, Indlﬁen
Itruggling against discontent and envy for Iome days
pm. At the lcnnt on the sofa, to which the had rc-
treated that the might not be m, the pain of her mind
had been much beyond that in her head; and the
sudden change which Edmund’l kindness had then
occalil?ll¢d, made her hardly know how to Iupport
heroe . -

Chum: 173]}.

ANNY'S rides recommenced the very next day;
and u it Wu a pleasant fresh-feeling mornin ,
lets hot than the weather had lately been, Eg-

mund trusted that her loosen both of health and pleuure
would be noon made good. ‘While the wan gone, Mr

78 msan nu.

Ruehwonhan-ived,” ' hie mother,whoeame to
hecivilandtodiov/herciulity ' y,inurgingthe
execution oftheplanfor whichhad
been named e fortnight before, and which, in con:-
quenoe ofher luheequent Ihemee ﬁum home, had ince
lain doan Mn Norrie and her niece: were all well
plulcdwitll ite revivalﬂod an earlyday we: named,
and agreed to, provided Mr Crawford ehould he dino-

'gaged; the un ladieedid not forgetthat nipolatioo,
and though “a glunil would willingly have nnlwered
for hiI being no, they would neither authorize the liberty,
normntheriak; andathnonnhintfromMi-Ber-
nan, Mr Rnahworth dinoovered that the properen thing
to he done was for him to walk down to the Panonage
directly, and call on Mr Crawford, and inquire whether
Wedoaday would euit him or not.

Before hia return, Mn Grrmt and Min Crawford
came in. Having been out oome time, and taken a
different route to the houee, they had not met him.
Comfortable h I, however, were given that he would
ﬁnd Mr Claw ord at home. The Sotherton scheme
wa- mentioned of coune. It waa hardly pouihle, in-
deed, that anything elee should he talked of, for Mn
Norril win in high epiriu about it ; and Mn Ruah-
worth, a well-meaning, civil, prodng, pompoul woman,
who thought nothing of conlequenee, but an it related to
her own and her aon’a eonceme, had not yet given over
preoring Lady Bertram to be of the part . Lady Ber-
tram connantly declined it; but her )1 acid manner of
refusal made Mn Runhworth atill think Ihe wiahed to
come, till Mr: Norria’e more numeroue word: and
louder tone convinced her of the truth.

“ The fatigue would he too much for m litter a
great deal too much, I auure you, my dear n Rulin-
worth. Ten mile- thcrc, and ten back, you know.
You mun excuae my liner on this aeration, and accept

MAHSHILD run. 79

of our two dear girla and mynelf without her. Sother-
ton in the only place that could give her A with to go on
far, but it cannot be, indeed. She will have a corn-
panion in Fanny Price, you know, no it will all do ve

well; and at for Edmund, an he ll not hear to apea

for himself, I will answer for his being moot happy to
join the arty. He an go on horseback, you know.”

Mr! uehwonh being obliged to yield to Lady Ber-
trun’e ataying at home, could only be lorry. "The
loan of her ladyehip'a compan would be a great draw-
haclt, and the should have been extremely happy to
have aeen the young lady too, Min Price. who had
never been at Sotherton yet, and it waa a pity the should
not lee the place.”

“ You are very kind, you are all Icinan my dear
madam,” cried Mn Norrie; “ but u to Fanny, ahe
will have opportunitiea in plenty of seeing Sotherton.
She hu time enough before her ; and her going now in
quite out of the t‘ueerion. Lady Bennm could not
pooliny apare her.’

“ Oh no I I cannot do without Fanny."

Mn Ruuhworth proceeded next, under the conviction
that eve bod muat be wanting to lee Sotherton, to in-
clude iu rawford in the invitation: and though

Mn] ‘* Grunt, who had not been at the trouble of
vuiting Mn Rmhworth, on her coming into the neigh-
bourhood, civilly declined it on her own account; ahe
wan glad to Iecure any pleasure for her aiater; and
Mary, pro ly pressed and pemladed, wno not long in
accepting er ahare of the civility. Mr Ruahworth
came back from the Panonage ucceuful; and Edmund
made hia a annce junt in time to learn what had been
Iettled forpmedneaday, to mend Mr- Ruahworth to
her carriage, and walk half way down the park with the
two other Indiu- ‘

' Printed “ Mina " In the enrly edltlona.

so Innsrim unit.

On his return to the brukfut-room, he found Mn
Norrie 'ng to make up her mind a: to whether Mi-
Crnwfo ’5 being of the party were delirable or not, or
whether her brother's borouehe would not be full with-
out he}. The Mill Bent-ml laughed at the idea,
uluring her that the hamuche would hold four perfectly
well, indefendent of the box, on which one might go
with him. ’

“ But why in it neceonry,” laid Edmund, “that
Crawford's carriage, or hie only, Ihould be employed?
Whyilnouneto he madeofmymother’echmee? I
could not, whm the Icheme wu lint mentioned the
other day, undemnd why a visit from the family were
not to he made in the carriage of the family."

“Whatl” cried Julia: “go, hox’d u three in a

chaiee in thin weather, when we may ve seat: in
a borouchc! No, my dear Edmund, that will not
quite do."

“ Beudee,’ " mid Marimgéeknow that Mr Czwﬁzrd
d dlll ntakinguo. rwlut dot rot,he
wm claii: it u I promile." W

“ And, my dear Edmund," added Mr. NorriI,
“ taking out two carriage: when on: will do, would be
trouble for nothing; and, between our-elven, coachman
in not very fond of the road: between thin and Sother-
ton; he always complaint bitterly of the narrow lance
ecratching hie carriage, Ind you know one Ihould not
like to have dear Sir Thoma, when he come: home,
ﬁnd all the varnish Acmched off.” '

“That would not he I very handmme reason for
using Mr Crawfor '5," said Maria; “but the truth is,
that Wilcox ll a nu id old fellow, and does not know
how to drive. I wdl anrwer for it, that we Ihall ﬁnd
no inconvenience from narrow road: on Wednesday."

“ There in no hardship, I suppone, nothing un-
KLem’a'nt," said Edmund, “in going on the barouchc

x.

MANSFIELD PARK. 8r

“Unpleauntl " cried Maria: " oh dearl I believe
it would be generally thought the favourite neat. There
can be no corn ‘ n II to one'l View of the country.
Probeny Min ray/ford will chooee the barouche box
henelf." .

“There can be no objccu'on, then, to Fanny's going
with you; there can be no doubt of your having room
for her.” ,

“Fannyl” repeated Mrl Norris; “my dnr Ed-
mund, there in no idea of her ing with u. She
up with her aunt. I told Mn mhworth to. She
in not expected."

“You can have no moon, I imagine, madam," said
he, addressing his mother, “for wilhing Fanny not to
be of the party, .but no it relates to ourself, to your
own comfort. If you could do Without her, you
would not will) to keep her at home i ”

" To be lure not, but I mum! do without her."

d ""You can, if I any at home with you, an I mean to
0.

There was a general cry out at this. “Yea,” he
continued, “there in no necelaity for my going. and I
mcan‘lo my at home. Funny ha. in great denim to ace
Sotherton. I know the wishes it very much. She
he: not often I gratification of the kind, and I urn mire,
nu’agr, you would be glad to give her the plea-rue
now u .

“ Oh, i very glad, if your aunt nee- no objection."
Mn Eni- wu very ready with the only objection
which could remain—their having poaitivel auured
Mn Ruahworth that Fanny could not go, In the very
mange appearance there would conlequently be in
taking her, which Ieemed to her a difﬁculty quite im-
po-ible to be got over. It mult have} the unngert
appearancel It would be something no ve uncere-
monioue, no bordering on dimpect for n Ruth-

8: umsneu) max.

wonlhwhoeeownmannenweremhlpmemof

-hreeding and amnion. tint the val did not
eeleqnaltoit. MnNorriahndno ' for
Fanny,end no wiah ofprocnring her plea-ore at any
time; but her 'Iion to Edmund now, an: more
from ptrtiality orherovnrehemeﬁeeameitw her
own, than from anything elie. She felt that the hnd
armged everything extremely well, and that an alien-
tion must be for the wone. When there-
fomtold herin reply,“ hedidwhenthewould’give
him the hearing. that ahe need not dim henel on
Mn Ruahworth’l account. beanie he had taken the
opportunity at he walked with her through the hall of
mentioning Min Price a one who would probably be
of the party, and had direct] received a very uﬂicient
invitation for [hit] ' couain, rI Noni: wan too much
veiled to whmit with a very good grace, and would
only lay, “Very well, very well, 'unt a you choooe,
fettle it your own way, I am mre do not care about
It.’

“It teem: very odd," mid Marin, "that you ahonld
he mying at home inatead of Fanny."

“I am lure the ought to he very much obliged to
you," added Julia, hutily leaving the room an the
lpoke, from a conlcioulneu that she ought tooﬂ'er to
may at home henelf. -

“Fanny will feel quite M grateful u the mention
Sequins,” was Edmund’a only reply, and the mbject

anny'l gratitude, when the heard the plan, was, in

fact, much greater than her pleure. She felt Ed-

mund’l kindnesl with all, and more than all, the tenni-

bilit which he, unlulpicioua of her fond attachment,

con d be aware of ; but that he should forego any en-

joyment on her Iccount gave her pain, and her own
' Printed “ her" in the early editionl.

uArrsnnw PARK. 83

ntiafaction in aeeing Sotherton would be nothing with-
out him.

The next meeting of the two Man-ﬁeld familiea pro-
duced mother alteration in the plan, and one that wan
admitted with general approbuu'on. Mn Grunt offered
her-elf aa companion for the day to Lady Bertram in
lieu of her ton, and Dr Grant wan to join them at
dinner. Lady Bertram waa very well planed to have
it no, and the young ladies were in Ipirita again. Even
Edmund war very thankful for an arrangement whidr
restored him to hit ahare of the Imy; and Mn Norria
thought it an excellent plan, an hed it'lt her tongue’a
end, and wu on the point of propoting it, when Mn
Grant Ipoke.

Wedneoday war ﬁne, and noon after breakfut the
barouche arrived, Mr Crawford driving hie rim; and
an everybody was ready, there waa nothing to be done
but for Mn Grant to alight, and the othen to uke
their placee. The place of all placea, the envied seat,
the poet of honour, was uwpropriated. To whole
happy lot wan it to fall? hile each of the Mica
Bertram: were meditating how but, and with the moat.
appearance of obliging the others, to tecure it, the
math pm Iettled by Mn Grnnt’l laying, a the
cupped mm the camage' ,“Aa there are ﬁveof on.
it will be better that one ahould sit with Henry; yand

'aa you were laying lately that you wiahed you could
drive, Julia, I think thia will be a good opportunity for
you to take a lea-on.”

Hap Julial Unhappy Maria! The former was
on the uche-box in a moment, the latter took her
out within, in gloom and mortiﬁcation; and the car-
ria drove off amid the good wishea of the two re-
maining ladiea, and the barking of pug in hil mirtreu'a

arrna.
Their road was through a plea-ant country; and

84 MANSFIELD PARK.

Funny, whoue ride- had never been attentive, vm coon
beyond her knowledge, Ind wu very happy in ohterv-
ing all that wu new, and admiring all that wan pretty.
She was not often invited to join in the convention of
the other; nor did the delimit. Her own thouth
and reﬂection: were habitually her but companion”
1nd, in observing the appearance of the country, the
hearing. of the road], the difference of coil, the date
of the haunt, the cottlgeu, the cattle, the children.
the found entertainment that could only have been
heightened by having Edmund to rpenk w of what the
felt. That w the only point of remnblance between
her and the lady who ut by her; in everything hurt a
value for Edmund, Miu Crawford wu very unlike her.
She had none of F Inny’e delicacy of taste, of mind, of
feeling; Ill: law Nature, inanimate Nature, with little
obeervntion; her attention wan all for men and women.
her talent: for the light and lively. In looking back
after Edmund, however, when there wan any stretch of
road behind them, or when he gained on them in mend-
ing a coniderable hill, they were united, and a “ there
he in ” hroke at the name moment from them both, more
than once.

For the ﬁrst Icven miles Mica Bertram had ve
little real comfort; her prospect alwayt ended in r
Crawford and her litter lilting side by tide, full of con-
venation and merriment; and to nee onl hie exprenive
proﬁle n he turned with a Imile to Julia. or to catch
the laugh of the other, was a rpetual source of irrita-
tion, which her own sense propriety could but jun
month over. When Julia looked back, it wan with a
countenance of delight, and whenever she rpoke to
them, it wan in the highest spirits: “ her view of the
country wan charming, the withed they all could lee it,”
&C.; but her only offer of exchange wan uddreued to
Mint Crawford, no they gained the cummit of a long

nansrrem PARK. 85
hill, and was not more inviting than this: “Here is a
ﬁne born of country. I wish you had my seat, but I
dare say you will not take it, let me ress you ever so
much ; " and Miss Crawford coul hardly answer,
before they were moving again at a good pace.

When they came within the inﬂuence of Sothelton
associan'ous, it was better for Miss Bertram. who might
be laid to have two strings to her how. She had
Rushworth-feeliugs, and Crawford-feelings, and in the
vicinit of Sotherton, the former had considerable effect.
Mr uahwonh's consequence was hers. She could
not tell Miss Crawford that “ those woods belonged to
Sotherton )" she could not carelessly observe that “she
believed that it was now all Mr Ruahworth’s roperty
on each side of the'road," without elation 0 heart;
and it was a pleasure to increase with their approach to
the capital freehold mansion, and ancient manorial reli-
de'uce of the family, with all its rights of coun-leet and
and court-baron.

“ Now, we shall have no more rou h road, Miss
Crawford; our difﬁculties are over. he rest of the
way is such as it ought to be. Mr Rushworth has
made it since he succeeded to the estate. Here begins
the village. Those cottages are really a disgrace. The
church spire is reckoned remarkably handsome. I am
glad the church is not so close to the great house as
often happens in old places. The annoyance of the
bells must he terrible. There is the parsonage; a tidy-
looking house, and I understand the clergyman and his
wife are very decent peofple. Those are aims-houses,
built is some of the amily. To the right is the
stews ’I house; he is a very respectable man. Now,
we are coming to the lodge-gates; but we have nearly
a mile through the park still. It is not ugly, you see, at
thia end; there is some ﬁne timber, but the mutation of

‘the house is dreadful. We go down hill to it for half

86 IAusrrIu) mm

I mile, and it in I pity, for it would not be In ill-looking
place if it Ind I better Ippmech."

Mi- anford wu not elow to admire; the pretty
well gunned Mi- Bertnrn'l feelingl, Ind nude it a
point of honour to promote her enjoyment to the
unmet. Mn Norrie wu Ill delight and voluhility;
end even Fanny had Iomething to my in edlniration,
and might be heard with complacency. Her eye wu
eegerly taking in everything within her reach; and
after being at some me to get a view of the home,
and obterving that “ rt win a nort of buildin which the
could not look at but with respect," she, ed, " Now,
where in the avenue? The home front: the eat, I
perceive. The avenue, therefore, mint be I! the hack
of it. Mr Ruehforth talked of the wet front."

“Yet, it in exactly behind the home; beginl at a
little dimnce, and alcend- for half-n-mile tn the ex-

tremity of the ground‘. You may tee something of it
' heng of the more dimnt treel. It in oak
entirely.”

Mia Bertram could now rpealr with decided informa-
tion of what the had known nothing about, when Mr
Ruehworth had liked her opinion; and her rpiritl
were in u happy a ﬂutter a. vanity and pride could
fuminh, when they drove up to the rpacioul atone ttepl
before the principal entrance.

Chill"? 3 ’.

R RUSHWORTH war It the door to receive
hil fair lady; and the whole party were wel-
comed by him with due attention. In the

drawing-room they were met wirh e ual cordinlity by
the mother, and Mill Bertram had 21 the distinction

unusual.» max. . 87

with each that Ihe could wieh. After the buaineu of
arriving was over, it won lint aeceuary to eat, and the
door! were thrown open to admit them through one
or two intermediate room: into the appointed dining-
parlour, where a collation wan prepared with abundance
and elegance. Much wu laid, and much wu ate, and
all went well. The particular ob'ect of the day was
then con-idered. How would r Crawford like, in
what manner would he chooae, to take a curvey of the
grouadIi Mr Ruahworth motioned his curricle. Mr
Crawford nuggerted the greater detirableae- of some
carriage which might convey more than two. “ To be
d rivin them-elven of the advantage of other eye: and
o r ju gruenu, might be an evil even beyond the loci
of lament pleature.’

re Ruahwonh proposed that the chain ahould he
taken alto: hut thi- wu ecarcely received as III amend-
ment: the young ladie: neither smiled nor Ipoke. Her
next ropoeition, of ahowing the house to each of them
It not been there before, was more acceptable, for
Mine Bertram wu leued to have it: in dilplayed,
and all were glad ML doing eomething.

The whole Rarty role accordingly, and under Mr-
Ruahworth'l dance were ehewa through a number of
room. all lo y, and many large, and amply furnished
in the tam of ﬁfty yearn back, with shining ﬂoorc, eolid
mahogany, rich damaak, marble, gilding, and carving,
each handeorne in in way. Of pictures there were
abundance, and come few good, but the larger part were
family portraits, no longer anything to anybody but Mn
Ruahworth, who had been at great 'na to learn all
that the hmwekeeper could tech, on was now almoat
equally well qualiﬁed to chew the home. On the 1:1 -
sent occasion, ehe nddrcued hereelf chieﬂy to in
Crawford and Fanny, hut there was no com riaoa in
the willingneu of their attention; for Min rawford,

88 umsnm run. -

mudmmmofyathmaqandwedfornone.
of them, had only the tppunnee of civilly linening.
while Fanny, to whom everything wu almost an inter-
en‘nguitwu new,nttendedwith nnaﬂ'ected earm—
neal to Ill that Mrs Rulhworth could relate of the
furnil in former timen, in rile Ind granular, regal viita
and yal eﬂ'oru, delighted to connect anything with
hinory alrady known,orvrarm with
Icenea of the port.

The titration of the houne excluded the potnibility of
much prospect from any of the rooms; and while Fanny
and name of the otherl were attending Mn Runhworth,
Henry Crawford was looking grave and ahnking hi-
head at the window. Every room on the welt front
looked acro- a lawn to the beginning of the avenue
immediately beyond tall iron peliaadet and gates.

Having vin'ted many more roomt than could he
mppoudmbe ofnnyotheruse than to contribute to
the window tax, and ﬁnd employment for hon-emaidn,
“ Now," aaid Mn Ruthworth, “ we are coming to the
chapel, which properly we ought to enter from above,
and look down upon : but as we are quite among friends,
I will take you in this way, if you wrll excuae me.”

They entered. Fanny’s imagination had prepared
her for tomething grander than a mere spacious, oblong
room, ﬁtted up for the purpoee of devotion : with no-
thing more striking or more tolemn than the profusion
of mahogau , and the crimson velvet culhionl appearing
over the l ge of the family gallery above. “ I um die-
n inted,” laid she, in I low voice to Edmund.
“ his in not my idea of n chapel. There in nothing
nwﬁtl here, nothing melancholy, nothing grand. Here
are no aides, no arches, no inocri tionn, no banners.
No banners, cousin, to be 'hlown y the night wind
of heaven.’ No signs that a ‘ Scottish monarch sleeps
helow.‘ ”

nansrrew PARK. 89

“You forget, Fanny, how lately all thin ha- been
built, and for how conﬁned a purpoae, compared with
the old chapel. of cutlea and monuteriee. It wu
only for the private me of the family. They have been
buried, I auppoee, in the pariah church. There you
mun look for the banner- and the atehievementa.”

“ It wu foolinh of me not to think of all that; but
I um diaappainted."

Mn Ruahwnrth began her relation. “This chapel
VIII lined up u you nee it, in Jamel the Second’a time.
Before that periodl u I “demand, the pew- were only
wainacot; and there in Iome renaon to think that the
lininga end cnahiona of the ulpit and family cent were
only purple cloth; but thia 1| not quite certain. It in
a handaorne chapel, and was formerly in constant uae
both morning and evening. Prayer: were alwayl read
in it by the domestic chaplain, within the memory of
manyg but the late Mi: Rnahwonh left it of." d M

“ ention aaitaim rovemenu,” aai in
('Jrawftm,y a mile, to Edmlimd.

Mn Ruahworth waa gone to repeat her lemon to Mr
Crawford; and Edmund, Fanny and Mine Crawford,
remained in a cluatcr together.

“ It in a pity,” cried Fanny, “ that the custom lhouhl
have been diacontinued. It was a valuable part of
former times. There it aomething in a chapel and
chaplain In much in character with a great home, with
one a idea of what Inch a houaehold ahould be! A
whole family auernbling regularly for the purpose of
prayer ll ﬁne I "

“ Very ﬁne, indeed,” aaid Misc Crawford, laughing.
“ It mun do the head: of the family a feat deal of
food to force all the poor houaernnida an footmen to
cave hulineu and leanre, and lay their prayera here
twice 1—day, while t ey are inventing excuael themaelvee
for mying away."

90 IANSYIILD PARK.

“ TM is hardly Fanny'l ith of: ﬁniin Inn-Hing,"
nidEdmund. “Ifthennnerlndnnmudout
attenddnmclvqthemmnnbelnote barium good
in the 6mm.”

“Atmyntgiti-nfertolmve totheirown
devicuonmchnbjeeta. EveryhoK;0 toer
own way—toehoooedm‘rowntimemdmonnerof
devotion. The obligation of attendance, the ﬁnality,
dwrenuingthelengthof time—altogetherit ilafor-
inidable thing' and whet nobody liken; and ifthe

lewhoueedmkneelnndgapeinthatglllerywdd
ve foreseen that the time would ever come Vlllﬂl men
Indvlomenmightlieanothetten minute. inbed,whtn
they woke with a headach, without danger of [cymba-
tion, became chapel wu mined, they would have
with joy and envy. Cannot on imagine with w t un-
willing feeling- the former a of the hum of Ruh-
wonh did many a time 'r to thic chapel? The
young Mn Eleanor. and Bridgett—mud up
into seeming piety, but with head: hill of aolnething
very different—especially if the poor wen not
worth looking at—end, in than days, I fancy puma
were very inferior even to wlnt they are now.’

For I few moments ehe wan unauwemd. Fanny
coloured and looked at Edmund, but felt too an for
Ipeech; and be needed a little recollection one he
could lay, “ Your lively mind can hardly be minu-
evcn on terioua subjects. You have given III In unne-
ing Iketch, and human nature cannot lay it wan not I0.
We mutt :11 feel a: time: the difﬁculty of ﬁxing our
thought: al we could wilh; but if you are mppocing it
o ﬁ'equent thing, that it to my, a weakneu grown into a
habit from neglect, what could be expected from the
primal: devotion. of Inch per-om? Do you think the
mind: which are suffered, which an: indulged in
wanderingl in a chapel, would he more collected in n
cloact? " .

MANSFIELD PARK. 9 I

“Yes, very likely. They would have two chances
at least in their favour. There would be leu to dis-
tract the attention from without, and it would not be
tried no long."

" The mind which does not Itruggle against itself
under one circumnance, would lind objects to diltnct
it in the other, I believe; and the inﬂuence of the place
and of example may often rorue better feeling: than are
begun with. The greater length of the oervice, how-
ever, I admit to he Iometimes too hard I stretch upon
the mind. One wiIhes it were not so; but I have not
yet left Oxford long enough to forget what chapel
pmyérs are.”

hile this wu pausing, the rent of the gny being
scattered about the chapel, Julia called Mr nwford's
attention to her titter, by saying, “ Do look at Mr
Ruehworth snd Maria, standing side by aide, exactl as
if the ceremony were going to be performed. ave
not the com leter the air of it i " '

Mr rawgrd smiled hie acquieacence, and stepping
forward to Maria, laid, in a voice which the only could
hear, “ I do not like to see Mia Bertram so near the
altar.”

Starting, the lady instinctively moved a Itep or two,
but recovering hemlf in a moment, affected to laugh,
and uked him, in a tone not much louder, “ If he would
give her away i "

“ I am afraid I should do it very awkwardly,” wan
hia reply, with a look of meaning.

Julia, joining them at the moment, carried on‘ the
'oke.

J “ U my word, it is really a pity that it should not
take p ace directly, if we had but a proper licence, for
here we are altogether, and nothing in the world
could he more snug and pleasant." And she talked
and laughed about it with to little caution, u to catch

l. G

92 msnm nu.

the comprehth of Mr Rnnhworth and hi: undue,
nndexpoeehereiatertothewhiqeredglllantrieoofher
lover, while Mn Rnahwonh yoke with pmper Inilet
mddignity ot‘iu being: mummtmher
whenever It look Flue. '

“If Edmundwerehntinordenl" cried-ligand
nrnning to where he stood with Mi- Crnwford and
Funny: “Mydandmmﬂifywwuehrninordm
now, you might perform the oerernon directly. How
unlucky tint you are not ordained; r Rulhwonh and
Maria are quite mdy."

Mi- Crlwford'a countenance, :- Julia Agate, might
have emu-ed a dieinrerelred oheener. he looked
almonnllutunderthenewidea Ihewureeeiving.
Fanny prtied her. "How dime-ed Ill: will be It
what the raid jurt now," puued acro- her mind.

“ Ordained!" mid Min Crawford; “what, are
you to he a cl man?"

“Yet; I the! take orden noon after my father'l
return; probably It Chrlltlnu."

Mia Crawford rallying her 'rite, Ind recovering
her corn lexion, replied only, “ f I had ltnown thin
before, would have spoken of the cloth with more
re ” and turned the urbject.

e chapel war loan afterward- left to the lilenoe
and Itillneu which reigned in it, with few interru done,
throughout the year. Min Bertram, di l with
her sister, led the way, and all Ieerned to gel that they
had been there long enough.

The lower rt of the home had been now entirely
ehown, and n Ruehworth, never weary in the came,
would have proceeded towardl the principal mimne,
and taken them through all the room: above, if her son
had not interposed with a doubt of there bein time
enough. “ For if,” laid he, with the tort of oelf-
evident proposition which many a clearer head does

KANSHILD PARK. ' 93

not alwaya avoid, “we are too long going over the
houae, we ahall not have time for what ll to be done
out of doora. It it put two, and we are to dine at.
ﬁve."

Mn Rulhworth submitted; and the queation of
eurveying the gmunda, with the who and the how waa
likely to be more fully agitated, and Mrs Norrie waa
beginning to arran e by what junction of carriagee and
horses moat coul be done, when the young people,
meeting with an outward door, tempﬁngly open on a
ﬂight of atepe which led immediately to turf and ehnibe,
and all the aweeu of pleaaure munda, an by one impnlee,
one wiah for air and liberty, hill walked out.

“ Suppoae we turn down here for the present," laid
Mrs Rnahworth, civilly taking the hint and following
them. “ Here are the grentest number of our plants,
and here are the curious heaaanta."

“Query,” said Mr gnwford, looking round him,
“ whether we may not ﬁnd aomethinp to employ we
here, before we go farther? I lee wal e of great ro-
miae. Mr Ruahwonh, shall we Iurnmon a counci on
this lawn P”

“Janice.” laid Mn Ruahvrorth to her Ionl “I be-
lieve the wildemeu will be new to all the party. The
Miu Bertram- have never teen the wildcrneu yet."

No objection waa made, but for some time there
aeemed no inclination to move in any plan, or to any
dietance. All were attracted at lint by the plant: or
the heaaante, and all about in happy inde-
pen ence. Mr Crawford wan the int to move for-
ward, to examine the capabilities of that end of the
houae. The lawn, bounded on each side by a high
wall, contained beyond the lint planted area a bowling-
greenI and beyond the bowling-green a long terrace
walk, backed by iron palindee, an commandin a view
over them into the top: of the treee of the wildemeee

wantoflhuhigher Ipeeien ofaelf-coimnand.dmjnn
midmﬁon of others, that knowledge of her own
heart, that principle of right, which had not formed
anyeuendalpanof her eduaﬁon,nude herminenhle
under it.

“Thin ie inalienth hot," laid Mi- Crawford,
whendwyhadlzkenonetumonthe ternce,and were
drawing a necond time to the door in (he middle which

to the wilderness “Shall any oful object to
hein comfortable? Here in I nice little wood, if one
an get. into it. What happineu if the door thould
nothe locked! hutofcoune itin; for in theeegmt
placer the frdenen Ire the only people who can go
where they 'ke.”

The door, however, proved not to be locked, and

umsrrm run. 95

they were all agreed in turning '0 fully through it, snd
leaving the unmitigated glsre ofl d'ny behind. A con-
liderahle ﬂight of I landed them in the wilderness,
which Via a plan wood of about two acrel, and
though chieﬂy of larch and laurel, and beech cut down,
and though laid out with too much regularity, wns
darknesa and shade, and natural beaut , compared with
the bowling-green and the terrace. he ull felt the
refreshment of it, and for some n'rne coud only walk
and admire. At length, after a Ihort pause, Miss
Crawford began with, “ So you are to be a clergyman,
Mr Bertram. This is rather a surprile to me."

“ Why should it surprise you? You mult euppose
me designed for some mfession, and might perceive
that I am neither a awyer, nor a soldier, nor I
tailor."

“Very true; but, in short, it had not occurred to
me. And you know there is generally an uncle or I
grandfather to leave a fortune to the second son.”

“A ve praiseworthy practice,” said Edmund,
“but not quite universal. I am one of the exceptions,
and being one, must do somethin for myself."

“ But why are you to be a c crgymanl I thought
that wu alwaye the lot of the 'oungest, where there
were many to choose before him. ’

“Do you think the church itself never-chosen,
then i ” -

“ Never is a bluck word. But yes, in the never of
conversation, which means nor very qﬂen, I do think it.
For what in to be done in the church? Men love to
distinguish themselves, and in either of the other lines
dininction may be gained, but not in the church. A
cler is nothin .”

“ he Mlbiqg of conversation has its gradations, I
hope, u well u the never. A clergyman cannot be
high in wire or fachion. He muet not head mobs,

96 unsnm PARK.

ortet rhetonin drett. ButIcannot call that I'tua-
u'on nothing which has the charge of all that it of the
Em importance to mankind, individually or collectively
oontidered, tanponlly and eternally, which htt the guer-
dianthip of religion and monlt, and contequenll of the
manner! which retult from their inﬂuence. 0 one
hereuncallthegﬁunothin . Ifthemanwhoholda
it it to, it it by the neglect o hit duty, by foregoing it:
just impomnce, and stepping out of hit place to tppetr
what he ought not to appear.”

“Tau attign greater consequence to the el
than onehatheenntedtoheargivemordun can
quite comprehend. One doet not tee much of thit
inﬂuence and importance in tociety, and how can it he
acquired where they are to teldom teen themtelvet!
How can two torment a week, even tuppoting them
worth hearing, tuppoting the preacher to have the note
to prefer Blair't to hit own, do all that you speak of?
govern the conduct and fathion the mannert of a la!
congregation for the rent of the week? One scare y
teet I clergyman out of hit pulpit."

“ You are tpealting of London, I am speaking of the
nation at large.”

“ The metropolis, I imagine, it a pretty fair temple
of the rett."

“ Not. 1' thould hope, of the pro rtion of I virtue to
vice throughout the kingdom. WP: do not look in
great citiet for our hett morality. lt it not there that
rerpectahle people of any denomination can do m0tt
good; and It certainly it not there that the inﬂuence of
the do can he most felt. A line preacher is followed
and admired ; but it it not in ﬁne preaching only that a
good clergyman will he uncnt in hit pariah and hit
neighbourhood, where the parish and neighbourth
are of a tile capable of knowing hit private character,
and obeerving hit general conduct, which in London

MANSFIELD PARK. 91

can rarely be the cue. The dc are loot there in the
frowde of theirl parishioners. 'Iglile‘y Ire known to the
a on II mcherl. nd with regard to
dimnmcingy blil; mannen. Miu Crawford must
not mivundentln me, or suppose I mean to call them
the arbiter- of good breeding, the regulator: of refine-
ment Ind courtesy. the mute" of the ceremoniel of life.
The men I Ipealt of might rather be called conduct,
perthe, the result of good Krinciplel; the effect, in
than, of those doctrines whic it is their duty to teach
and recommend; and it will, I believe, be everywhere
found, that at the clergy are, or Ire not what they
ought to be, so are the ren of the nation."

“ Certain] ,” aid F any, with gentle earnemeu.

“ There,’ cried Min meford, “ you have quite

_ convinced Mi- Priee already.”

“ I with I could convince Mist Crawford too."

“ I do not think on ever will," said the, with an
arch smile; “I am Just at much surprised now u I
was at ﬁrst that you Ihould intend to take orders. You
really Ire ﬁt for somethin better. Come, do chmge
your mind. It is nut too ate. Go into the law.”

“ Go into the lnwl With as much clue on I was
told to go into this wildemets." ‘

"Now you are going to my oomething about law
being the worst wilderneu of the two, but I forestall
you; remember, I have foreatllled you."

“You need not hurry when the object is only to
prevent my saying I bun-mot, for there is not the least
wit in my nature. I um I very mttter-of-fnct, plain-
spoken being, snd may blunder on the harden of I
repurtee for half-In-hour together without striking
it out."

A general silence succeeded. Each wan thoughtful.
ann made the ﬁrst interruption by saying, “ I wonder
that Illould be tired with only walking in this sweet

98 umsrmm PARK.

wood; but the next time we come to in Int, if it it not
dingreeable to you, I ehould be glad to lit down for a
little while."

“ My dear Fanny,” cried Edmund, immediately
drawing her arm within his, “ how thoughtleu I have
been 1 I hope ou are not very tired Perhap,”
turning to Miu grawford, “ my other companion may
do me the honour of taking an arm."

“ Thank you, but I am not at all tired." She took
it, however, at ahe lpoke, and the gratiﬁcation of having
her do ac, of feeling such a connection for the 6m
time, made him a little forgetful of Fanny. “You
Icarcely touch me,” aaid he. “ You do not make me
of any uae. What a difference in the weight of a
woman’e arm from that of a manl At Oxford I have
been a good deal used to have a man lean on me for the
length of a street, and you are only u ﬂy in the com-

neon.’ '

“ I am really not tired, which I almont wonder at ;
for we must have walked at least a mile in thia wood.
Do not you think we have i ”

“Not half a mile,” wae hit sturdy answer; for lie
was not yet so much in love an to measure diatance, or
reckon ume, with feminine lawleuneu.

“ Oh! you do not coulider how much we have
wound about. We have taken tuch a very ee ntine
course, and the wood itaelf mutt be half a mileTting in
a atraight line, for we have never seen the end of it yet
aince we left the lint great path.”

“ But if you remember, before we left that ﬁrlt great
path, we w directly to the end of it. We looked
down the whole vista, and saw it closed by iron gates,
and it could not have been more more than a furlong in
length."

“Oh! I know nothing of your furlongl, but I am
sure it it a very long wood, and that we have been

umsnzm‘ PARK. 99

winding in and out ever line: we came into it; Ind,
therefore, when I ray that we have welked n mile in it,
I mun upeult within campus."

“We have been exactly a quarter of an hour here,”
Iuid Edmund, taking out hie watch. “ Do you think
we Ire walking four miles an hour 2 "

“ Oh I do not mack me with your watch. A watch
ll Ilwnyl too fat or too Ilow. I cannot be dictated
to 2y I witch.”

few wept farther brought them out at the bottom
of the 1 well: they had been talking of; and standing
buck, wel shaded and rheltered, and lookin ‘over a
hl-hl into the park, won I comfortable-sized nch on
which they all lat down.

“I m druid you are very tired, Fanny," uicl
Edmund, chewing her; “why would not you rpeuk
noneri Thin will he I had dny’l nmueernent for
you if you are to be knocked up. Every tort of
eugenics fltiguel her '0 noon, Min Crawford, except
n n .’

“glow abominable in you, then, to let me engrou
her hone an I did all hot wcckl I am ashamed of
you and of mynclﬁ‘but it rhall never happen ngnin."

“ Tam-attentiveneu and connidention market me more
OenIible of my own neglect. F anny’e interest ueemr in
nfer hand: with you than with me."

“Thnt ehe should be tired now, however, given me
no cur-prise ; for there in nothing in the course of one’-
dutieo lo fatiguing on what we have been doing thin
morning: seeing 1 great house, dnwdling from one room
to Inother, attaining one'r eyes and one’r attention,
henring what one doe- not undeMnd, admirin what
one does not cure for. It ll gencrull allow to he
Wm bore in the world, and in Price he:

it to, though she did not know it.”

“I IhIll noon be rented," laid Funny; “to it in

100 MANSFIELD PARK.

the ahade on a ﬁne day, and look upon verdure, is the
moat rfect refmhrnent."

A r aitting a little while, Min Crawford waa up
again. “ I muat move,” laid the, “ rening fatiqu me.
I have looked across the Ira-ha till I am weary.
mun go and look through that iron gate at the lame
view, without being able to tee it to well."

Edmund left the neat likewiae. “ Now, Mill Craw-
ford. if you will look up the walk. you will convince
younelf that it cannot be half a mile long, or half half
a mile."

“ It in an immenae distance,” laid the t “ I aee I54!
with a glance.”

He Itill reaaoned with her, but in vain. She would
not calculate, ahe would not compare. She would only
mile and men. The greatett degree of rational con-
Iiatency could not have been more engaging, and they
talked with mutual ntilfaction. At last it will agreed
that they ahould endeavour to determine the dimenaiona
of the wood by walking a little more about it. They
would go to one end of it, in the line they were then
in (for there was a ttrai ht green walk along the bottom
by the tide of the hat-hag, and perhapl turn a little way
in some other direction, if it seemed likely to mint
them, and be back in a few minutel. Fanny aaid lht
we rented, and would have moved too, but thin war! not
aufl'ered. Edmund urged her remaining where the wan ‘
with an eameatneu which the could not reeiat, and ll“:
waa left on the bench to think with pleasure of her
couain'a cure, but with great regret that the waa not
stronger. She watched them till they had turned the
comer, and listened till all aound of them had ceased.

MANSFIELD PARK. [0!

, chapter ﬂ.

QUARTER of an hour, twent minutes, paned
away, and Fanny was still thin 'ng of Edmund,
Miss Crawford, and herself, without interruption
from any one. She began to be surprised at being left
so long, and to listen with an anxious desire of hearing
their steps and their voices again. She listened, and at
length she heard; she heard voices and feet approaching ;
but she had just satisﬁed herself that it was not those
she wanted, when Miss Bertram, Mr Rulhworth, and
Mr Crawford, issued from the same path which she
had trod herself, and were before her.

“Miss Price all alone! ” and “m dear Fanny,
how comes this?” were the ﬁrst saliitations. She
told her story. “ Poor dear F anny," cried her cousin,
“ how ill you have been used by them! You had
better have staid with us.”

Then seating herself with a gentleman on each side,
she resumed the conversation which had engaged them
before, and discussed the ibility of imirovcmcnts
with much animation. utliing was ﬁx on; but
Henry anford was full of ideas and projects, and,
genera" aking, whatever he roposed was immedi-
ately alipgsed. ﬁrst by her, ans then by Mr Rush-
worth, whose principal business seemed to be to hear
the others, and who scarcely risked an original thought
of his own beyond a wish that they had seen his friend
Smith's place.

After some minutes spent. in this way, Miss Bertram,
observing the iron gate, ex ressed a with of ‘ng
through it into the park, at their View an their
plans might be more cornPrehensive. It was the very
thing of all others to he wished, it was the best, it was
the only way of proceeding with any advantage, in

102 human PARK.

Henry anﬁxd'l opininnﬁnd Indirectly nvahnnll
nmhalfannkaﬁwhkh'onldgieethmexmlythe
requiteeommdol’thehmm Gothaefole
mmthathnnanndthmghdntpm;hntthe
Iva-locked. Mr Rnlhvnnh'ilhedhehnd
dnkzyghehadbealverynurdainkingvhetherhe
Mlldmthringthehey; bmﬁtaminedlnmld
nevercomewithontdie lyinghntlillthinlidnot
removethepruentevil. oouldnotgetthmugh;
InduM‘nlBemrn’einelimtionforndoingdidhy
nomineenﬁtendedin Mr Ruhworth’e declaring
ontrighttlnthewnnldgoandfetchthehey. Head

ofncoordin .
“IthnﬁZulxedlythehutthingveandnnow,

aware-okran thehonne already,"nier
Crawford, when he was gone.

“ Yet. there i0 nothing clue to he done. But now,
linemely, do not you ﬁnd the place altogether won-.-
than on expected?”

“ n, indeed. far otherwise. I ﬁnd it better, grander,
more complete in it: nyle, though that ner my not he
the belt. And to tel you the truth," epeaking rather
lower, “ I do not think that I aha]! ever lee Sotherton
again with ID much pleasure al I do now. Another
ournlner will hardly improve it to me."

After a moment’l embamnment the lady reyhed,
“You are too much a man of the world not to nee
with the eye: of the world. If other people think
Sotherton improved, I have no doubt that you will."

“I am ufnid I m not quite |n much the man of
the world :- might be good for me in some points My
feeling: are not quite l0 evanercent, nor my memory of
the part under Inch ea-y dominion as one ﬁnd: to he
the cane with men of the world.”

Thin wan followed by n Ihon Iilence. Min Bennm
began again. “ You leemed to enjoy your drive here

in

MANSFIELD PARK. {03

very much thin morning. I wu glad to see you no
wel entemined. You and Julia were hughing the
. whole we .”

“WereWe? Yegl believe wewere; but I have
not the lent recollection It whet. Ohl I believe I
wu relating to her tome ridiculoul Itoriel of on old
Irilh in of my uncle’l. Your liner lover to laugh."

“ on think her more light-hand thin I am."

“More euily Imueed," he replied, “consequently,
gm know,” nailing, “better corn any. I could not

vc to entertain you with Imh Inecdotel during
a ten mrlee’ drive."

“Naturally, I believe, I Im :- lively u Julio, but I
have more to think of now.”

“ You hove, undoubtedly; end there are nitration:
in which very high Ipirits would denote inaeneihility.
Your 1: however, are too fair to juatify went of
Ipiritn. on have I very nnilinﬁg scene before ion."

" Do you mean literally or guntively? iternlly,
I conclude. Yen, certuiol the run chines, end the
park look: very cheerful. ut unluckin that iron gate,
that hn-ha, give me a feeling of reetruint nnd hardship.
‘ I cannot get out,’ n the Itnrling mid." As the tpokc,
and it war with ex reunion, Ihe walked to the gate: he
followed her. “ r Rurhworth in lo long fetching
this key] ”

“And for the world It would not get out without
the key and without r Rulhwonh'l Authoriz Ind
protecuon, or I think ou might with little di col
punoundthe edge thegate,here,with rnycuitt-
once; Ithinkitnughtbedoneﬁf youreollywnhedto
he more It lor , end could allow yourself to think it
not prohibited. ’

“ Prohibide noneenlel I certainly an get out
that my, nod I will. Mr Ruhworth will be here in
a moment, you know; we dull not be out of light.”

“Orifvlenre,Miu Price willhe eogoodutotell

[04 HANS?!” PARK.

him,that he will ﬁndul near that knoll: the grove ot
oak on the knoll."

Fanny, feeling all thil to be wrong, could not help
making an effort to prevent it. “ You will hurt your-
oelf, Min Bertram," ohe cried, “you will certainly
hurt younelf againat thote Ipikel; you will tar your
gown; u will be in danger of Ilipping into the ha-ha.
You hadohetter not go."

Her cousin wu Iafe on the other aide, while theae
words were woken, and, Imilin with all the good
humour of Iucceu, the aid, "'lghank you, my dear
Fanny, but I and my gown are alive and well, and to
good-bye."

Fanny wna again left to her Iolitude, and with no in-
creue of leaaant feelingl, for the wan torry for almost
all that had teen and heard, amuilhed at Mia
Bertram, and angry with Mr Crawford. By taking :4
circuitoua route, and, a: it appeared to her, very unrea.
nonable direction to the kno l, they were noon beyond
her eye; and for name minutes lon r the remained
without light or sound of In companion. She seemed
to have the little wood [H to hemlf. She could
almost have thought that Edmund and Min Crawford
had left it, but that it wan impossible for Edmund to
forget her no entirely;

he was again rouled from dingreeable mueingl by
nudden footltepl: lamebody wan coming at a quick
Ece down the principal walk. She expected Mr
uahworth, but It wan Julia, who, hot and out of
breath, and with a look of diaappointment, cried out
on Ieeing her, “ H day! Where are the otherI? I
thought Maria and r Crawford were with you."

Fanny explained.

“A pretty trick, upon my word! I cannot see
them anywhere," looking eagerly into the rk. “ But
they cannot be Very Fur 01?, and I think am equal to
as much as Maria, even without help."

IANSI'IBLD PARK. [05

“Brit, Julia. Mr Rn-hwnnh will be here in a
moment with the key. Do wait for Mr Runhwortb."

“ Not I, indeed. I have lud enough of the family
for one morning. Wh , child, I have but thin moment
unpedfrombilhorribe mother. Such a penanoeu
I lure been enduring, while you were lining here no

and to happy! It might have been at well,
perhapo, ifyou had been in my place, but you alwaI
contrive to keep out of there scrapes"

Thin wu a most unjun reﬂection, but F nnny could
allow for it, and let it pal: .lulia war vexed, and her
temper w ; but the felt that it would not lut,
and therefore 'ng no notice, only asked her if the had
not teen Mr Ruahworth. .

“Yen, en, we now him. He wu poning away a
ifupon ii; and death, and oould but apare time to
tell u- hia errand. and where on ell were.’

“Itionpityheahwld veaomucbtroublefor
nothin .”

"T it Mine Maria’a concern. I am not obliged
to punilh rnylel! for her line. The mother I could not
avoid, u long an my tiresome aunt was dancing Ibout
with the houaekceper, but the son I can get nwny
from."

And the immediately Icrnmbled acro- the fence, and
wllked away, not attending to F anny'v laat question of
whether ahe had aeen an thing of Mir: Crawford and
Edmund. The Iort of dread in which F army now at
of Rein Mr Ruchworth, prevented her thinking so
much 0 their condoned absence, however, an the might
have done. She felt that he had been very ill need, and
wan uite unhappy in having to communicate whet hnd
puma. He joined her within ﬁve minutes after Julia’u
exit; and the h the made the beet of the story, hewu
evidently morti ed and disle in no common degree.
At ﬁrst he Icarcely mid anything; his look: only ex-

106 muse-12m PARK.

pie-ed hie extreme nrpni and reunion, and he
'ﬂkedmdxegaunndunodthergwidaom-eemingm
kmvlmtodn.

“They deimd me to lay; min Maria
chaﬁedlneto-ythatywvmld ndthematdm
lno,ortheruhoim."

“Idonotbelievelelnllgoanyﬁlnher,"-idhe,
Inllenly;“leeenothingofdxem. Bythetilnelget
mdleknoll,dieymaybegoueunewhereelne. [have
hadwalkingeoough.’

Andhe at down witha mac gloomy countenance
“WWW- . ..

“I'amveryeorry,” aaldlhe;“1tnverynnlneky.”
Andehelougedwbeahlem-ywmethingmetnthe

PM?“

After an interval of ilence, “ I think they might an
well have laid hr me,” said he.

“ Min Bertram thought on would follow her."

“ I Ihould not have ha to follow her if the Ind
M),

Thilconld not be denied,and Fannywaa Iilenced.
After another paw, he went on :—“ Pr: , Min
Price, are you Inch 3 great admirer of thin Mr nvford
in name people are! For my part,I can Ice nothingin

1m."

“ I do not think him at Ill handsome.”

“ Handnnmel Nobody can call luch an under-dud
man handwme. He in not live foot nine. I chould not
wonder if he was not more than ﬁve foot eight. I think
he in an ill-looking fellow. In my 0 inion, the-e
Crawford- are no addition at all. We did very well
without them."

A null sigh Fanny here, Ind ahe did not
know how to cont ct him.

“ If I had made any difﬁculty lbout fetching the
key, there might have been some excuee, but I went the
very moment the aid she wanted it."

 

.272 (54:4,. “45,4,

nqnw.

 

 

 

MANSFIELD PARK. 107

“ Nothing could be more obligin than your manner,
Iarnsure,a.ndl dare uyyou w kedaafaataa you
Could; but till it ia aome dimnce, you know, from thin
spot to the houee, quite into the houae ; and when
people are waiting, they are bad judges of time, and
eve half rninum seems like five."

e ot up and walked to the gate again, and
" ' he had had the key about him at the time."
Fanny thou ht ahe discerned in his mnding there an
indiation o relenting, which encouraged her to mother
attempt, and the said, therefore, “ It in a pity you should
not 'oin them. They expected to have a better view
of house from thnt part of the park, and will be
drinking how it may be im raved; and nothing of that
sort, you know, can be ed without you."

She found heraelf more aucceaaful in sending away,
than in retainin a companion. Mr Ruahworth was
worked on. " ell,” aaid he, “if you really think I
had better go: it would be foolish to bring the key‘ for
nothing.” And letting himself out, he walked off
without further ceremony.

Plan a tlroughta were now all en h the two
who ha left her so long ago, and gctnng quite rnrp-rticnt,
the resolved to go in aearch of them. She followed
their nepl along the bottom walk, and had juet turned

. u into another, when the voice and the laugh of Min
nwford once more caught her ear; the sound ap-
roached, and a few more windings brought them before

. They were returned into the wilderneaa from
the park. to which a tide-gate, not fastened, had tenr ted
them very noon aftertheir caving her, and they had
some: a portion of the park into the very avenue which
Fanny had been 'n‘g the whole morning to reach at
Int, and had been artu'ng down under one of the tree.-
Thia was their hiatory. It was evident that they had
been Ipending their time pleaaantly, and were not aware

I. H

108 IMSI’IILD mm

nithelengthoftheir drum. Fanny’r hen con-oli-
tinnwuinbn‘ng amredthlt Edmndhndwiehedfor
herverymnch,andthatheelmrldeertainlyhnre come
heckforherﬂndebenot been tired already; but thin
wuotquitenﬂiduttndonvnywiththe ' of
hlving been left I whole hour, when he had of
only e few minutiae, nor to bani-h the eon of entitlin
thefelgto knowwlnttheylud heeneonveringnbom
ellthettime; and theremlt ofthc whole“ to her
diuppointment and depreeion. u they prepared by _
gmenl Ignement, to return to the house.

On reachingtbebotiom of the step. to the terrace,
Mn Ruehwonh and Mn Nonit presumed them-elven
ntthetop,jult read for thewilderneu,» the endof
an hour and I half In their leaving the battle. Mn
Noni. had been too well employed to move liner.
Whatever cm accident: had occurred to intercept the
pleuqu of her nieces, the had found I morning of
complete enjoyment; for the hauekeeper, After a grant
many couneeiee on the mljm of pheanntn, had taken
her to the dairy, told her 1 Ibout their com. and given
herthereeeipt for I famous cmm cheer; and tinee
Julia’l laving them, they had been met by the gardener,
with whom the had made a moat sci-factory acquan-
ence. for the had set him right a to hie grandson’s ill-
ness, convinced him that it w an ague, and promised
him I charm for it; and he, in return, had thmm her
all hit choice-t nurvery of plants, end mually presented
her with I very curioue specimen of heath.

Ontln'lrenoontretheyallremmed to the home to-
gether, there to lounge am the time u they could with
tofu, and chit-chat1 and narterly Reviewe. till the
mum of the othen, and the arrival of dimer. It vIu
lute before the Min Bertram: and the two gentlemen
ceme in, and their ramble did not appear to have been
more than partially agreeable, or at ell productive of

HANSHELD PARK. [69

anything uleful with regard to the object of the day.
By their own Iccountl the had been Ill wIlkin Iﬂer
eIch other, Ind the junction which hId taken Ioe It
Int Ieemed, to FInny’e obeervItion, to have II '
much too late for re-eetnblilhin hurrnony, u it can-
feuedl had been for deterrninm on any nlterItion.
She feh,» Ihe looked at Julia and r Ruehwnrth, that
hen VIII not the only dimtieﬁed boeom Imongrt them;
there wan gloom on the face of ench. Mr Crwaord
Ind Min Bertram were much more gay, Ind the thought
thIt he wII taking partieulnr pains, during dinner, to do
away any little reeentment 'of the other two, and more
general good humour.

Dinner wu coon followed by ten and coﬁ'ee, a ten
milee' drive home allowed no wrote of hours; Ind from
the time of their sitting down to able, it wu I quick
Niece-ion of bury nothinge till the carriIge ante to the
door, Ind Mn NorriI, thing ﬁdgeted about, Ind ob-
tained n few pheInntI' eggI Ind a cream cheeIe from
the houIekeeper, and mIde abundance of civil Ipeechel
to Mn Rulhworth, wIe lady to lend the wa. At
the same moment, Mr Crawford, npprolching Julia,
said, "I hoie I nm not to loee my companion, nnleu
Ille il afraid of the evening air in lo expo-ed n lent."
The lequelt had not been forereen, but wu very
gncioully received, and Julin'l by me likely to end
Ilmoet uwell II it began. Mile Bertrlm had rnIde
u her mind w Iomethin different, and wu I little
dun pointed; but her conviction of being really the one
pre , comforted her under it, and enabled her to
receive Mr Rurhworth’l parting mention u the ought.
He waI certainly better pleased to hand her into the
barouche than to Iain her in Incending the box, and MI
corn lacem: seemed conﬁrmed by the arrangement.

ell, Inn ,thie ha- been a ﬁne dIy for you, upon
my word," laid n Norrie, :5 they drove through the

l to IANSHILD PARK.

rk. “Nothing but plea-ire from heginnin to end!

In! lure you ought to he very much 0in to your
aunt Bertram and me, for eontriving to let you go. A
pm good day'- amusement you have had! "

aria wn discontented enough to u directly,
“I think you have done retty well yourself, nu'un.
Your lnp oeenu full of thin I. end here is I baket
of aomething between in. which ﬁn been knocking my
elbow unmercifully.”

“My clear, it i- only a beautiful little heath. which
that nice old gardener would make me take; but if it in
in your way, I will have it in my I: directly. There,
Fanny, you Ihnll carry that parcel or me; uke great
care of it: do not let it fall; it in a cream cheese, jut
like the excellent one we had at dinner. Nothing
would ratitfy that good old Mn Whitaker, but n1
akin one of the cheeset. I mod out as longas
coul , till the tear: almost came into her eyes, and I
knew it was jutt the sort that my deter would be de-
lighted with. That Mn Whitaker in a treasure! She
wu quite Ihocked when I Inked her whether wine wu
allowed at the second table, and Ihe has turned nway
two housemnidl for wearing white gowns. Take care
of the cheese, Fanny. Now I can manage the other

el and the buoket very well.”

“What else have you been ungingl" laid Maria,
half pleated that Sotherton shorile be so complimented.

"S ungi'r‘rfg, my dear! It ll nothing but four of
those I: ' ul pheasant’l eggs, which Mn Whitaker
would quite force upon me; she would not take a
deniaL She mid it must be such an amusement to me,
at the underltood I lived quite alone, to have a few
living creatures of that sort; Ind so to he lure it will.
I shall get the dairyrnaid to set them under the ﬁrst
rpare hen, and ifthey come to good I can have them
moved to my own houee and borrow a coop; and it

MANSFIELD PARK. 1 l I

will be a great delight to me in my lonely hourl to
- attend to them. And if I have good luck, your mother
ll’llll have nonrefl

It wan a beautiful evening. mild and «ill, and the
drive waa u pleaaant u the eerenity of Nature could
make it; but when Mn Norrie eeued rpeaking, it wu
altogether I ailent drive to thoee within. Their lpiriu
were in general exhumed; end to determine whether
the day had all'orded moot pleuure or pain, might occupy
the meditation. of almoet all.

Cblptlr 5].

HE da at Sotherton, with all it. imperfection,
Iﬂ'orded the Mile Bertnme much more agreeable
feeling: than were derived from the letter. from

Antigua, which loan nfterwarda reached Madlﬁeld. It
wu much plemnter to think of Hen Crawford than
of their father; and to think of their ather in En land
again within I oemin period, which the» letter: oh iged
them to do, wu a moot unwelcome exercise.

November war the black month ﬁxed for hie return.
Sir Thornu wrote of it with In much decirion as ex-
perience and anxiety could authorize. Hie holine-
wu In nearly concluded II to julu'fy him in pmpoeing
to take hia plunge in the September packet, and he
coneequentl looked forward with the hope of being
with his oved family again early in November.

Mariawu moretobe 'tied than Julia; for to her
the father brought a h nd,'end the return of the
friend moat eoliciwul for her luppineu would unite her
to the lover. on whom Ihe had choeen that hep ine-
ahould depend. It wu a gloomy prospect. and el the
could do wu to throw a mint over it, and hope when

I ll IANSYIILD PARK.

themiatcleared awa ahelhould lee something elee. It
would hardly be tori in November, there were ly
delay; a bad pamge or haunting,- that vouring
numbing which everybody who Ihuu thdr eyea while

look, or their undermndingl while they xenon,
fee I the comfort of. It would rohnbly be the middle
of November at lam the middle of Novenﬁer wan
three month- oﬁ‘. Three month- oompriaed thirteen
weekl. Much might happen in thirteen weeks.

Sir Thomas would have been deeply mortiﬁed by n
lupicion of half that hi- dingth felt on the of
hi. return, and would hnrdly hove found consolation in
a knowledge of the intern: it excited in the brea: of
another young lady. Mira Crawford, on walking up
with her brother to lpend the evening at Mansﬁeld
Park. heard the good new; and thou h teeming to
have no concum in thv.I nﬂilir beyond poﬁteneu, and to
luve vented all her feelingl in a quiet con ratulation,
heard it with an attention not It) eerily mi ed. Mn
Norri- gave the particulara of the lenerl, and the lub-
ject waa dropty but after ten, an Mia Crawford was
standing at no open window with Edmund Ind Fanny
looking out on a twilight acene, while the Min Ber-
tram, Mr Ruahworth, and Henry Criwford were all
busy with candle: at the piano-forte, the mddenly re-
vived it by turning round towardl the group, and lay-
ing. “ How happye Mr Ruahworth looktl He in
dunking of Novem r.”

Edmund looked round at Mr Ruthworth too, but
had nothing to any. “ Your father'l return will be a
very interesting event."

“ It will, indeed, after auch an abaence; an abeencé
not only long, but including I0 many dangers.”

“ It will be the forerunner also of other intereuing
event‘i’; your lle'l marriage, and your taking orders."

H at"

KANSHELD PARK. I 13

“Don't be aﬂ'ronted," laid the, inn hing, “but it
damn: in mind oflorne oflthe old heathen hem
w Perfonnin t ex aim in n forei ,
oﬂ'ered neuﬁcel to their;- unpaid: are returns-IL

“ There in no mriﬁce in the cue," replied Edmund,
with n Ierioul unile.1nd glmcing at the limo-forte
again, “ it in entirely her own doing."

" 0h yell I know it in. I wu merely joking.
She ha- done no more thin what every young woman
would do; Ind I hue no doubt of her being extremely
happy. My other ucriliCe of courne you do not
under-tand.’

"My taking ordcra, I nunrc you, in quite at volun-
tary u Marin’l rrying.”

“ It in fortunate that your inclination and your
father’l convenience Ifhjould acicordso well. There in n
we livin r “demand, hernhonu."

IZgl’liich yoﬁkoflgpon me?"

“ But tbal I nun cure it ha not," cried Fanny.

" Thank you for our good word, Funny, but it in
more than I would in Ieif. 0n the conmry, the
knowin that there was ouch l provilion for me pro-
bably did bin: me. Nor can I think it wrong that it
Ihould. There wu no mtum! dirinclinntion to be over-
wmgnndI oeeno reuonwhy nun Ihould huh I
wore clerg n for knowing thnt he will have 3 com-
petence carry“: life. I wan in safe lunch. I hope I
Ihould not have been inﬂuenced mytelf in n'wrnng way,
Ind I am lure my father wan too conscienticm to have
lﬂowedit. I hnvenodnubtthathu hinlled,bntI
think it was hlnmeleuly."

“Itiuhenme Iort ofthin ” laid Fanny,after n
Ihon paune, “u for the non o In Idlnirnl to go into
the navy or the non of a general to be in the army, and
nobody teen nnything wrong in that. NobodfyI wonden
that they nhould prefer the line where their 'end- an

1 r4 Inter-inn run.

“mmm-npemthmmhek-inmin
it than they appﬂr.”

“Nanny dear Mia-Price,andforreuon| good.
Thepmfe-on,‘ drhernuynr-rmyﬁriumynmﬁn' ' -
tiou. Itha- 'giniufavour;heroiln,danger.
bottle, fuhion. ldien and tailor: are alwlyt accep-
table in eociety. Nobody can wonder that men are
Inldien and nilon."

“But themotim of: manwho taken orderlwith
the certainty" of preferment my be fairly
you think?” aid Edmund. “To be ' ' in
your eyes, he muat do it in the moat etc uncer-
tain of any proviaion.”

“ t! takeordenwithout-livingl Nogthn
in madne- indeed; abeolule mednen.”

“Shalllukyouhowthechurchiltobeﬁlledﬁfa
man in neither to take order! with a living, nor without?
No; for you certainly would not know what to ﬂy.
But I mun beg come advantage to the clergyman from
your own argument. Ar he cannot be inﬂuenced by
thoee feelingl which you rank highly u temptation and
reward to the eoldier and tailor, in their choice of a
profeudon, a heroin, and noiee, and Elohim, are all
again: him, he ought to he le- liahle to the
of wanting lincerity or good intention in the choice of
his."

“ Oh! no doubt he ll very sincere in [preferring an
income ready made, to the trouble of working for one:
and Ira the beat intention of doing nothing all the rest
of hi. days but eat, drink, and grow ﬁt. It is llldﬁl-e
ence, Mr Bertram, indeed. Indolenee and love of cue:
a want of all laudable ambition, of mate for good com-
pany, or of inclination to take the trouble of being
ngreable, which make men clergymm. A clergyman
hu nothing to do but be Ilovenly and telﬁah; rad the
new-paper, watch the weather, and quarrel with hil

MANSFIELD PARK. I 15

wife. Hi1 curate doee Ill the work, and the bulineu
of hi; on life ll to dine."

“ There are each clergymeh, no doubt, but I think
they ere not no common In to Miu Crawford in
eeteerning it their general character. I lulpect that in
thin oomprehenlive end (my I my) commonplue cen-
sure, you are not judging from younelf, but from Pre-
'udiced pemne, whoee opinion" on hue been in the
lubit of henring. It in Impouibe that your own ob-

eerntion can have given you much knowledge of the
clergy. You can have been per-onnlly lcquainted with
very few of I let of men you condemn I0 conclulively.
You are king what you have been told at your
uncle’l n]

“I open]: what u to me the ne 0 'nion;
and where an opiniollpgngenenl, it kg:de garnet.
Though I have not eoen much of the domeme live. of
cl it in seen by too many to leave my deﬁciency
of in nation.”

" Where any one body of educated men, of what-
ever denominntinn, are condemned indiecriminately,
there mun be a deﬁciency of information, or (Imiling)
of eorncthing clue. Your uncle, and MI brother ud-
mirale, perhape knew little of clergymen beyond the
chaplliuu whom, good or bed, they were nlweye withing
Iwuy.’ r

“Poor William! He he met with great kindneu

- from the chaylain of the Antwerp," wai‘ : tender apoc-
tmﬁl: of Fanny’s, very much to the W of her own
fee ' gt if not of the convemtion.

“ I have been I0 little addicted to take my opinion-
from my uncle," laid Mi- anford, “ that I can
hardly IuppoIe—end since you h me no hard, I
mutt obeerve, that I Im not entire y without the mn-
of eeeing what clergymen are, bein It thin renent time
the guen of my own brother, Dr nnr. nd though

x 16 umnun PARK.

Dr Grant it moat kind and obliging to me, and b
he ia really a gentleman, and. I dare ny,a good

and clever, and often preachel good sermons, and in
very respectable, 1 Ice him to be an indolent, selliah
bon vivant, who mun have hie palate coneulted in every-
thing; who will not atir a ﬁnger for the convenience of
any one; and who, moreover, if the cook maku a
blunder, in out of humour with hia excellent wife. To
own the truth, Heralry and I were partly driven out thia
v evenin a 'n intment about a n ooee,
weliiim be 503d not I;th better of. Mmrgsiner
was forced to stay an bear it." .

“ I do' not wonder at your diaapprobation, upon my
word. It is a great defect of temper, made wone by a
very faulty habit of self-indulgence; and to see your
litter wﬁeﬁng from it must be exceedingly to
such feelings as yours. Fanny, it goee againtt ua. We
cannot attempt to defend Dr Grant."

“ No," replied Fanny, “ but we need not give up hie

rofeuion for all that; because, whatever profeuion
Br Grant had chosen, he would have taken a not
a good temper into it; and as he mutt, either in the
navy or army have had a great many more people
under hie command than he has now, I think more
would have been made unhappy by him II a tailor or
soldier than as a clergyman. Besidee, 1 cannot but
mpﬁose that whatever there may be to with otherwiae
in r Grant, would have been in a greater danger of
becoming wane in a more active and worldly rofeuion,
where he would have had leu time and oblligation—
where he might have escaped that knowledge of him-
self, the frequent), at lent, of that knowledge which it
is impossible he should escape as he in now. A man—
a sensible man like Dr Grant, cannot be in the habit of
teaching others their duty every week, cannot go to
church twice every Sunday, and preach such very good

 

‘ msnnn PARK. :17
tern-one in no good a manner an he does, without being
the better for it himself. It must make him think;
and I have no doubt that he oftener endeaku to re-
atrain himnelf than he would if he had been anything
but. a clergyman."

“ We cannot prove to the contrary, to be sure; but.
Iwiahyonabetxerflm,MiuPrice,thanmhethe
wife of 1 man whole amiableneu dependl u hie own
Iermonl; for, though he may tench himrel into a good
humour every Sunday, it wil be bad enough to have
him quarrelling about green geese from Monday morning
till Saturda nlghL"

“1 thin the man who could often quarrel with
Fanny," mid Edmund, nﬂ'ectionntely, “ mutt be beyond
the reach of any Iennom.” ‘

Fanny turned farther into the window; and Mill
Crawford had only time to ray, in a pleasant manner,
“I fancy Min Price ha: been more tiled to dcaerre

raise than to hear it ;" when being eameotly invited

the Miu Bertrnml to join in :1 le, Ihe tripped off
to the instrument, leaving Edmund ooking after her in
an ecmny of admiration of all her many virtuee, from
her obliging mannera down to her light and gncelul
tread.

“ There oer good humour, I‘ am sure,” aid he pre-
oently. “ here oer a tem r which would never give
gainl How we Ihe welt! and how readily the

II. in with the inclination of otherll joining them the
moment oh: in uked. What a pity,” he added, after an
inmnt’e reﬂection, “ that she Ihould have been in Iuch
hand: I ”

Fanny agreed to it, and had the pleasure of tracing
him continue at the window with her, in spite of the
expected glee ; and of having hil eyet noon turned. like
hen, toward: the occur without, where all that was
solemn, and loathing, Ind lorely, appeared in the brilli-

"8 umsnlu) PARK.

my aim undouded night. and the contrut of the
descend: of the wooda. Fanny Ipoke her feeling:
“ re’a harmonyl" nid the; “here'l repoeel
Here’l what may leaveall pointing and all manic be-
hind,nnd what poetry onl can attempt to deocn‘he!
Here ’a what may tranquil ize every care, and lift the
heart to rapturel When I look out on truth a night In
thin, I feel an if there could be neither wickedneu nor
narrow in the world ; and there certainly would he le-
of both if the mhlimity of Nature were more mended
to, and $011k were carried more out of drerruelveo by
contern ting Inch a scene."

“ I 'ke to hear your enthuialm, Faun . It in n
lovel night, and they are much to be pi ' who have
not n taught to feel, in come degree, II II do;
who have not. at lean, been given a tam for ature in
early life. They lone 3 gm: deal."

“ Too taught me to think and feel on the abject.
cumin."

“I had a very apt scholar. There '3 Aretunu
lookin very bright.”

‘f maudtheBear. Iwiah I couldoteCa-i-
opera."

“ We mun go out on the lawn for that. Should
you be afraid I ’

“Not in the lean. It ll a great while since we
have had any our-gazing.”

“ Yer; I do not know how it has hapnened." The
glee began. “ We will my till this in linuhed, Fanny,”
' laid he, turning hie back on the window; and II it
advanced, Ihe had the mortification of aeeing him
advance too, moving forward by gentle degree. toward.
the instrument, and when it ceased, he wat clone by
the ringers, among the moat urgent in requelting to hear
the glee again.

Fannkuighed alone at the window till Icolded away
by Mn orris'a threau of catching cold.

MANSFIELD PARK. 1 l 9

Chum: $1]-

IR THOMAS wan to return in November, and

hie eldeet eon had dutiee to cell him enrlier home.

The uppde of September brought tidingl of

Mr Bemm, lint in I letter to the gene end

then in a letter to Edmund; end by the end of Aug:

hell'rivedhimoelﬁw begn,|reeeble,nndgnl t

ngnin uoecu'ou eerved, or in ray/ford demanded;

to tell of men Ind Weymouth, Ind peniel and friende,

to which the might have linened six weeh before with

name intereet, Incl altogether to give her the fullest con-

viction, by the power of mud compu'ilou, of her
preferring hie younger brother.

It wu very vexndoue, Ind Ihe um been.in eorry for
it; but to it will; end I0 far from new meaning to
marry the elder, Ihe did not even want to attract him
be and whit the Iimplcet claims of conlciom beauty re-
quired: hil lengthened absence from Man-ﬁeld, without
anything but pleuure in view, end hi: own will to
conult, made it perfectly ole-r thlt he did not care
ebout her; and hie indilference wet to much more then
equalled by her own, diet were he now to nep forth
the owner of Moneﬁeld Perk, the Sir Thomu complete,
which he woe to be in time, the did not believe the
could accept him.

The eel-on Ind dutiee which brought Mr Bertram
back to Maneﬁeld took Mr Crawford into Norfolk.
Everinglnrn could not do without him in the beginning
of September. He went for I fortnith fortnight of
Inch dulne- to the Min Bertmne It ought to have put
thembothootheirgunrdﬁnd made even Julia admit,
in her jellouey of her litter, the Ibeolute ueceuity of
dim-ting hie nttentione, Ind withing him not to return ;
end a fortnight of Iuﬁicieut leisure, in the intervele of

I 20 IANSHILD PAIL

ahooting and ‘ to have convinced the gentleman
tlmheonghttn longerany,hadheheenmein
thehahitofmmininghhmmidvqandofrdnct-
ingtn'hattheindulgmoe ofhie idlennitywaatend-
ing; but, thoughtle- and Ielﬁah from pmqaerity and
hndexample,hevwldnotlookheymdthepruent
mount. The intern, haudaolne, clever, and encourag-
hﬁvaemamnmtmhiamed mind; andlinding
nodiin iuNmfolktoeqnaltheaodalpleanmof
Manédﬂiegladlymumed to it atthetimeanxinled,
and van welcomed thithn'qnimugladlybythonevllln
he came to triﬂe with Farther.

Maria, with only Mr Rnahvrorth to attend to her,
and doomed to the,lepeated detail-ofhiaday’l n,
goodorl'nd,hia hoax ofhia
nei hhaurl, hia doubt: of their qualiﬁcation. and hit

after poachcrl, tuhjccta whinh will not ﬁnd their
my to fenule fut-ling: without Iome talent on one side
or name attachment onI the other, had Mr Craw-
ford gnevonal' ; and ulia, uneupged unemplo ed,
felt all the right of milling him much more. Fitch
ﬁler believed her-elf the favourite. Julia might be
jnatiﬁed in so doing by the hints of Mn Grant, inclined v
to credit what the wished, and Maria by the lint- of
Mr Cnvlford himself. Everything returned into the
name channel a before hia ahaence; hia mannen being
to each I0 animated and agreeable an to lone no gmund
with either, and juat napping ahort of the continence,
the readiness, the Iolicitude, and the warmth which
might excite general notice.

Fanny wan the only one of the rty who found any-
thing to dislike; but Iince the y at Sotherton, the
could never nee Mr Crawford with either liner without

' observation, and nele without wonder or mm;
and had her conﬁdence in her own judgment been equal
tollcrexerciae ofitin uerynthurerpecqhadthebeen

 

MANSFIELD PARK. 1 2 l

lure that the was teeing clearly, and judging undidly,
the would probably have made tome important com-
munication to her usual conﬁdant. Al it wan, how-
ever, she only hazarded a hint, and the hint wu lost.
“ I am rather lurpriled,” laid the, “ that Mr Crawford
thould come back again to noon, after being here IO long
before, full oeven weeln; for I had under-mod he was
to fond of change and moving nbout, that I thought
tom ing would certainly occur when he wan once
gone, to take him elnewhere. He it uaed to much
' gayer plane. than Mansﬁeld." -

“ It ll to hit credit," wul Edmund’t answer; "and
I dare my it given his Iitter plealure. She doet not like
hi- unlettled habits."

“ Whit I favourite he is with my cousint! "

“ Yea, hie manner: to women are with at mutt. plane.
Mn Grant, I believe, mopectt him of a preference for
Julia; I have never seen much Iyrn tom of it, but I
with it may be to. He hu no fault; at what aterioue
attachment would remove.”

“If Mitt Bertram were not en aged," said Fanny,
cautioualy, "I could Iometimcl II moat think that he
admired her more than Julia."

“ Which in, perhapt, more in favour of hll liking
Julia bent, than you, Fanny, may be aware; for I be-
lieve it often he that a man, before he hll quite
made up llll own mind, will diltinguinh the litter or
intimate friend of the woman he ll reall thinking of,
more than the woman henelf. Crawfo l1“ too much
tense to my here if he found him-elf in any danger from
Maria ; and I am not at all afraid for her, after ouch a
proof u the hu given, that her feelings are not strong."

Fanny pond the rnuet have been mimken, and
nteantto think diﬁ'etently in future; hut with all that
lubmiuion to Edmund could do, and all the help of the
coinciding loolu and hint: which the occaeionally noticed

l 2 2 MANSIIILD PARK.

in name of the mhemmd which leaned tonythat
Julia wu Mr Crawford's choice, ll! knew not Ilwayo
what to think. She wu privy, one evening, to the
hope-ofheraunt Norrin on the mbjeeguwell u to
her feelings and the feelingu of Mn Rnnhwonh, on I
point ofaoine imilnrityﬂndcould not he] wondering-a
Ihe linened; and glad would she have not to be
obliged to linen, for it wu while all the other on;
people were dancing, and the sitting, mo: unwil ' gly,
among the cha mm It the ﬁre, longin for the re-en-
trance of her elder coulin, on whom ll her own
of I plrtner then depended. It was Fanny’l lint ball,
though without the preparation or uple of many
a oung lady's lint ball, being the thou ht only of the
moon, built on the lute acquilition I violin pla r
in the tervanu' hall, Ind the pouibilit of railing ve
couple with the help of Mn Grant I a new intimate
friend of Mr Bertnm’e jun Irrived on I virit. It had,
however, been a very happy one to Fanny through four
dancee, and Ihe waa quite rieved to be losing even a
quarter of In hour. hile wliting and wiohing.
looking now It the dancer! and now at the door,
thin dialogue between the two above-mentioned ladies _
wu forced on her—

“ I think, ma'un,” laid Mn Non-ie—her eye!

directed toward. Mr Rushworth and Malia, who were
en for the Iecond time, “ we shall lee tome
face: again now."

“ ea, ma nm, ind ,” replied the other, with I
ntcly Iimper, “ there will be some ntinﬁction in look-
ing on w, end I think it wan rather a pity they
should have been obliged to part. Young folk: in tha'r
lituation thould be excuoed complying with the common
fonnt. I wonder my Ion did not propane it.”

“I dare uy he did, ma'ani. Mr Rulhworth it never
rennin. But deer Morin hu nah a nrict eenle of pro-

MANSFIELD PAR K. I 23

priny, In much of that true delicacy which one aeldom
meeta with now-a-da a, Mr- Ruahworth—that wiah of
avoiding 'cularity( Dear ma'am, only look at her
face at in moment; how diligent from what it wa-
the two Ian danceal "

Mine Bertram did indeed look happy, her eye! were
lparkling with pleuure, and ahe waa lpeaking with t
animation, for Julia and her mer, Mr Crawlzn,
were cloaeto her; they were 1 in a clutter together.
How ahe had looked before, Fanny could not recollect,
for the had been dancing with Edmund heraelf, andhad
not thought about her.

Mn Norrie continued, “ It in quite delightful, ma’am,
to lee young people to p rly ha y, aowell united,
and to much the rhingl cannot I: think of dear
Sir Thomu'l delight. And what do you any, ma’am,
to the chance of another match 2 Mr Ruahwonh haa
net a good example, and auch things are ve catching."

Mn Ruahworth, who saw nothing but er eon, was
quite at a loss. “ The couple above, ma’am. Do you
lee no aymptoma there 2” »

“ Oh denri Min Julia and Mr meford. Yen,
indeed, a very pretty match. What in hit property i ”

“ Four thouaand a-year.”

“Very well. Thoee who have not more, mun he
utiaﬁed with what they have. Four diouaand a year in
a preto ante, and he aeerna 'a very genteel, neady young
man, In I hope Mi- Julia will he very happy."

“It ll not a aettled thin , ma’am, yet. We only
lpuk of it among frienda. m. I have very little doubt
it vi” 5:. He in growing extremely particular in hia
menu'om."

Fanny could linen no farther. Littening and
wondering were all Iulpended for a time, for Mr Ber—
tram waa In the room again ; and though feeling it would
be a great honour to be naked by him, the thought it

I 24 IANSI’IILD PARK.

mutt happen. He came towards their little cinle; but
inmad of atking her to dance, drew a chair near her,
and gave her an account of the present mate of I lick
hone, and the opinion of the groom, from whom he had
juet parted. Fanny found that it wan not a: bel and in
the modeaty of her nature immediatel felt that aha had
been nnreaaonahle in expecting in hen he had told
of hit hone, he took a nevupaper from the table, and
looking over it, laid in a languid way, “ If you want to
dance, Fanny, I will and up with on." With more
than equal civility the offer was d ined; the did not
wiah to dance. “ I am glad ofit," aid he, in a much
briaker tone, and throwing down the new per again.
“for I am tired to death. I only wo er how the
£20de can keep it up no long. Theth need
all in ove. to ﬁn any Imuaement in such folly; and
I0 they are, I funcy. f you look at them on may
act: the are no man couple of lovcn—ull hot {Em and
Mn rant—and, een onnelvea, the, poor woman,
moat want a lover In much at any one of them. A
desperate dull life hen muat be with the doctor," mak-
ing a aly face as he spoke toward: the chair of the
latter, who proving, however, to be close at hll elbow,
made no inatantaneona a change of expreasion and lubject
neeeuary, II Fanny, in spite of everything, could hardly
help laughing at. “ A mange husineuthia in America,
Dr Grunt! that it your opinion! I alwayl oometo
you to know what I am to think of public marten."
“My dear Tom," cried hia aunt soon aftenvarde,
“ on you are not dancing, I dare lay on will have no
objection to join us in a rubber; ehal you?" Then
leaving her seat, and coming to him to enforce the pro-
, added in a whisper, “ We want to make a table
or Mn Rnlhworth, yon ltnaw. You mother in quite
anxioul about it, but cannot very well lpare time to lit
down herself, became of her fringe. Now, you, and I,

MANSFIELD PARK. 1 25

and Dr Grant, will just do; Ind though we play but
xix-crowns, you know, you my bet half-guinea with

“ I thould be moot haypy," replied he aloud, Ind
jumping up with Ilacrity, “ it would give me the greatest
yin-lire; but that I am thin moment goin to dance.
Come, Funny,” taking her hind, “ do not dnwdling
any longer, or the dance will be over."

Funny wan led off very willingly, though it wen im-
pouible for her to feel much gratitude towurde her
comin, or dietinguilh, at he certainly did, between the
oelﬁehneu of another person and hit own.

“A pretty mode-t requelt uion my word,” he in-
digmndy exclnirned on they wnl ed away. “ To want
to nail me to a card table for the next two houn with
her-elf and Dr Grant, who are alwayl quorrelling, Ind
that pokin old woman, who know: no more of whiat
than ofagebn. I with my good aunt wouldbea
little less boxy! And to all: me in ouch I waytool
without ceremon , before them I", no u to leave me no
poteihility of wing. Tbal it what I diAlike moot
ptrtieulnrly. It mim my spleen more than anything,
to have the pretence of being naked, of being given A
choice, and at the lame time nddrcued in much I way In
to oblige one to do the very thing, whatever it bel If
I had not luckily thought of standing up with you I
could not have got out of it. It in a great dell too
bad. But when my Iunt he got 1 funcy in her had,
nothing an nap her."

:26 mmsrinm PARK.

chum ma. \-

HE Honounble John Yawn, thin new friend, hld
not much to recommend him beyond habit: of
fuhion Ind ex he. and being the younger Ion

of n lord with a menble independenCe; and Sir
Thomu would probably have thought hie introduction
at Mansﬁeld by no mean: delimble. Mr Bemnm’l
lcqunin't‘anCe with him had begun at Weyrnouth, where
h ttenda togetherintheuineooc' ,
In the fnmp, if riendthi it might be celled,lehzl
been proved and perfected by r Yatee'n being invited
to take Mansﬁeld in hit way, whenever he could, Ind
by hi! romiling to come; and he did come rather
earlier n had been expected, in con uence of the
ruddcn breakin -up of a huge part nut-ml) ed for iety
at the house 0 nnnther friend, which he had left ey-
mouth to join. He came on the wingl of die: 'nt-
ment, and with hie head full of acting, for it had a
theatrical party; and the play in which he had borne a
pan, wu within two day- of repreeentntion, when the
ludden death of one of the uncut connectionl of the
family hnd destroyed the Icheme and ditpened the per-
fonneru. To be no near happineu, so near fame, to
near the loo paragraph in pniee of the private thenu'i-
cnle It Eccfelford, the neat of the Right Hon. Lord
anenohaw, in Cornwall, which would of coune have
immortalized the whole party for at lent I twelve-
inonthl and being [0 near, to lone it all, war no injury
to he keenly felt, and Mr Yatel could talk of nothing
else. Eccleuford Ind its theatre, with in arrangement:
and dreneu, reheamll, and joker, wan hil never-failing
iub‘ect, and to boat of the pm hi: only coniolation.
appin for him, I love of the theatre in to general,
an itch for acting to Itrong unong young people, that he

 

HANSHELD PARK. 1 21

could hardly out-talk the interert of hi: harem. From
the lint eating of the pane, to the epilogue, it wa- all
bewitehing, and there were few who did not wiah to
have been a party concerned, or would have heeimted
to their Ikill. The play had been Loven’ Vowe,
and r Yates wan to have been Count Camel. “A
part," laid he, " and not at all to my mate, and
arch a one u I certainly would not accept again; but I
wu determined to make no difﬁculties. Lord Raven-
lhaw end the duke had riated the only two
character: worth playing beige reached Eccluford;
and though Lord Ravenrhaw offered to reaign hi: to
me, it we impoaible to take it, you know. I win
aorry for bin! that he Ihould have no miuken hil

were, for he wu no more equal to the Baron—a
ittle man with a weak voice, nlwnyn hoane alter the
lira ten minute; It muIt have injured the ieoe
materially; but [was resolved to make no diﬂi ties.
Sir Henry thought the duke not equal to Frederick,
but that wan became Sir Henry wanted the part him-
aelf; whereu it wal certainly in the heat hand: of the
two. I was surprised to Ice Sir Henry such a nick.
Luckily the ltl’ength of the piece did not depend upon
him. Our Agatha wu inimitable, and the duke war
thou ht very great by many. And n n the whole, it
won d cert-ml have gone off wonderglly.”

“Inna; ard case, upon mywordg" and, “Ida
think you very much to he pitied,” were the ltind
reaponaelo iatenin .

“ It in not “111.83:th about; but to be me
the poor old dowager could not have died at a woue
time; and it it impossible to help withing that the news
could have been pmoed for the three day! we
wanted. It was t three days; and being only a

dmother, and all happening two hundred milel of,
think there would have been no great harm, and it

1:8 MANSFIELD max.

cw mgge‘ed, I know; but Lord Raven-haw, who I
auppoae in one of the moat comet men in England,
would not hear of it."

a An afterpiece inatead of a comedy,” laid Mr
Bertram. “ anen’ Vow. were at an end, and Lord
and Lady Raven-haw left to act My Grandmother ?
thernIelvea. Well, the ' inture may comfort bin- .- au ,
perhapa, between frien , he began to tremble for MC
credit and hit lungl in the Baron, and wet not aorry to
withdraw, and to make you amenda, Yatea, I think we
mutt nine a little theatre at Mansﬁeld, and uh you to
be our manager."

Thin. though the thought of the moment. did not
end with the moment; for the inclination to act wan
nwakened, and in no one more Itrongly than in him who
we now matter of the houae; and who having to much
lei-are at to make almont any novelty a certain good,
had likewioe auch a degree of lively talent: and comic
tarte, u were exactly adapted to the novelty of acting.
The thought returned again nnd again. “ Oh, for the
Eccluford theatre and aeenery to try aomethin with l "
Each litter could echo the‘wiah; and Henry émwford,
to whom, in all the riot of his gratiﬁcationa it wan yet
an untamed pleature, war quite alive at the idea.
“ I really believe,” laid he, “I could be fool enough
at thil moment to undertake any character that ever
wan written, from Sh lock or Richard III. down to
the Iinging hero of a rec in his scarlet coat and cocked
hat. I fuel In if I could be anything or everything; at
if I could rant and atom, or nigh, or cut caper. in any
tragedy or comedy in the Engliah language. Let ua be
doing tomething. Be it only half a play, an act, a
.cene; what ahould prevent us? Not theac counten-
ancec, I am sure," looking tnwardl the Mine Bertrama,
“ and for a theatre, what Iigniliea a theatre! We ahall
be only arnuaing ounelvea. Any room in thin house
might aullice."

HANSHILD PARK. 1 29

“We muIt hue I curtain," nid Tom Bertram; “a
few youth of green bite for I cumin, Ind peﬂupI that
may be enough."

“ 0h, quite enoughl " cried Mr Yates, “ with only
jun I I'de wing or two run up, door. in ﬂat, Ind three
or four Icenel to be let down; nothing more would be
nemury on ouch I plan as this. For mere ImuIement
smoulg oanelveI, we Ihould want nothing more."

“ belim we mun he utillied with Ian," laid
Mei-in. “There would not be time, and other diﬂi-
cultiel would urine. We mun ruther adopt Mr Craw-
ford’l View, Ind make the Marmara, not the that",
:‘flr object.”MIny parts of our beet play: It: independent

IC .

“m' mid Edmund. who began to linen with
alum. “ Let u do nothing by halvel. If we are to
act, let it be in n theatre co letely ﬁtted up with pit,
boxes Ind gallery, and let ulmluve a plIy entire from
beginning to end ; no u it he I German lay, no matter
what, wrth I good tricking, Ihiftiug ‘ece, and n
ﬁgure-dance, and I hompi , and I song tween the
ecu. If we do not outdo Ecclceford, we do nothin .”

“ Now, Edmund, do not be dimgrccnblc," mid Ju in.
" Nobody lom a play better than you do, or can have
gone much farther to Ice one."

“ True, to Iee real acting, good hardened real acting ;
but I would hardl walk from thin room to the next to
look It the rev e m of those who have not been bred
to the tnde : I set of gentlemen and ladies, who have
Ill the dindvnnugeo of education and decorum to
m e through.”

I Ihort Paulo, however, the subject nil] con-
tinued, and wan ducuued with unIbmed engerneu, every
one’l incliuIdon increIIin by the diIcu-ion, Ind n
knowledge of the inclination of the teat; Ind thou h
nothing wu Iettled but that Tom Bertrlrn would pre er

I30 MANSFIELD PARK.

n comedy, and hit linen and Henry Crawford a tragedy,
and that nothing in the world could he ﬂier than to
ﬁnd a piece which would please them Ill, the resolution
to act nomething or other nemed to decided,altomake
Edmund quite uncomfortable. He wu determined to
prevent it, if pouible, though hie mother, who equally
heard the convenation which panned at table, did not
evince the let dinpprobation.

The name evening afforded him an opportuni of
tryin hit ttrength. Marin, Julia, Hen Cn ord,
and r Yntee, were in the billiard-room. om return-
ing from them into the drawing-room, where Edmund
was ﬁnding thoughtfully by the ﬁre, while Lady Ber-
tram war on the tofa at a little dimnce, and Funny
clone beside her, arranging her work, thue began a he
entered—

“ Such a honiny vile billiard-table at can it not to
be met with, I believe, above ground. I can stand it
no longer, and I think, I may lay, that nothin llllll
ever tempt me to it again; but one good thing have
just ascertained: it ie the very room for a theatre, pre-
cisely the shape and length for it; and the doors at the
farther end, communicating with each other, a they
may be made to do in ﬁve minutet, by merely moving
the bookcase in my father’a room, in the very thing we
could have desired, if we had net down to Wish for it;
and my father’r room will be an excellent green room.
It nech to join the billiard-room on purponc.”

“ You are not serious, Tom, in meaning to act?"
raid Edmund, in n low voice, as his brother approached
the ﬁre.

“Not Ierioul! never more no, I mure you. What
in there to eurpriee ou in it!"

“I think it wo d be very wrong. In a gareral light,
private theatrich are open to some objectionl, but ae
we are circumstanced, I mutt think it would be highly

umsrrew mm. 131

injudieioue, and more than injudieioue, to attempt any-
thing of the kind. It would chow great want of feeling
on my father'l account, absent us he in, and in some
degree of cement danger; end it would be imprudent.
I think, with regnrd to Marie, whole Iituetron in a
we delicate one, con-'dering everything, extremely
delicate."

“You take up a thing to Ierioullyl u ifwe were
goin to act three time- a week till my father’l reurm,
and invite all the country: But it in not to he a dilplay
of that non. We mean nothing but a little amulement
umong ourselves, just to vary the scene, and exerciae
our powen in Iomething new. We want no audience,
no publicity. We may be trusted, I think, in chooling
come play moat perfectly unexceptionahle; and I can
conceive no greater harm or danger to an of III in con-
vening in the elegant written language 0 some reepect-
able author than rn chattering in word. of our own. I
have no feare, and no ecnrplea. And an to my father’-
heing absent, it ll so far from an objection, that I con-
lider it rather an a motive; for the expectation of hit
retum murt he .1 very anxioul period to my mother;
and if we can he the meant of nmuaing thnt anxiety,
and keeping up her spirit: for the next few weeks, I
Ihall think our time very well vpent. and no, I am lure,
will he. It in a «my nnxioun period for her."

A: he laid thin, each looked towardl their mother.
ley Bertram. Junk hack in one corner of the roll, the
picture of health, wealth, ease, Ind tranquillity, war
falling into a gentle don, while Fanny war getting
through the few diﬂicultiel of her work for her.

Edmund Irniled And thank hie head.

"By Jovel thin won’t do," cried Torn, throwing
himnelf into n chair with a hearty laugh. “ To he
sure, my dear mother, your anxiety—I war unlucky
mm.”

133 HANSHILD PARK.

"What in the matter!" uked in the
henrytoneofonehalfroueed,“l wuuotnleep."

“Oh dear no, ma’un, nobody "quoted ywl Well,
Edmund.” he continued, returning to the former abject,
pouum, and voice, I: noon on Lad Bertram begun to
nod agnin,“but thirIou'ﬂ nuintzln,that we dull he
doin no harm.”

“ mnnot agree with you; I am oonvinced that my
father would totally dinpprove it."

“ And I am convinced to the oontnry. Nobody in
{under of the exercise of ulent in young people, or
pmmomitmore,thonmyfather,endtbran 'g
of the acting,30uting. reciting kind, I think be In:
Ilwnylndectd taste. Iemturehe encoungedit in
u- ume How many a time have we mourned over
the d body of Juliue Cesar, and lo 6!!! and not to
k’rl, in thin very room, for hie amusement? And I am
IIII'L', my um: um: Nomi, every evening of my life
throu h one Chrirtmu holidays.”

“ t w a we different thing. You must nee the
difference youne f. My flther wi-hed u, In school-
boyl, to It well, but he would never with his
grownvup ughterl to be noting playe. Hie ten-e of
decomm in ntrict."

“ I know all that," laid Torn, dirPleaeed. “ I know
my father up well as you do; end I ll take carethat hie
daughters do nothing to dittreu him. Manage your
own concerne, Edmund, and I ’11 take care of the rest
of the family."

“ If you are renolved on acting,” lied the pene-
vexing Edmund, “I mutt hope it wil 'be in a very
email and quiet way; and I think a theatre ought not
to be attempted. It would be taking libertiel with
my father’e house in hit abeence which could not be
juetiﬁed."

“ For every thing of that nature, I will be answer-

ususnew max. 133

lble," mid Tom, in n decided tone. " His houle ohall
not be hurt. I have quite as great an interest in bdng
careful of his houoe as you can have; and u to such
alterations as I was suggesting just now, such as moving
a bookcaoe, or unlocking I door; or even as using the
billiard-room for the space of I week without laying at
billinrdl in it, you might just us well suppose e would
object to our sitting more in this room, and less in the
breakfast—room, than we did before he went away, or
to my sister's piano-fame being moved from one side
of the room to the other. Absolute nonsense! "

“ The innovation, if not wrong as an innovation, will
be wrong u on expense."

“ Yes, the expenoe of such an undertaking would be
prodi ‘onol Perhaps it might can a whole twenty
poun I. Something of a theatre we must have un-
doubtedly, but it will be on the simpleottplanj a green
cumin and a little carpenter’s work, and at 's all; and
u the carpenter's work ma be all done at home by
Chrimpher Jocan himlel , it will be too absurd to
tall: of expenle; and on long as Jackson is employed,
every thing will be right with Sir Thomas. Don’t
imagine that nobody in this houae can see or 'udge but
yourself. Don’t set yourself, if you do not rke it, but
don’t expect to govern everybody else.‘ ’

“No, no to acting myoelf," mid Edmund, “Ibo! I
Iboolutely prom against."

Tom walked out of the room as he said it, and
Edmund was left to sit down and stir the ﬁre in
thoughtful vention. '

Fanny, who had heard it all, and borne Edmund
company in every feeling throughout the whole, now
ventured to ny,in her anxiety to est some comfort,
" Perhaps they may not be able to nd any play In suit
them. Your brother’s tame, and your sisters’, neern
very diﬂitrent."

134 IANSHILD PARK.

"Ihavenohopethere,Fanny. Iftheypeniatin
the theme, they will ﬁnd oomething. I ehnll ope-k
Inn innandu-ytodimderbm,anddutiaalll
m u

u I should think my aunt Norrie would he on your

“I dareuy the would,bur the harm inﬂuence with
eitherTorn or myn‘nenthatconldbeofanyuae; and
if I cannot convince them mylelf, I rhall let thing-
uke their courae, without attempting it through her.
Family aquabbling in the greatest evil of all, and we had
better do anything than be altogether by the nu.”

Hie intern, to whom he had an opportunity of speak-
ing the next morning. were quite an impanent of hie
advice, quite an un 'e ding to hll representation, quite an
determined in the cane of plea-ire, an Torn. Their
mother had no objection to the plan, and they were not
in the lent afraid of their father’e diupprobation. Then.-
could be no ham-i in what had been done in to nuny

table families, and by to many women of the lint
conﬁdention; and it mult he acru uloumeu run mad,
that could lee anything to centure in a plan like theirs,
comprehending'only hrotherl and tine“, and intimate
friendl, and which would never be heard of beyond
themoelvu. Julia dd teem inclined to admit that
Maria'l tituntion might require particular caution and
delicacy—hut that could not extend to I’m—tire waa at
liberty; and Maria evidently con-idcred her engage-
mt u only raising her no much more above reetraint,
.nd leaving her leu occasion than Julia, to consult either
my,“ or mother. Edmund had little to hope, but he
w etill urging the subject, when Henry Crawford
entered the room, frelh from the Parsonage, calling
mg, M No want of hand: in our theatre, Mia- Bertram.
No want of nndentr-appera; my sister desire: her love,
“,1 hopel to be admitted into the company, and will be

MANSFIELD PARK. 135

happy to take the part of any old duenna, or time con-
ﬁdante, that you may not like to do youraelvea.”

Maria gave Edmund a glance, which meant, “ What
lay you now? Can we be wrong if Mary Crawford
feel. the name P" And Edmund, ailenced, wan obliged
to acknowledge that the charm of acting might well
carry fascination to the mind of genius; and with the
ingenui of love, to dwell more on the nbliging, ec-
cpm ating purport of the meaaage than on anything
e le.

The Icheme advanced. Oppoaition war vain ; and as
to Mn Norrie, he war miataken in up 'ng the would
with to make any. She marred no mmuea that were
not ulked down in live minutel by her eldut nephew
and niece, who were all-powerful with her; and, aa the
whole arr-an ement wan to bring very little expenae to
anybody, an none at all to herlelf, an the fore-aw in it
all the comfort: of hurry, hustle, and importance, and
derived the immediate advantage of fancying herIelf
obliged to leave her own home, where the had been
living a month at her own can, and take up her abode
in theira, that eve hour might be t in their aer-
vice, the was, in net, exceedingly lighted with the

mic“

Chant" $317.

ANNY reemed nearer being right than Edmund
had nippoeed. The buaineu of ﬁnding a play
that would euit everybody proved to be no mile;

and the carpenter had received hir order: and taken
hia menuremenu, had an eated and removed at lent
two aeta of diﬂicultiea, an having made the neceaaity of
an enlargement of plan and expense fully evident1 wu

136 IANSHILD PARK.

already at work, while a play was mill to leek. Other
preparations were alao in hand. An enonnoua roll of
green baize had arrived from Northampton, and been
cut out by Mrs Norris (with a loving by her good
management, of full three quarters of a yard), and waa
actually forming into a cumin by the housemaidc, and
mill the play wan wanting; and In two or three daya r
d away in thin manner, Edmund began almoat to

ﬂu” that none might ever be found.

when were, in fact, to many things to be attended
to, no many people to be pleated, to many but character-
required, and above all, each a need that the play ahould
be at once both tn edy and comedy, that there didaeem
aa little chance '0 a deciaion at anything pursued by
youth and zeal could hold out.

On the tragic side were the Mina Bertrams, Henry
Crawford and Mr Yates; on the comic, 'l‘om Bertram,
not pail: alone, because it war evident that Ma Craw-
ford I wiahea, though itely kept back, inclined the
ume way: but hia eten-ninateneu and his power
seemed to make allies unnecenary; and, independent
of thin great irreconcileable difference, they wanted a
piece containing very few characters in the whole, but
every character ﬁrst-rate, and three principal women.
All the best la 5 were run over in vain. Neither
Hamlet, nor ac th, nor Othello, nor Douglaa, nor
the Gamester, presented anything that could satisfy even
the tragedinm; and the Rivall, the School for Scandal,
Wheel of Fortune, Heir at Law, and a long et cetera,
were aucceuively diamilaed with yet warmer objections.
No piece could be proponed that did not supply some-
body with a difﬁculty, and on one side or the other it
waa a continual repetition of, “ Oh no, that will never
do! Let us have no ranting tragedies. Too many
characters. Not a tolerable woman’s t in the play.
Anything but rbat, my dear Tom. twould be im-

MANSFIELD PARK. [37

po-h‘ le to ﬁll it . One could not ex ct an y to
take Inch n partnp Nothing but huﬂ'oonify (mm?-
ning to end. le might do, perhape, but for the ow

If I mu! give rn 'nion, I have alwayl
thought it the moat inliyid p ayln the En lilh language.
I do not with to make objection. } I ah be happy to
beofanyuae,hutlthinkwecouldnotchooee
wone."

Fanny looked on and linened, not nnamuaed to-
ohaerve the Ielﬁehneu which, more or lean dieguieed,
eeemed to govern them all, and wondering how it would
end. For her own gratiﬁcation the could have wiehed
that nonlething might be acted, for the had never teen
even lnlf n play, but everything of higher coneequence
wua 'net It.

“ hie will never do," aid Torn Bertram It last.
“ We are waning time most nbominnhly. Something
mnat be ﬁxed on. No matter what, to that aomething
in chosen. We mutt not be I0 nice. A few chlmten
too many mult not frighten up. We mult double them.
We mutt descend a little. If a part il insigniﬁcant, the
greater our credit in making anything of it. From thin
moment I make no diﬂicultiee. I take any part
choote to give me, 00 II it he comic. Let it but be
comic, I condition for nothing more."

For about the ﬁﬁh time he then pmpoeed the Heir
at Law, donhu'ng only whether to prefer Lord Dober-
ley or Dr Pangloea for himaelf ; Ind very earneatly, but
very unluccellfnly, trying to per-nude the other- that
there were enme ﬁne tragic pane in the teat of the
dram-ﬁe pemnc.

The plane which followed thin fruitle- eﬁort wa-
endedhythe name epeaker,vvho takin uyoneofthe
many vnlnlnen of play that lay on the mile, Ind turning
it over, laddenly exclaimed,—“ Loverl' Vowel And
why ahould not Loven’ Vowe do for u an well In for

138 uensrrnn PARK.

the Revenahawti Haw came it never to he drought
of before? It atriltet me u if it would do exactly.
What my you all? Here are two capinl tragic pm
for Yatea and Crawford. and here in the rhyming Butler
for me, if nobody elle wanta it; a triﬂing part, but the
tort of thing 1 ahould not dialike, and, u I laid before,
I am determined to take anythin and do my best.
And u for the reot, they ma be lled up by anybody.
It in only Count Caaael and nhalt."

The auggeltion war generally welcome. Everybody
waa growing weary of iodcciaion, and the lint idea with
everybody was, tl‘nt nothing had been prupoled before
I0 likely to unit them all. Mr Yam waa particularly

leued: he had been aighingand longing to do the
Enron at Eccleaford, had gnrdged every rant of Lord
anenehaw’a and been forced to mmnt it all in hia
own room. The awnn through Damn Wildenhcim
war the height of hia theatrical ambin'on; and with the
advantage of knowing half the tcenca by heart already,
he did now with the greatett alacrity, nﬂ'er hia servicea
for the part. To do him justice, however, he did not
retolve to appropriate it; for remembering that there
waa aorne very good ranting d in Frederick, he
rofeued an equal willingneu or tha Hen Craw-
0rd war ready to take either. Whichever r Yatea
did not chooee would perfectly u ‘ him, and a bhort
par-Icy of corn limcnt entued. Mia mam, feeling all
the interest an Agatha in the question, took on her
to decide it, by obaerving to Mr Yates, that this was a
point in which height and ﬁgure ought to be comiderod.
and that 51': being the talleat, aeerned to ﬁt him peculiarly
for the Baron. She waa acknowledged to be quite
right, and the two pam being accepted accordingly, ahe
wan certain of the proper Frederick. Three of the
characterl were now can, beeidel Mr Ruahworth, who
we! alwaya antwered for by Maria aa willing to do any-

ususrrew max. ' 139

thing 3 when Julia, meaning, like her sister, to he
Agatha, began to be scrupulous on Miss Crawford’s
account.

“ This is not behaving well by the absent," said she.
“ Here are not women enough. Amelia and Agatha
may do for Maria and me, but here is nothing for your
sister, Mr Crawford.”

Mr Crawford desired tlmt might not be thought of:
he was sure his sister had no wish of acting, but as
she might useful, and that she would not allow her-
self to be considered in the present case. But this was
immediately opposed by Tom Bertram, who asserted
the part of Amelia to be in every respects the plzperty
of Miss Crawford, if she would accept it. “ It ls s
naturally, as necessaril to her," said he, “ as Agatha
rice! to one or other all m sisters. It can be no sacrifice
on their side, for it is big ly comic."

A short silence followed. Each sister looked anxious;
for each felt the best claim to Agatha, and was ho in
to have it pressed on her by the rest. Henry Crawgrdg,
who meanwhile had taken up the play, and with seemin
cnrclcssncss was turning over the ﬁrst act, soon settled
the business.

" I must entreat Miss Julia Bertram," said he, “ not
to engage in the part of Agatha, or it will be the ruin
of all my solemnity. You must not, indeed you must
not (turning to her). I could not and {our coun-
tenance dressed up in woe and paleneas. he many
laughs we have had together would infalliny come
across me, and Frederick and his knapuck would be
obliged to run away."

Pleasantly, couneously, itwas spoken ; but the manner
was lost in the matter to Julias feelings. She saw a
glance at Maria, which continued the injury to herself:
it was a scheme, a trick; she was alighted, Maria was
preferred; the smile of triumph which Maria was trying

I. K

I40 MANSFIELD PARK.

to uppreu Ihoved how well it wan under-(nod; and
before Julia could command her-elf enough to speak,
her brother gave his weight agaiiut her too, b saying,
“Ohyell Marinmu'nheAgatha. bethe
beet Agatha. Though Julia fancies the refer: tragedy,
I would not out her in it. Thereinno in oftngedy
about her. She ha notthelookofit. ﬁerfenturel
Ire not tragic futon-I, and the who too quick, and
Eula too quick, and would not keep her countenance.

he had betterdo the old countrywoman: the Cottager’l
wife; you had, indeed, Julia. Cottager’a wife in I
very Pretum I nave you. The old lady relieves
thehr - wnhenevolenceofherhnohnndwilhagood
dul oflpirit. Yon Ilnll be Cottager’l wife."

“Cottang wifel " cried Mr Yum. “Wth are
you talking of? The moot trivial, paltry, imigniﬁcant
part; the mercu commonplace; not :1 tolerable Ipecch
In the whole. Your liner do tlmtl It in an inlult to
propoce it. At Ecclelfonl the governeu wan to have
done it. We all ugreed that it could not be offered to
anybody elee. A little more juuice, Mr Manager, if
you pleue. You do not deserve the oﬂice, if you
‘ cannot appreciate the talents of your company a little
better.”

“ Why u to that, my good friend, till I and my
com have really acted there mutt be rome gueu-
wort“: ut I mean no dilporagernent to Julia. We
cannot have two A Milan, and we mutt have one Cot-
uger’l wife; and am lure I let her the exam le of
moderation myeelf in being ntiaﬁed with the old uder.
If the in triﬂing she will have more credit in making
something of it; Ind if she in lo desperately bent against
everything humoroua, let her take Cottager'l apeechen
inmd of Cottager’l wife’s, and no change the porn all
through; be in oolemn and pathetic enough, I am sure.
It could make no difference in the play, and u for

MANSFIELD IARK. I4! ‘

Cottager himaelf, when he haa got his wife's apeechel,
I would undertake him with all In heart."
“ With all your partiality for (gottager‘s wife,” said

Henry Crawford, “ It will be impoaible to make any-
thin of it ﬁt for your liner, and we moat not auﬁ'er her
goognaoure to be imposed on. We rnuat notaﬂowher
to accept the part. She must not be left to her own
comphiaanee. Her talenra will he wanted in Amelia.

Amelia ia a character more diﬁicult to be well repre- .
aenred than even Agatha. I conaider Amelia is the
most dillicult character in the whole piece. It require.
great powera, great nicety, to give her playfulness and
simplicity without extravagance. I have aeen good
aetreosee fail in the part. Simplicity, indeed, ll beyond
the reach of almost every actrees by profession. It
requires a delicacy of feeling which they have not. It
uiree a gentleworrun—I Julia Bertram. You will
u emke it, I hope?" turning to her with a look of
anxious entrea , which new" a little; but while
theheairatedwattonyﬁm there ‘ in
with Mien anford'a better claim. sun W
“ No, no, Julia mun not be Amelia. It in not at all
the rt for her. She would not like it. She would
not 0 well. She is too tall and robust Amelia ahould
be a small, light, girlish, ski in ﬁgure. It is lit for
Miss Crawford, and Miss Cra rd on] . She loolu
the and! am pervaded will do it adhriubly.”
ithout attendin to this, Henry Crawford continued
hiatuppligation. “ oumustobli us," nidhe, “indeed .
yournuat. Whenyouhave ' thecharseter,lam
lure you will feel it ruit you. Tragedy may be your
choice, but it will certainly appear that comedy choosea
’0'. You will be to viit me in priaon with a baaket of
proviaionlr you willnotrefuae to viait me in prim?
think I aee you coming in with your haaketi ’
4 The inﬂuence of his voice waa felt. Julia wavered";

' I42 IANSIIEID IARK.

but was he only ﬂying to toothe and purify her, and
make her overlook the previou- alli'ontl She dittde
him. The alight had been moot determined. He wu,
perhana, but at tracheroun lay with her. She looked
nupicrounly at her litter, ' ’t countenance W to
decide it; if the were vexed and Illnncd—but Mario
looked all Ierenity Ind anti-faction, and Julia well knew
thetonthiagrvundMaria could not he ha y but It
her expenle. With hut indignation, there re, and a
tremuloua voice, the tail to him, “ You do not teem
afnid of not keeping your countenance when I come in
with a bucket of provi-ionr—though one might have
mppoled—butititonlyuA thathathuvo be no
overpowering! ” She In)pr Henry anford looked
anther foolilh, and u if he did not know what to my.
Tom Bertram began again—

“Miu Crawford mun be Amelia. She will be an
excellent Amelia."

“Do not be afraid of my wanting the character,”
cried Julia, with angry quickness: " I am no! to he
Agatha, and I am sure I will do nothing clue; and u
to Amelia, it it of all Pam in the world the most dit-
guating to me. I quite detect her. An odious, little,
pert, unnatural, impudent girl. I have Ilwayt protected
againtt comedy, and this ll corned in iu wont form."
And lo ying, she walked hnm'y out of the room,
leaving awkward feeling. to more than one, but exciting
rmnll companion in any except Fanny, who had been a
quiet auditor of the whole, and who could not think of
her a! under the agitationa of jtalaur] without great

It .

P 3'1 rhort tilence lucceeded her leaving them ; but her
brother noon returned to hurineu and Lovert’ Vowr,
and war eagerly looking over the play, with Mr Yatet’t
hcl , to uncertain what scene would be necemry,
Whlle Maria and Henry Crnw 0rd converted together

HANS!!!“ PARK. 1 43

in an under voice, and the declaration with which she
began of, " I am sure I would give up the part to Julia
most willin ly, but that though I shall probably do it
very ill, I geel persuaded she would do It worse,” was
doubtless receivrn all the compliments it called for.

When this had lasted some time, the division of the
party was completed by Tom Bertrnm and Mr Yates
wolkin of together to consult further in the room now
beginnrng to be called the 73mm, and Mill Bertrsrn's

_ resolving to go down to the Parsonage herself with
the offer of Amelia to Miss Crawford; and Fanny
remained alone.

The ﬁrst use she made of her solitude was to take up
the volume which had been left on the table, and begin
to acquaint herself with the play of which she had
heard so much. Her curiosity was nll awake, and she
no throu h it with In engemeu which was suspended
only by rntemls of astonishment, that it could be
chosen in the present instance, that it could be mposed
and accepted rn a private theatre! Agatha an Amelia
sppeared to her in their different ways so tot-ll im-
p r for home representation; the situation 0 one.
an the language of the other, so unﬁt to be expressed

‘ by sny vlonun of modesty, that she could hsrdly
tuppose her cousins could be aware of whst they
were engaging in; and longed to have them roused
as soon ss possible by the remorutr-snce which Edmnnd
would certainly make.

 

cbsotn $17.
185 CRAWFORD so the part very
ﬂ nndsoonaﬁu rssBertrarn’sretau-n

Y5
the Psrsonlge. Mr Rushworth arrived,
and another character wu consequently cast. He had

I44 MANSFIELD PARK.

the oifer of Count Caaael and Anhalt, and at ﬁr: did
not know which to choone, Ind wanted Min Bertram
toditeethirn; but uponbeing madetonnderltandthe
diﬂ'ereut style of the charactern, and which wu which,
and reoollecting that he had once teen the pin in
London, and had thought Anhalt a very ttupid f low,
he aoon decided for the Count. Mia. Bertram approved
thedeeiaionJortheleuhehadtolearn thebettenand
though the could not aym athiae in hia with that the

' Count and Agatha might be to act together, nor wait
very pan'ently-while he wan tlowly turning over the '
leam with the hope of mill discovering each a acene,
lhe very kindly took his in hand, and curtailed
every apeech thnt admi bein shortened; beddea
pointing out the neceuity of hll hein very much
dated, and chooan hie colourt. r Ruahworth
liked the idea of hit linery very well, though Aim-cling
to detpiae it; and wan too much enga ed with what
hit own appearance would be, to think 0 the othera, or
draw any of thme conclusions, or feel any of that die‘
pleaaure which Maria had been half repared for.

Thus rnuch waa settled before und, who had ,
been out all the morning, knew anything of the matter;
but when he entered the drawing-room before dinner.
the bu: of diacuetion was high between Tom, Maria,
and Mr Yuan; and Mr Runhworth Itepped forward
with great alacrity to tell him the agreeable new.

“We have got a play," said he. “It in to be
Lavcrt’ Vowl; and I am to be Count Cauel, and am
to come in lint with a blue dreu, and a sink min
cloak, and afterwards am to have another ne fancy
way of a shooting-dread. 1 do not know how
I like it.” .

Fanny’s eyes followed Edmund, and her heart beat
for him an ahe heard this speech, and nw his. look, and
felt what hll aenaation- mutt be.

KANSHILD PARK. ' I45

" Loven' Vowel ” in a tone of the greatelt amaze-
ment, wu hi: only reply to Mr Rulhworth, and he
turned toward- hie brother and intern in if hardly
doubting I contradiction.

“ en," cried Mr Yntee. “ After all our debating!
and diﬂicnltiel, we ﬁnd there in nothing that will suit III
altogether so well, nothing to unexceptionable, u
Loven’ Vowe. The wonder in, that it should not have
been thought of before. My stupidity wu abominable,
for here we have III the damage of what I law It
Eccleeford; end it in no uneful to hue nnything of I
model! We have cut almoet every part."

“But what do you do for women? laid Edmund
grlvely, and looking at Maria. ‘

Maria blushed in quite of herself an the nnlwend,
" I take the n which Lady Ravenshnw was to have
done, and (Vlldl I bolder eye) Min Crawford in to be
Amelia.”

“I ahould not have thought it the sort of plny to be
no eaeily ﬁlled up with u, replied Edmund, turning
away to the ﬁre, where not his mother, aunt, and
Fanny, and Ielting himlelf with n loolt of great
vcxntlon. _

Mr Runhworth followed him to say, “I come in
three times, 1nd have two-and-forty lpeecheu. That ’1
oomething. in not it? But I do not much like the idea
of being no ﬁne. I shall hardly know myself in a blue
dml, end I pink utin cl ”

Edmund could not nnlwer him. In a few minute-
Mr Bertram was called out of the room to ntiufy Dome
doubt! of the carpenter; and being accompanied by Mr
Yates, Ind followed soon aﬂcrwurde by Mr Ruthworth,
Edmund Ilmmt immediatel took the opportunity of
saying, " I cannot before r Yam [peak what I feel
an to thin play, 'without reﬂecting on hie friend: at
Beale-ford ; but I mun now, my dear Maria, tell you,

r46 MANSFIELD PARK.

that I think it exceedingly unﬁt for prime reprenenta— .
tion, and that I ho you will give it up. I cannot but

you will win you have read it carefully over.
Read only the lint act aloud to either your mother or
aunt, and nee how you can approve it. It will not
be neceeury to lend you to your father’l judgment, I
am convinced."

“ We tee (hinge very differently," cried Maria. ‘I
am perfectly ac uainted with the play, I sure yon;
and with a very ‘l‘ew omissions, and I0 forth, which will
he made, of courae, I can nee nothing objectionable in
it; and I am not the only young woman you ﬁnd, who
thinlu it very ﬁt for private repreeeutation."

“I In: lorry for it," wu hi. answer; “but in thin
matter it it you who are to lead. Tau mun pet the ex-
ample. If othen have hlundered, it in your e to
put them right, and show them what true d racy it.

n all points of decorum, your conduct mutt be law to
the rest of the part ."

This picture of er consequence had tome effect, for
no one loved better to lead than Maria; and with far
more good humour the anlwered, “ I am much obliged
to you, Edmund; you mean very well, I am lure; but
I atill think you see thingctoo strongly; and I really
cannot undertake to harm ue all the rut upon a luhject
of thin kind. 71m: would he the greatest indecorum,
I think."

" Do on imagine that I could have auch an idea in
my headl No : let your oonductbe the only harangue.

Say that, on examining the part, you feel yourlelf un-
' equal to it; that you nd it requiring more exertion and
conﬁdence than you can be iupponed to have. Say thie
with lirrnneu, and it will be quite enough. All who
can dintinguilh will undemnd your motive. The
play will be given up, and your delicacy honoured an it
ought."

MANSFIELD PARK. I47

“ Do not act an in im , m deer,” aid
Lady Bennm. “ygir BThomould' not like it.
F Inn-y, ring the bell ; I mun luvs my dinner. To be
our: ulin in dreued by thin time.”

“ I In convinced, madam,” mid Edmund. yrevent-
in; Funny, “ that Sir Thom would not like It.”

“ Tame, my dear, do you hear what Edmund
lye ?

“If I wen to decline the part," aid Muia, with
renewed lell, “ Julia would certainly take it.”

“ Wl’lll l ” cried Edmund, “ if the knew your
Malone! ”

“ Oh I Ihc might think the difference between Ill—-
the difference in our lituntione—that :5: need not be In
warden- " I might feel neceuary. I am lure uhe
w dargueoo. oryoumunexculemeglcannot
mumymmtgithmﬁrnnlﬁeverybody
would be no disappointed, Tom would be quite nngry ;
and ifwe are In very nice, we Ihall newer nct mything.”

“ I wu going to my the very lame thing," nid
Mn Norris. “ If every play in m be objected to, you
will let nothing. and the preplmionl will be all to
much money thrown awn , and I am euro Ibat wouldbe
I diocredit to Ill all. I not know the phy ; but, In
.Mnrinu gifthereil Ill ' 3- little wowann Rand
itnowi mouofthem)ltcanbeeuilyleftout. e
mult not be over precne, Edmund. Al Mr Rth-
worth iI to not too, there can he no harm. I only
wilh Tom had known hip own mind when the carpen-
ten begin, for there was the loci of half I dny'n work
ebout Ihoee aide-doom. The cunlin will he a
job, however. The nnidn do their work very well,
IndIthinkweulnllbe nhletoeend hocklomednuna
oftheringl. Thereinnoocouionto tthennovery
clone together. I am of norm use, I one, in prevent-
ing wane Ind making the molt of tinny. There

I43 IANSHILD PAIL

ahouldalwayaheonemdyheadtoorperintendao
ny young one. I forgot to tell Tom of aomething
that happened to me thin day. I had been looking
about me in the ultry m and wan coming out,
when who ahoul I tee but Dick Jackson making to
the Iervanu’ hall-door with two bite of deal in
hia hand, bringing them to father, you may be lure;
mother had chanced to tend him of a meange to father,
and Lllﬂl father had bid him bring up them two hit: of
board, for he could not no how do without them. I
knew what all thin meant, for the aervanta‘ dinner-bell
wan ringing at the very moment over our head: 3 and u
I hate Inch encroaching people (the Jackeonl ate very
encroaching, I have alwa laid to: jun the I)": of
peopletoget all they any I aid to the boy directly
(a great lubberly fellow of ten ean old, you know, who
ought to be uhamed ofhimoelf); ‘I'ﬂtaketheboarde
to your father, Dick, to get you home again at fut u
you can.’ The boy looked very silly, and turned awa
without offering a word, for I believe I might apea
pretty eharp ; and I dare II it will cure him of coming
marauding about the houae or one while. I hate auch
greedineu; to good“ your father in to the family,
em laying the man all the yur round ! ”

nobody wu at the trouble of an answer ; the othen
won returned; and Edmund found that to have en-
deavoured to let them right muet be his only eatitfac-
tion.

Dinner pasted heavily. Mn Norris related again her
triumph over Dick Jackson, but neither lay nor pre-
paration were otherwiee much talked of, or Edmund'a
dim probation wu felt even by hll brother, thou h he
wo d not have owned it. Maria, wanting enry
Crawford'a animating Iupport, thought the auhject better
avoided. Mr Yatet, who was trying to make him-elf
agreeable to Julia, found her gloom lenl impenetrable on

IANSHILD PARK. 1 49

Any topic than that of hie regret at her Ieceuion frvm
their company; end Mr Rulhworth, having only hie
own pnrtandhipowndreqinhiaheadﬁadmnﬂllud
away all that could he aid of either.

But the concernl of the theatre were Iquended only
for an hour or two: there war Itill l great deal to be
Iettled; and the irite of evening giving fmh courage,
Tom, Maria, undfiir Yates, noon after their being re-
Iuembled in the drawin -room, leaked themeelvel in
committee at I aepnme le, with the play n before
them. and were juet getting deep in the Iubject, when
n moat welcome interruption wu given by the entrance
of Mr and Mite Crawford, who, late and dark. and
dirty u it wan, could not help coming, and were received
with the moat grateful joy.

“Well, how do you go on 2 ” and “ What have you
Iettled 1’ " and “ Oh! we can do nothing without you,"
followed the {int nlutationl; and Henry Crawford wan
noon eeated with the other three at the table, while hie
either made her way to Lady Bertram, and with leuant
attention was complimenting ber. " I mutt reuﬁy con-
grntulate your Iadyehip,” laid ahe, “on the plny being
chain; or though you huve home it with exemplnry

'ence, I urn tune you mutt be lick of all our mine and
diﬂicultiee. The actorl mlybe glld, but the by-nnden
mm be inﬁnitely more thunkful for a decision; and I
do Iincerely give 'you joy, madam, an well up Mr-
Norriu, and everybody elle who ll in the lame redica-
ment.” glancing half fearfully, hulf alily, beyon Funny
to Edmund.

She wu- very civilly answered by Lady Bertram, but
Edmund aid nothing. Hie being only I by-nander
vru not diaelairned. Alter continuin in chat with the
party round the ﬁre a few mintuet, in Crawford re-
turned to the party round the table; and mnding by
them, leemed to interest herqu in their amngernenu

I 50 MANSFIELD PARK.

till, a ifetruck by: hidden recollection. Ihe exclaimed.
“My good friend; you In molt corn y It work
upon thene cottage-and nle-houmﬁmi nodout; but
pn ,letmeknowmyﬁreinthemeenwhile. Who in
to lie Anhalt? Whnt gentleman among you am I to
have the plenum of making love to 2”

For n moment no one he; and then mny spoke
together to tell thenme anchol truth, that they had
not yet got any Anhnlt. “ Mr lIuehworth wan to he
v Count Cartel, but no one had yet undertakes: Anhnlt."

“ I had my choice of the para,” mid Mr Ruohworth |
“ but I thought I ehould like the Count hen, though I
do not much relieh the ﬁnery I am to have.”

“ You choee very wirely, I nun sure,” replied Miu
Crawford, with a brightened look; “Anlult it I heavy
part."

" 'l‘br Could he two-und-l'ort rpecehce," returned
Mr Rmhworth, “which in no tri e.’

“ I Im not at all Iurprined," laid Min Crawford,
after a Ihort pan-e, “at thin want of In Anhnlt. Amelia
deserves no better. Such a forward young My my
well frighten the men."

“I should be but too happy in taking the part, if it
were dble,” cried Tom ; “ but. unluckily, the Butler
Ind nhalt are in together. I will not entirely ive it
up, however; I will try what can he done—I wil look
it over again."

“ Your barber ehould take the part," said Mr Yatei.
in n low voice. “ Do not on think he would? ”

“ I Ihall not ask him,’ replied Tom, in n cold,
determined manner.

Min Crawford talked of something clue, and soon
afterward: rejoined the party at the ﬁre.

“Th do not want me at all," said the, seating her-
relf. “ only puzzle them, and oblige them to make
civil speeches. Mr Edmund Bertram, a you do not

MANSFIELD PARK. I 5 I

not youndf, you will be a dilintereeted adviser; Ind,
therefore,l apply to you. Whnt ahall we do for an
Anhalt? In it practicable {or any of the othen to
double it? What in r advice.”

“My advice," uni he calmly, “in that you change
m ‘l,

"Pigeth have no objection," ahe replied; “for
though I ahould not plmculul didike the port of
Amalie, if well Iupported, the is, if everything went,
well. I Ihall be eorry to he an inconvenience; but on
they do not chooee to heir advice at the tall:
(looking round), it certainly ' not be taken."

Ed;nnnd If no more. I

“I my rtcouldtemtyutoaet, mppooeit
would he Aplihalt," oblervEd the lady nrchly, after I
Ihortrnle ; “ for he in a clergyman, you know.”

“ In! circumnce would by no mean. tempt me,"
he replied, “for I Ihould be oorrytomakethecharuter
ridiculoua by bad acting. It mun he very difﬁcult to
k Anhalt from a peering a formal, solemn lecturer;
Incipthe man who chooeel the profusion itoelf, in. per-
hnpn, one 3! the lut who would Willi to rcprcnent it on
the Itn e.

- Mi: Crawford was Iilenced, and with some feeling. of
resentment Ind mortiﬁcau'on, moved her chair con-ider-
ably nearer the tea-uhle, and gave all her attention to
Mn Norrie, who wae preliding there.

“ Fanny,” cried Tom Bertram, from the other table,
where the conference wu eagerly carrying on, and the
oonverutinn inceuant, "we want your services."

Fanny wan u in a mot, expecting some emnd ;
for the hehit o emplo in her in that way wu not yet
overcome, in Ipite of that Edmund could do.

“Ohl we do not want to dilturb you from your
neat. We do not want your pram! eervicee. We shall

only wont you in our play. You mutt he Cotuge'r’o

wl e."

152 NANSIIILD PARK.

“ Mel cried Funn , ﬁtting down nglin with a mod
frightened look. “ ndeed you must excune me. I
could not manything ifyouweremgivemetheworld.
No, indeed, I cannot not. ’

“Indeed, but you mun, for we cannot excule you.
It need not frighten you; it i: nnmhingofnpmn
mere nothing, not above half-a-dnzen lpeeche- Alto-
gether. and it will not much Iignify if nobody hurl a
word you ray, I0 you may be u creep-mule a you
like, but we must have you to look at."

u If you Ire afraid of half-a-dozen when," cried
Mr Rulhworth. “ what would on do with ruch a port
on mine? I have forty-two to earn."

“It it not that I am afraid of learning by heart,”
said Fanny, ehoclted to ﬁnd henelf It that moment the
only rpeaker in the room, and to feel that almost every
eye war upon her; “ but I really cannot let."

“Yet, yen, you can act well enough for m. Learn
your pm, and we will teach an all the ten. You have
only two Icenee, and u I rha be Cottager, I ’ll put u
in and pooh you about, and you will do it very well, I?"
answer for it.”

a No, indeed, Mr Bemm, you must excuse me.
You cannot have an idea. It would be abeolutely im-

'ble for me. If I were to undemke it. I rhould
only dinppoint you.”

“ Phoo! Phoo! Do not be no Ihamefaced. You '1]
do it very well. Every Illowence will be made for

on. We do not expect perfection. You mun get u

mwn gown, and I white 31mm, and a mob cap, and
we mun make you a few wrinkles, and u little of the
crownfoot It the comer of your eyes, and you will be a
very mper, little old woman."

u ou must excuee me, indeed you mun excule me,”
cried Fanny, growing more and more red from excessive
agitation, and looking diumnﬁdly at Edmund, who was

IANSHELD Mix. 153

kindly nbeerving her; but unwilling to exaepente hie
brother h interference, gave her only an encouraging
mile. er entreaty had no effect: on Tom; he only
eeid egein what he had raid before, and it wee not
merely Tom, for the requieition will now backed by
Maria, end Mr anfo'n‘l, and Mr Yam, with In
urgency which differed from hie but in being more
gentle or more ceremonioue, and which altogether wne
quite overpowering to Funny; and before ehe could
breathe nfter it, Mn Norrie completed the whole, by thue
eddreeeing her in e wbieper It once angry and audible:
—"Whue e 'ece of work here ie about nothin , I am
quite of you, Fanny, to make Inch 3 'ﬂiculty
of obliging your coueinu in a triﬂe of thin eon—co kind
aetheyereto you! Takethepartwithegoodgnce,
and let us hear no more of the matter, I entrent."

“ Do not urge her, madam," mid Edmund. “ It in
not fair to urge her in this manner. You eee ehe does
not like to act. Let her chooee for hereelf, 3. well a:
the reet of ue. Her judgment may be quite ne enfer
tux-ted. Do not urge her any more.”

“I em no: going to urge her," replied Mre Norrie
eherpl ; “but ehell think her I very obetineee, un-
gn girl, if ehe does not do what her run: end
coueine wish her; very ungrateful, indeed, considering
who end whet the in."

Edmund vial too angry to epeak; but Miu Crawford
looking for e moment with netoniehed eye at Mre
Norrie, end then It Fanny, whole teen were beginning
to ehow themeelvee, immediately aid, with eome keen-
ueee, “I donotlike my eituation; thie‘ﬁlauir too hot
for me," and moved ewey her cheir to eiteeide
of the table, clone to Fuzz-y, laying to her, In a kind,
low whieper, er the plnc henel , “Never mind, my '
deer Mine Price, thie ie e croee evening; everybody ie
croee end telling, but do not let us mind them i" and

l 54 MANSFIELD PARK.

withpointedauention continuedtohlktoherand
endeawur to nine her apiriﬂ, in tpite of being out of
Ipirita her-elf. By a look at her brother, the prevented
any farther entrenty from the theatrical board, and the
really good feeling: by which the wet almon ulely
governed, were rapidly remring her to all the linlie the
had loot in Edmund’a favour.

Fanny did not love Min Crawford; but the felt
very much obliged to her for her pretent kindneaa; and
when, from taking notice of her work, and withing :5:
could work aa well, and begging for the pattern, and
auppoaing Fanny waa now preparing for her appearance,
In of course Ihe would come out when her couain wu
man-ied, Miu Crawford proceeded to in uire ifahe had
heard larer from her brother at let, an laid that the
had quite a curiotity to lee him, and imagined him a
very line young man, and adn'acd Fanny to get if»
picture drawn before he went to lea ngain,—ahe could
not help admitting it to be very agreeable ﬂattery, or
help linening, and amwering with more animation than
the had intended.

The coutultation upon the fplay ttill went on, and
Mill Crawford'a attention waa rat called from Fanny,
by Tom Bertnm’a telling her, with inﬁnite regret, that
he found it absolute] impouible for him to undertake
the part of Anhult in addition to the butler: he had
been man anxiously trying to make it out to be feaaible,
but it would'not do; he must give it up. “ But there
will not be the mallett dilliculty in ﬁlling it,” he added.
“We have but to vpeak the word; we may pick and
chooce. I could name, at thia moment, at lean aix
youngmenwithinaixmilel ofnqwho arewild to be
admitted into our company, and there are one or two
that would not diagrace nag I Ihould not be afraid to
trim either of the Oliver-a or Charlea Maddox. Tom
Oliver ia a very clever fellow, and Charlet Maddox ll

msrrm pan. 1 5 5

n entlenunlilte a nun no you will aee anywhere, no I

' take my horse rly to-morrow morning, and ride
over to Stoke, and nettle with one of them.”

While he apoke, Maria was looking apprehensiver
round at Edmund in full expectation that he mm
oppoee Inch In enlargement of the plan an thin: Io
contrary to all their lint pmtenationa; but Edmund
laid nothing. After a moment’a thought, Mi- Craw-
ford calmly replied, “ A- far as I am concerned, I can
have no objection to anything that you all think eligible.
Have I ever teen either of the gentlemen? Yen, Mr
Charles Maddox dined at my litter’l one day, did not
he, Hen ? A quiet looking young man. I re-
member him. Let bin- be applied to, if you pleaoe, for
it will be leu unpleasant to me than to have a perfect
manger.”

Charlee Maddox wat to be the man. Tom repeated
hil relolution of going to him early on the marrow;
and thou h Julia, who had Icarcely opened her lipe
before, rved, in a tam-tic manner, and with a
ﬁance ﬁrst at Maria, and then at Edmund, that “the

anaﬁeld theatrical: would enliven the whole neigh-
bourhood cxceedin ly," Edmund etill held hia peace,
and ahowcd hie feelings only by .1 dctcmrincd gravit .

“I am not very sanguine u to our play," laid Mia
anford, in an under voice to Fanny, after acme con-
aidentiong “ and I can tell Mr Maddox that I shall
ahorten tome of In} speeches, and a great many of my
own, before we rehearse together. It will be very dia-
ngreeable, and by no means what I expected."

I. L

r 56 KANSHILD PARK.

charm 517].

T wan not in Mice Crawford’a power to talk Farm
into any real forgetfulnen of what had
Whentheeveningwuover,nhewent to bed ﬁll!

of it, her nerve: mill agitated by the duck of ouch an
attack from her couain Tom, no public and no penevered
in, end her cpiritl Iinltin under her aunt’a unkind re-
ﬂection and reproach. o be called into notiCe in ouch
a manner, to hear that it won but the prelude to nome-
thing an inﬁnitely wane, to be told that the mun do
what wan co impouible an to act; and then to have the
charge of obetinacy and ingntitude follow it, enforced
with Iuch a hint at the dependence of her situation. had
been too diatreuing at the time to make the renumbrance
when ll”: will ulonc much lcu no, eqicciully with the
Illpcratlded dread of what the morrow might produce
in continuation of the Iubjeet Min Crawford had
protected her only for the time 3 and if the were applied
to again among themaelm with all the authontan've
urgency that Tom and Maria were capable of. and
Edmund perhape awa , what nhnuld the do? She fell

before the could anawer the question, and found
it quite a puzzling when the awoke the next morning.
The little white attic, which had continued her sleeping
room ever since her ﬁm entering the family, proving
incompetent to luggelt any reply, the had recoum, u
noon at the war dreued, to another apartment more
apacioua and more meet for walking about in and think-
ing, and of which she had now for tome time been
almort equally mietreu. It had been their Ichool-
room; so called till the Min Bemama would not
allow it to be called to any longer, and inhabited a:
Inch to a later There Min Lee had lived,
and there they had read and written, and talked and

MANSFIELD PARK. 15']

laughed, till within the lat three yearn, when the had
grained” Timmomhadthenbecomeuuleqand
amnetime waa quite deaerted, exceptby Fanny, when
the viaited her planta, or wanted one of the book,
which the wee etill glad to there, from the
deﬁciency of vpace and aceornm don in her little
‘ chamber above: hut gradually, at her value for the
comfortrof it increued, ahe had Iddedto herpouee-
lion, and tpent more of her time there; and having
nothing to her, had no naturally and lo utlenly
worked he f into it, that it war now generally
ndmitteclto be hel’a. TheEan room,aait hadbeen
called ever Iinoe Maria Bertram was aixteen, wan now
conlidered Fanny’s, almoat u decidedlyaa the white
mic: the unallneu of the one making the nae of the
other to evidently reaannehle, that the Mira Berta-arm,
with ev nu nority in their own asartmenta, which
their ovjiiy Jeri: of wperiorit coul demand, were
tirel approving it; and Norrie, having eti-
pula for there never being a ﬁre in it on Fanny'a
account, we tolerath reeigned to her having the ute
of whet nobody elle wanted, though the term in
which ahe aometirnee tpoke of the indulgence nemed
to imply that it war the heat room in the home.

The upect war no favourable, that even without a
lire it wu habitable in many In early ring and late
autumn morning, to luck I willing min a: Fanny’a;
and while there was a gleam of Iunahine, the hoped
not to be driven from It entirely, even when winmr
came. The comfort of it in her home of leiaure Wan
extreme. She could go there after anything unpleaaant

' below, and find immediate conrolatian in name gunuit,
or come train of thought at hand. Her plants, her
boob—of which the had been a collector from the
ﬁm hour of her commanding a Ihilling—her writing-
delk, and her worlu of charity and ingenuity. were all

158 msnlu) PARK.

withinherreech; or if indiapoetd for employment,“
nothing but Inning would do, the could Icemer lee
“object in that room which had not In interning
manhunt! connected with it. Everythin me a
ﬁnd, or bore her thought: tn 1 friend; In though
there hedheen norm:de much ofeulfering to her;
Whamotim hldofren been mieundemoodﬂm
feelin and her comprehemion under-
valued: though the had known the pain- of tyranny,
of Mink, and neglect; yet almost every recurrence
of eitha had led to unmet-lung connoletory ; her aunt
Bertram had epoken for her, or Mile Lee had been
enooun 'ng. or, what wax yet more frequent or more
den, Eilmund had been her champion end her friend;
he had my rted her came or expleined her meaning;
he m ml: her not to I: ,or had given her name
roof of :ﬂ'cction which e her teen delightﬁrl, end
the whole wan now so blended together, no harmonized
b dimncc, that every former afﬂiction had its charm.
he mom we: moot dear to her, and the would not
I”, chased in furniture for the handwmeet in the
W, though what had been originally plain, had
“ﬁnd 311 the ill-unge of children; and in greateet
deg-main and ornaments were a faded foomool of
hug. work, too ill done for the drawing-room, three
min, made in a rage for mneparenciee, for
mmMJower panel of one window, where Tintem
held in nation between I cave in Ital anda

ight hike in Cumberland, a collection 0 limin

ﬂu, thought un‘worthy of being anywhere else;

m mantel-piece, and by their side, and pinned
me!“ me well, a small aketch of a my: sent four
' . from the Mediterranean by mum, win.
“,3. Antwap It the bottom, in lettere u tall at

“gin-mun

To chi- nest of comfortl Fanny now walked down

MANSFIELD PARK. [59

to t]? its inﬂuence on an agitated, doubting spirit, to
see ' by looking at Edmun ’s proﬁle she could catch
any of his counsel, or by giving air to her geranium-
she might inhale I breeze of mental strength herself.
But she had more than fears of her own rseserance
or remove: she had begun to feel undeci as to what
she ought Ii) do,- and as she walked round the room her
doubts were increasing. Was she rigb! in refusing
what Wu so warmly asked, so strongly wished for——
what might be so essential to a scheme on which some
of those to whom she owed the greatest com lsisance
had set their hearts? Was it not ill-nature, se fishness,
and s fear of exposing herself i And would Edmund’s
judgment. would his persuasion of Sir Thomas’s dis-
a probation of the whole, be enough to justify her in a
etetmined denial in spite of all the rest? It would he
so horrible to her to act, that she was inclined to suspect
the truth and urity of her own scruples; and as she
looked around er, the claims of her cousins to being
obliged were strengthened by the sight of present upon
resent that she had received from them. The table
the windows was covered with work-boxes
and netting-boxes which had been given her at difth
times, principally by Tom] and she grew bewildered
as to the amount of the debt which all these kind remem-
brances‘produced. ‘ A tap at the door mused her in the
midst 0 this attempt to ﬁnd her way to her duty, and
her gentle “ come in ” was answered by the appearance
of one, before whom all her doubts were wont to be
laid. Her eyes brightened at the sight of Edmund.
"Can I speak with you, Fanny, for a few minutes?”
said he. r
“ Yes. certainly."
“I want to consult. I want your opinion."
" My opinion] " she cried, shrinking from such a
compliment, highly as it gratiﬁed her.

:60 mum nut.

“Yen, advice and I do not know
what to dmm'l‘hi: acting tcheme get: wane and wane,
yon-ea. Theyluvechoeenllmo‘ulldnphyu
gnin to uk the n nun very ‘
knovenwanyofu. I’Thiaiaytl‘i‘e'meiidnl'all_the
and which was talked about 3! lim. know
no hnrm of Charles Maddox; but the exoeuive
intimacy which mutt upring from hi- heing admitted
among III in this manner it highly objectionable, the
m than intimacy—the ﬁmil'm-ity. I cannot think of
itwithanypatienee; anditdnelnppear tour.- an evil
of Inch magnitude at mug? poi-riﬂe, be plevented.
Do not it lee it in the lame light?"

“Yet; bntwhnt can he done? Ymnbrotherino
determined?"

“There ll but one thing to be done, Fanny. I mutt
take Anhalt mytelf. I am well aware that nothing elte
will quiet Tom."

Fanny could not nn-wer him. ’

“ It in not It all what I like," he continued. “No
man can like being driven into the WW! of Inch
incan-‘atency. After being known to oppoee the
echeme from the beginning, there ll Ibturdity in the
{we of my joining them now, when they are exceeding
their ﬁm plan in every telpect; but I can think ofno
other Iltemative. Can you, Fanny I ”

“No,” mid Fanny Ilawly, '‘not immediately,
but "

“ But what? I tee your judgment in not with me.
Think it: little over. Perhan you are not to much
aware an I am of the mischief that may, of the un-
plemntneu that mutt arise from a oung man'l being
received in thin manner; domemuted among \u;
unthorized to come at all houn, and placed suddenly
on a footing which must do away all ruminu.

 

numeral.» PARK. :61

To think only of the license which eve rehenml
mun tend to create. It in all very bndl ut yourIelf
in Mint anford’l place, Funny. Conﬁder what it
would he to act Amelia with n Itnnger. She ha- a
right to be felt for, beenuae nhe evidently feel; for
heroelf. I hetrd enough of whet the said to you Int
night, to undemmd her unwillingness to be acting with
l mu r; Ind u the probebly engaged in the part
with d’ t expectation—perm!» without coneidering
the lubject enough to know what was likely to he-—it
would be no nemul. it would be really wrong to
expoee her tort. Her feeling- ought to be respected.
Doe! it not strike you so, Fanny? You hesitate.”

“ I am lorry for Mice anford; but I am more
lorry to lee you drawn in to do what you had reeolved
tguinet, end what you are known to think will be die-
Igreeable to my uncle. It will be Inch 1 triumph to
the otherII "

“They will not have much cause of triumph when
they nee ow infamouuly I act. But, however, trium h

‘there certainly will be, Ind. I muot bnwe it. But ' I
can be the mount of remaining the publicity of the
Mine... of limiting the exhibition, of concentrating our
folly, I ehnll be well repaid. Al I am now. I have no
inﬂuence, I can do nothing: I have offended them, and
theywillnot hear me; butwhen I have put themin
good humour thin cancel-ion, I am not without
hope- of pernndmg them to conﬁne the nomination
within 1 much emailer circle than they are now in the
high road for. Thin will be u mnterinl gain. My
object in to conﬁne it to Mn Ruthworth end the
Gnnte. Will not thin be worth gaining?”

“ Yet, it will be I grelt point."

" But still it hu not your I rohau‘on. Can you
mention Inynther rneuure byw eh I hve uchnnce
of doing equal good 1 ”

162 tunsnzu) PARK.

“ No. I moot think of anything clue." ~

“Give me your appmhauon, then, Funny. I am
not comfortable without it."

“ 0h, admin I " f

“If ouareagalnat' me,I ought to diatrul m eel,
and yety ———-. But it in nhoolutely impo-ihle t!) let
Tom go on in thin way, riding about the country in
queat of anybody who can be ed to let—no
matterwhom: thelooltofngen emaniatobeenoﬁl:
I thought you would have entered more into '
Crawford'l feelinga."

"No doubt the will be very glad. It muat be a
great relief to her," said Fanny, trying for greater
warmth of manner.

“ She never a peered more amiable than in her
behaviour to you at night. It gave her a very strong
claim on my good-will." '

“ She war very kind, indeed, and I am glad to have
her tparod—"

She could not ﬁnial: the generous eﬁ‘ution. Her
oonacience mpt her in the middle, but Edmund wu
Iatiaﬁed.

“I ahall walk down immediately after breekfut,"
laid he, “and am lure of giving pleasure there. And
now, clear Fanny, I will not interrupt you any longer.
You want to be reading. But I could not be only till
I had ken to you, and come to a decition. Sleeping
or waking, my head he been full of thin matter all
night. It it an evil, but I am certainly making it le-
than it might be. If Tom ll up, I [hall go to him
directly and get it over, and when we meet at breakfant
we shall be all in high good humour at the prospect of
acting the fool together with such unanimity. Tau in
the meanwhile will be taking a trip into China, I up-
pote. How doea Lord Macartney go on? (opening a
volume on the table and then taking up aome others)

MANSFIELD PARK. 163

And here Ire Cnbbe'e Tales, and the Idler, It hand
to relieve you, if you tire of your great book. I admire
your little embluhment exceedingly; and u noon u
Ilm gone, you will empty our head of Ill thin non-
IeIue of acting, Ind nit comgmbly down to your table.
But do not my here to be cold."

He went; but there wa- no retding, no China, no
oompolure for FInny. He had told her the moat
extrwrdinary, the molt inconceivable, the mon un-
welcome newe; and she could think of nothing elee.
To be actingl Alter Ill hie objectionI—ob' 'one
aojultnnd In public! After all that Ihe ha heard
him lay, and Ieen him look, and known him to be
feeling. Could it be possible? Edmund no incon-
Iirtentl Wu he not deceiving himself ? Wan
he not wrong? Alan! it wan all Mill Crawford’u
doing. She had teen her inﬂuence in eve lpeech,
and via: nﬁnerable. The doubts and 3mm u
to her own conduct, which had previourly dime-led
her, end which had all dept while ehe listened to him,
were become of little‘oonlequence now. Thin deeper
anxiety mellowed them up. Thingl Ihould take their
couree; Ihe cared not how it ended. Her cousin-
might attack, but could hardl teaee her. She wan
beyond their reach ; and if at lit obliged to yield—no
matter—4t win all minery now.

chum $173].

It wu, indeed, it triumphant day to Mr Bertmm and
Marin. Such a victory over Edmund’l dilcretion had
been 'heyond their hapee, and we: molt delightful.
Time wu no longer nnything to diaturb them in their
darling project, and they congratulated each other in

r64 MANSFIELD max.

'neeonthe'plouwuknnlovhieh attributed
mechange,withlll the offeelinmnﬁﬁedin
"Byway. Edmund mightuilllook [remand-ayhe
didnotlihetheecbemeingenenhmdmﬁdinppmve
theplayin panicular; their pointwu ' xhe‘nl
tougmdhewudrivenwitbythe ofeelﬁlh
inclination: only. Edmund had daeended from that
man! Elev-Lion which he had maintained before, Ind
lheywerebothumuchthebeneruthehaypierforthe

m?
behaved well, however, la Eur on the
occuion, ‘ng :zryunltation beyond the line: about
thecorneno themouth,andeeemedmthinkitu
ﬂeet en «capers be nit of the inundan of Charlee
nddox, u if they he been forced into ldrnining him
again their inclination. “ To have it quite in their
own fumin circle wu what they had prticnlarly wiahed.
A Itnn among them would have been the destruc-
ﬂora of Itheir comfort ; ” and when Edmund, puming
thlt idea, gave a hint of hie hope a to the limitation of
theeudience, they were ready, in the corn Ininnee of the
mat, to pro-nine an 'ng. It was good humour
end encouragement. I: Norrie offered to contrive hie
drag Mr Yam natured him that Anhnlt’l [an eeene
withtheBuonadmitted: gooddealofactionand
«mania, and Mr Rushwonh undertook to count hie

hen.

NPuhape," aid 'l‘om, “Fanny may be more die-
to oblige In now. Perhaps you may pemade
)3

‘No. the in quite determined. She certainly will
“ m.»

“Ohl very well." And not another word waa
'1; but Funny felt henelf again in danger, and her
Woe to the danger wan beginning to fail her
M-

uausnnw PARK. :65

There were not fewer smiles at the Parsonage than
st the Pork on this change in Edmund; Miss Crawford
looked very lovely in her’s, and entered with such an
imnuneoua renewal of cheerfulne- into the whole
affair, r could have but one effec‘t‘ejn him. “ He VIII.
certain ri ht in respectin such in i he was ad
he hsdydetgermined on it. ' And thE. morning \Eore
away in atisfactions very sweet, if not very sound.
One sdvanta e resulted from it to Fanny; at the earnest
request of Crawford, Mrs Grant had, with her
uauvd good humour, agreed to undertake the part for
which Fanny had been wanted, and this was all that
occurred to gladden her heart during the day; and even
this, when im rted by Edmund, brought a pang with
it, for it was iss Crawford to whom she was obliged;
it was Miss Crawford whose kind exertions were to
excite her gratitude, and whose merit in making them
was spoken of with a glow of admiration. She was
safe; but peace and safety were unconnected here.
Her mind had been never farther from peace. She
could not feel that she had done wmn herself, but she
was disquieted in every other way. or heart and her
jur‘llgment were equally against Edmund’s decision: she
00 d not acquit his unstesdiness, and his happiness
under it made her wretched. She was full of jealousy
and agitation. Miss Crawford csme with looks of
gaiety which seemed an insult. with friendly expressions
towards herself which she could hardly answer cslmly.
Everyhrgl around her wsa gay and bus , pros-
perous im rant; each had their object o interest,
their part, therr dress, their favourite scene, their friends
and confederatea : all were ﬁnding employment in con-
sulhtions and comparisons, or diversion in the playful
conceits they suggested. She alone was ad and in-
signiﬁcant; the had no share in anything; the might go
or say; she might be in the midst of their noise, or re-

I66 trnrrsnun PARK.

true from it to the lolitnde of the Em mom, without
bein teen or mind. She could aim think anything
vro dhavebeenprefmbletothia. Mn Camera
of ooneequence: bugood nature had honourable men-
tion: her lane end her time were coneidered; her

on wanted; the win nought for and mended,
and ' ; and Funny war It lint in tome danger of
envymg her the character the had accepted. Butle-
ﬂection brought better feelings. and Ihewed her that Mn
Grant wan entitled to respect, which could never have
belonged to bet ,- and that, had the received even the
greaten, the could never have been my in joining a
Icheme which, oonridering only her uncle, the mun
condemn altogether.

Fanny’v heart was not abeolutely the only widened
one unon them, at the noon began to acknowledge
to hem-l . Julia we a mftrerﬁoo. though not quite
to blamele-ly.

Henry Crawford had triﬂed with her feelingl; but
the had very lon allowed, and even nought hie atten-
tiool with a j only of her litter no reaaonahle an
ought to have beer. their cure; and now that the
conviction of hi! preference for Maria had been forced
on her, the Iubmitted to it without any alarm for
Muia’t lituation, or any endeavour at rational tranquil-
lity for henelf. She either rat in gloomy silence, wrap:
in vuch gravity no nothing could subdue, no curionit
much, no wit amute; or allowing the attention of r
Yates wll talking with forced gaiety to him alone, and
ridiculing the acting of the others.

For I day or two after the Ifﬁont was given Henry
(hle had endeavoured to do it away by the noun]
"‘1 of gallantry and compliment, but he had not
and mgh about it to pertevere against a few re-

; Ind becoming soon too buy with his play to
“Ring for more than one ﬂirtation, he grew indif-

msnm Mn. :67

ferent to the quarrel, or rather thought it a lucky
occurrence, aa uietly putting an end to what might ere
long have rai expectation in more than Mn Grant.
She waa not pleated to lee Julia excluded from the play,
and ﬁtting by dinregarded; hut ea it war not a matter
which really involved her ineu, u Henry rnuat he
thebeotjudge ofhiaown, uhediduoureher,with
Imolt 'nnﬂqdratnddrerhenorJuliahld
ever I Ierioru thought of each other, the could only
renew her former caution a to the elder timer, entreet
himnot to ridrhiatrln uillitybytoomuchadrniratiuu
dugmdthenghdlytle her share in anything that
brought cheerfulne- to the young le in geoeral,lnd
that did 00 particularly promote the p calm of the two
to dear to her.

“I uther wonder Juliu in not in love with Henry,"
via her observation to

“ I dare say the la," replied Mary coldly. “ I
imagine both I'm are."

“Both! no,no,that mun notbe. Do not giveth
a hint of it. Think of Mr Rudworthl "

“YouhadbmermﬂMiuBemm to thinkoer

Rfuahworth. It may do her nmdgoog. Ioften think
0 Mr Ruahworth’a mperty an in ependence, and
wiah then in other haiidu but I never think of Hm.
Amanrnight representtheeountywith larch-name;
a nunfrightuape a profeu'on and represent the
count . ’
“I’dareuayhewr'ﬂhe in parliament soon. When
SirThornu com! dare n hewillheinforeome
hmough,hnttherehaaheen ytoputhirninthe
way of doing anything yet."

“SirThornu ll to achieve my mighty thin when
hemhorne,"-idMary,nftera nae. “ you
remember Hawkins Browne’- ‘Adﬁu 1» TM}
in of Pope i—

I68 umnlu) mu.

‘ Bleak In“ whom around: dlepenre
To Templar: unduly, to Pﬁm Ielue.‘

[will parody them—

Bleat Knightl whore dictatorial looh dhpenn
To Children names, to Runhworth aenu.

Will not that do, Mn Grant? Everythin reemr to
upon Sir Thomu'c mm." a

“You will ﬁnd hia con oe veryy'uat and renou-
able when you nee himinl'l: family. uaure ou. I
do not think we do so well without him. e ha. a
ﬁne digniﬁed manner, which ruin the head of ouch a
hmrae, and keeps everybody in tlu-ir place. Lndy Ber-
tram teem more of a cypher now than when he in at
home; and nobody elte can It Mn Norrie in order.
‘But, Mary, do not fancy that aria Bertram carea for
Henry. I am lure Julia doe. not, or the would not
have ﬂirted n Ihe did but night with Mr Yam; and
though he and Maria are very good friendn, I think the
like. Sothenon too well to he inconltant."

“I would not give much for Mr Ruhworth'l
chance, if Henry ltept in before the Irticlea were
r ’I ‘

. qu you have ruch a ruupicion, aomething must he
do"; and an won an the play ll all over, we will talk
m him Icl'lmllly, and make him know hir own mind;
and if he mean. nothing, we will lend him oﬁ‘, though
he i, Hen , for a time. ’ .

Juli, 4.17 golfer, however, though Mn Grunt drocerned
. g Ind though it eocaped the notice of runny of her
" "° -,. likewine. She had loved, ahe did love still,
Mme had all the ruffering which a warm temper and
Ind. h Wm. were likely to endure under the disap-
I l“ I or a dear, though irrational hope, with a
l”! n: of ill-unge. Her heart we more and angry,

ﬁg". “Fable only of angry conoolationa. The

unusnnnn PARK. :69

einterwithwhomahewuuledtobeonealytennawunow
become her greetelt enemy: they were alienated from
each other; and Julia was not In 'or to the hope of
lame dimming end to the nttentronr which were Itill
carrying on there, acme punishment to Maria for conduct
no Ihameful townrda herself an well or toward: Mr RIIIl'I-
worth. With no material fault of temper, or difference
of opinion, to prevent their being very good friend- while
their interevu were the name, the Intern, under ouch a
trial at thin, had not affection or principle enough to
make them merciful or juut, to give them honour or
comp-ion. Maria felt her triumph, and pumed her
, careler of Julia; and Julie could never lee
' dietingninhed by Hen Crawford without trun-
ing that it would create any, and bring a public
dieturbance at int.

Funny law and much of thin in Julia; but
there wu no outward fellow-hip between them. Julia
made no communication, and Fanny took no liberties.
They were two aolirary euﬂ'eren, or connected only by
any’l conociousneu. '

The inattention of the two brother- and the aunt to
Julia’l ditcompoeure, and their hiindneu to it: true canoe,
mun be imputed to the fulneu of their own minds.
They were total] preoccupied. Tom wan engde
by the concenu o hu theatre, and saw nothing that did ‘
not immediate] relate to it. Edmund, between hia
theau'iul and his real part—between Miu Crawford’-
clainu and hi: own conduct—between love Ind connin-
ency, waa equally unoblervantg and Mn Norris wan
too buy in contriving and directing the general little
marten of the compan , superintending their variouc
dreuee with economicn expedient, for which nobod
thanked her, and laying, with delighted inte rity, hale
a-crown here and there to the abeent Sir 'Fhomaa, to
have leieure for watching the behaviour, or guarding the
happineu of ill! daughters.

'7‘, IIANSruLo pug.

Cbipm- 1})‘331

VERYTHING was now in a regular train;
theatre, actors. mutt, and dreuel, were all
getting forward; but though no other great int-

pediment. m, Fanny found. before many day- were
that it wu not Ill uninterrupted enjoyment to
the party themaelvet, and that the- had not to wine:
the continuance of Inch unanimity and delight, u had
been about too much for her at lint. Everybod began
tn have their vexaﬁcn. Edmund had many. ltzntirely
gaging bi: judgment, I lane-painter arrived from town,
ad was at work, much to the incrale of the cxpeneet,
and. what was worse, of the «L1! of their roceedingt;
Ind hit brother, instead of being really guided by him
3 m nae privacy of the rcpreeentation, was givin an
invitation to every family who came in hit way. om
“Mt” began to fret over the acene-painter’a tlow pro-
md to feel the miseries of waiting. He had
kned llil part—all his parts, for he took eve triﬂing
me that could be united with the butler, and to
him giant to be acting; and every day thnl unem-
wu tending to increase hil tense of the insigni-
ace of all his part: together, and make him moi-e
My .0 regret that some other play had not been
M , .
Fwy, bung alwaya a very courteoue listener, and
“the only listener at hand, come in for the com- .
v M the distressee of moat of them. 81:: knew
Mr Yam was in general thought to rant dreadfully ;
u u; Yates was diaappointed in Henry Crawford;
“Tom Bertan spoke to quick he would he unin-
- that Mrs Grunt Ipmled everything by laugh-
1..‘ uui Edmund W behind-hand thh hi. part, and
en

3;». a uni: misery w Imve anyming m do with Mr

MANSFIELD PARK. [7!

Ruahworth, who was wanting a prompter through every
speech. She knew, also, that r Mr Rushworth
could seldom get anybody to rem-e with him: hi:
complaint came before her as well as the rest; and so
decided to her eye was he cousin Maria’s avoidance of
him, and so needlessl often the rehearsal of the ﬁrst
scene between her In Mr Crawford. that the had soon
all the tenor of other com Isints from bin. So far
from being all sau'aﬁed and enjoying, she found every-
body requiring something they had not, and giving
occasion of discontent to the others. Everyhod had a
part either too 1025);; too short; nobody woul attend
as they ought; n y would remember on which ide
they were to come In; nobody but the complainer
would observe any directions.

Fanny believed herself to derive as much innocent
enjoyment from the play as any of them ; Henry Craw-
ford acted well, and it was a pleasure to her to creep
into the thestre,snd attend the rehrsal of the ﬁrst act,
in spite of the feelings it exeimd in some t for
Maria. Maria, she also thought, acted we] , too well;
and sfkr the ﬁrst rehearsal or two, Fanny began to be
their only sudience, and sometimes as prompter, some-
times as cuter, was often very useful. As far as
she could udge, Mr Crawford was considenhl the best
actor of Ill; he had more conﬁdence than nnd,
more ‘udgment than Tom, more talent and taste than
Mr ates. She did not like him as a man, but she
must admit him to he the best actor, and on this ' t
there were not many who differed from her. Mr ates,
indeed, exclaimed against his umeness and insipidity:
and the day came at last, when Mr Rushwortls turned
to her with a black look, and said, “ Do you think
there is within so very ﬁne in all this? For the life
and soul 0 me. cannot admire him ; and between our-
selves, to see such an undersized, little, mean-looking

l. M

l 72 lANSl‘Ill—D PARK.

man, let up for a ﬁne actor, in very ridiculoul in my
opinion."
methia momennherewua returnofhilformcr
jalouly, which Maria, from increuing h of Crew-
ford, W at little puine to remove, and 2E:th of
Mr Ruehworth’l ever anaining to the knowledge of his
two-and-forty epeechel became much lea. AI to hit
over making anything ultra”: of them, nobody had the
llnlilm idea of that except hil mother; (be, indeed,
regretted that his part wan not more canliderahle, and
deferred coming over to Mantﬁeld till they were for-
ward enough in their rehearsal to comprehend all hit
Icenel; but the othere upired at nothing beyond his
numbering the catch-word, and the ﬁrst line of his
h, and being able to follow the mpter through
e rent. Fanny, in her pity and kin -heertedneu, wu
at great plinl to teach him how to learn, giving him all
the helpe and direction! in her power, trying to make an
artiﬁcial memory for him. and learning every word of
hiinpart herself, but without his being much the for-
er.

Many uncomfortable, anxioua, apprehenaive feeling:
she certainly had ; but with all thele, and other claims
on her time and attendan, ehe wan II far from ﬁnding
hereelf without employment or utility amongtt them, It
Without a companion in unean'neu; quite at far from
having no demand on her lei-um at on her companion.
The gloom of her ﬁre: anticipation: wu proved to have
been unfounded. She wan occaaionally neeful to all;
die Wu perhapl as much at peace at any.

There wan a great deal of needlework to he done,
moreover, in which her help was wanted; and that Mn
Norrie thought her quite an well off an the rent, wan
evident the manner in which she chimed it:—
‘Come. anny,” ehe cried, “theee are ﬁne time: for
“hot you mm not he alwaye walking from one

nwsnenn run 173

mom to the other, and doing the lookinan at your

> eale, in this wa ; I want you here. I have been alav-
ing In self till can hardlymndto contrive Mr Ruth-
worth I cloak without sending any for more ratio 3 and
now I think you ma ' give me your help in putting it to-
gether. There are t three name, you may do them
in a triee. It would be lucky for me if I had nothing
but the executive part todo. Tn are but off, X on
tell you: but if nobody did more than you, we Ihouid
not get on very fut." '

Fanny took the work very quietl , without “tempting
Iny defence 5 but her kinder nunt ram observed on
her behalf— '

“One cannot wonder, litter, that Fanny 1‘wa be
delighted ; it in all new to her, you know; u and I
need to beveryfondofa phyourlelvegan so amI
Itill; and n won an I am a little more at lei-Ire, I
mean to look in at their reheartalr too. What it the
play about, Fanny, you have never told me? ” ‘

“ 0h! litter. pray do not ask her now; for Fanny
in not one of those who can talk and work It the same
time. It in about Loveru’ Vowl.”

“ I believe," laid F any to her aunt Bertram,
“ there will be three actn rehearsed to-morrow evening,
and that will give you an opportunity of seeing all the
noon at once. ’

"You hid better my till the curtain in hung," in-
terpoeed Mn Norrie; “ the curtain will he hung in a
day or two—there it very little none in a play without
a cumin—and I am much mimken if you do not ﬁnd
it draw up into very handoome feltoom. ’

ley Bertram teen-ted quite resigned to waiting.
Funny did not there her aunt’s eomporure; the thought
of the morrow l great deal, for if the three ncte were
rehearned, Edmund and Mint Crawford would then he
acting together for the tint time ; the third act would

I14 IIANSI'IILD PARK.
bring I teene between them which interetted her mott
particularly, and which the was longing Ind dreadingto
tee how they would The whole of it
wan love—a marriage of lovewat to be deleribed the
gentleman, and very little thort of a declaration love
he made by the lady.

She had read, and read the tcene a ain with many
pninful, many wondering emotiont, and ooked forward
to ' retentation of it u a circummnce tlmort too
intentting. She did not believe they had yet rehearted
It, even in private. _

The morrow came, the plnn Rtr the evening continued,
and Fanny’t consideration of it did not become leu
agitated. She worked very diligently under her nunt’t
directiont, but her diligence and her tileooe concealed I
very abtent, anxiout mind; and about noon the made
her etcape with her work to the Ettt room, that the
might have no concern in another, and, at the deemed
it, most unneceaary rehearsal of the lirtt act, which
Henry Crawford wat jutt propoting, detirout at once of
having her time to hertelf, and of avoiding the tight of
Mr Ruthworth. A glimpte, at the patted through the
hall, of the two ladiet walking up from the Parlonage,
made no change in her with of retreat, and the worked
and mediated in the Eat: room, unditturbed, for a

unrter of an hour, when a entle tap at the door wal
ollowed by the entrance ongiu Crawford.

“ Am I right? Yet; thit ii the Eat: room. My
dear Min Price, I beg your pardon, but I have made
my way to you on purpote to entreat our help.”

Fanny, quite surprised. endeavou to show hertelf
rnittreu of the room by her civilitiet, and looked at the
bright horn of her empty grate with concern.

“ Thank you; I am quite warm, very warm. Allow
me to my here a little while, and do have the goodnett
to hear me my third act. I have brought my book,

—-|

MANSFIILD PARK. 1 75

and il'you would but rehearse it with me, I should be
’ so obliged! I came here w—day intending to rehearse
it with Edmund—by ourselves—against the evening,
but he is not in the wny; and if he were, I do not
think I could go through it with ln'm, till I have
hardened myself I little ; for really there i: a or
two—. You will be so good, won’tyou?’

Fanny was most civil in her assurances, though she
could not give them in a very steady voice.

“Have you ever happened to look at the part I
mean?" continued Miss anford, opening her book.
“ Here it is. I did not think much of it at ﬁrst—hut,
u n my word—. There, look It Ibo! speech, Ind
£1, and (but. How am I ever to look him in the face
and ny ouch things? Could you do it? But then he
is your cousin, which makes all the difference. You
must iehenrue it with me, that I ma Fancy on him,
and get on by degrees. You boo: a wk of some-
tunes.”

“Have I l I will do my best with the greatest
readiness; but I must read the part, for I an so; very
little of it.”

“ None of it, I suppose. You are to have the book.
of course. Now for It. We must have two choirs at
hand for yOu to bring forward to the front of the stage.
There—very good school-room chain, not nude for a
theatre, I dare say; much more ﬁtted for little girls to
sit and kick their feet against when they are learning I
lemn. What would your governess and your uncle my
in see them used for such I purpose l Could Sir
Thomas look in u n us just now, he would bless him-
self, for we are re esrsing Ill over the house. Yates is
storming nway in the dining-room. I heard him no I
came upstairs, and the theatre is engaged of course by
those indefatigable rehnen, Agatha and Frederick.
If lie] are not perfect, I {ball be surprised. By-the-

x 76 Immutn PARK.

bye, I looked in upon them live minute. ago, and it
happened tobeexactlyat oneof the timeewhen they
were trying not to embrace, and Mr Rulbworth W
with me. I thought he began to look a little queer, lo
I turned it of at well u I could, by whirpering to him,
‘ We shall have an excellent Agatha, there in nonethng
to maternal in her manner, IO completely maternal in her
voice and countenance.’ Wan not that well done of
me? He brightened up directly. Now for my

aoliloqu ."

She began, and Fanny joined in with all the modest
feeling which the idea of reprenenting Edmund wan to
urongly calculated to inepire; but with looks and voice
to truly feminine, at to be no very good picture of a
man. With ruch an Anhalt, however, Miu Crawford
had courage enough; and they had got through half
the act-no, when a top at the door brought a pause, and
the entrance of Edmund, the next moment, tulpendtd
it all.

Surprise, consciouaneu, and plea-use, appeared in each
of the three on this unexpected meeting; and as
Edmund was come on the very me bunineta that had
brought Mia: Crawford, coneciouaneu and pleasure were
likely to be more than momentary in them. He, too,
had hit book, and wan necking Fauny,.to ask her to
rehearse with him, and help him to prepare for the
evening, without knowing Mm Crawford to be in the
houae; and great Win the joy and animation of being
that thrown together, of comparing achemee, and lym-
pathizing in praise of F anny'a kind alliCee.

Sb: could not equal them in their warmth. Her mil-it:
tank under the glow of theirs, and the felt herself
becoming too nearly nothing to both, to have any
comfort. in having been sought by either. They must
now rehearse together. Edmund proponed, ur ed,
entreated it, till the lady, not very unwilling at mt,

MANSFIELD PARK. 177

could refuse no longer, and Fanny was wanted only to '
prompt and observe them. She was invested, indeed,
with the ofﬁce of judge and critic, and earnestly desired
to exercise it and tell them all their faults; but from
doing 00 every feeling within her shrank—«he could
not, would not, dared not, attempt it: had she been
otherwise unliﬁed for criticism, her conscience must
have remained her from venturing at dinpprobation.
She believed herself to feel too much of it in the aggre-
gate for honesty or safety in particulars. To prompt
diem must be enough for her; and it was sometimes
more than enough; for she could not always pay atten-
tion to the book. In watching them she forgot herself;
and, agitated by the increasing Ipirit of Edmund's
manner, had once closed the page and turned away
exactly as he wanted help. It was imputed to very
reasonable weariness, and she was thanked and pitied;
but she deserved their ity more than she hoped they ’
would ever surmise. t last the scene was over, and
Fanny forced herself to sdd her pnise to the compli-
ments each VIII 'ving the other; and when again alone,
and able m recal the whole, the was inclined to believe -
their performance would. indeed, have such nnture and
feeling in it as must ensure their credit, and make it a
very suffering exhibition to herself. Whatever mi ht
be its effect, however, she must stand the hnmt o it
again that very day.

The lint regular rehearsal of the three ﬁrst acta was
certainly to take place in the evening: Mrs Grant and
the anfords were engaged to return for that pnrpoee
as soon as they could after dinner; and every one con-
cerned was looking forward with engcmcss. There
seemed a general diKuﬁon of cheerfulnesl on the occa-
sion. Tom was enjoying such an advance towards the
end; Edmund was in spirits from the morning's re-
hearsal, and little vexations seemed everywhere tmoothed »

l 78 IAHSHELD PARK.

away. All were alert and impatient ; the ladiea moved
anon, the gentlemen anon followed them. and with the
exception of Lady Bern-am, Mn Non-in. and Julia,
everybody wan in 'the theatre at an early hour; and,
having lighted it up u well u in unliniahed lute ad-
mitted, were Waiting only the arrival of Mn Grant and
the Crawford! to 'n. -

They did not want long for the anfonda, but there
wu no Mn Grant. She could not come. Dr Grant,
proﬁling.“ indiapoaition, for which he had little credit
with hia ir aiater-in-law, could not apare hit wife.

“ Dr Grunt ll ill," aid Che, with mock aolemnity.
“ He baa been ill ever ainoe he did not at any of the
phmnt to-da . He ﬁnded it tough, eent away hia
plate, and he luli'ering ever aince."

Here was din inunentl Mn Grant’a non-at-
tendnnce we and Indeed. Her plenum mannera and
cheerful conformizy made her alwaya vnluable among-t
them; but m e we nbaolutely neceuary. They
could not act, th could not rehearae with any natio-
t‘action without r. The comfort of the whole
evening VIII deatmyed. What waa to be done?
Tom, at Comger, VII] in despair. After a pauoe of

lexity, acme eyea began to be turned towarda
ﬂu ,and a voice or two to aay, “If Miaa Price
woultlbe to good u to read the part.” She waa
immediately aurroundcd by lupplicationa, everybody
naked it. even Edmund laid, “ Do, Fanny, if it it not

til-agreeable to you.” ’
“gut Fanny still hung back. She could not endure
the ids of it. Why was not Miu Crawford to be
wpﬁed to at well? Or why had not the rather gone
‘0 k.- own room, an Ille had felt to he «feat, inatead
of amding the rehearaal at all? She had known it
“Id irritate and distress her; the had known it her
M, .9 keep away. She wan properly puniahed.

 

MANsnew use. :79

“Ymhaveonl tofmdthe "raid Hen
Crawford, with reryiewed entraty. m '7

“AndIdo believe the can nyeve wordofit,"
added Mark, “ for she could put Mn rant right the
other day in twmty places. Fanny, I an lure you
know the part."

Fanny could not my she did ear,- and on they Ill
relocated, :- Edmund repeated his Willi. and with a
oak of even fond denee on her good nature, the
mint yield. She would do her belt. Everybody was
:du'rﬁedynndnhewulefttothe tremreofamott

' ting hart, while the othen prepared to begin.

112;): did begin; and being too much engaged in
their own noiee to be Itruckbyln, Inal noiee In the
odlerpuﬂofllnhoune,hadp mnemy,when
thedooroftheroomwthmwnopen,wd.lulia,

'ng at it, with a face all nghut, exclaimed, “ My
income! Heilin thehall atthitmomem.”

than": ’3’.

CW in theconmrnation of the partyto be de-
ecrihed? To the greater number it m I
moment of absolute horror. Sir Thomas in

the house! All felt the innnuneone conviction.
Notthopeofi "onorrnimkewuhuboured
anywhere. Julin'r oolu were an evidence of the feet
that made it indirpumble; and after the ﬁret mm Ind
exclamation» not I word war spoken for half I minute;
much with an altered countenance wa- looking at more
other, end almoet each was feeling it a stroke the most
unwelcome, m ill-timed, moot appallth Mr Yum
might conider it only no a venetian. intemxption for the
evening, end Mr Rmhworth might imagine it a blen-

“~/

r80 MANSFIELD PARK.

ingy but every other heart wu linking under tome ,
degree of self-condemnation or undeﬁned alarm, every
other heart wu ruggeoting. “ What will become of us?
whatil to bedone now?" I: w a terrible paule;
and terrible to every car were the corroborating round-
of opening door: and panning footltepa. '

Julia was the ﬁrst to move and Ipeak again. Jenloruy
and bitumen had been Culpended: Ielﬁnhneu war Ion
in the common cause; but at the moment of hernppear-
ance, Frederick wan lietening with look: of devotion to
Agatha’l narrative, and renting her hand to hit heart;
and an Icon in the coulid notice thin, and lee that, in
vpite of the shock of her words, he vtill kept hie nation
and retained her deter’a hand, her wounded heart
Iwelled again with injury, and looking on red an vhe
had been white before, Ihe turned out of the room,
laying, “ I need not be druid of appearing before him."

Her going rourcd the mt; and at the name moment
the two brotherl Itepped fonvard, feeling the neceuity
of doing nomething. A very few words between them
were ruﬁicient. The cane admitted no difference of
opinion; they must go to the drawing-room directly.
Maria joined them with the name intent, then the
Itouteet of the three; for the very circumnance which
had driven Julia away wan to her the Iweetett vupport,
Henry meford’l retaining her hand It such a mo-
ment, a moment of ouch peculiar proof and importance,
was worth aget of doubt and anxiety. She hurled it an
an cement of the moat lerioul determination, and won
equal even to encounter her father. They walked olf,
utterly heedch of Mr Ruehworth’t requested quenion
of, “ Shall I go too 2 Had not I better go too? Will
not ithe right for me to go too P” but they were no
moner through the door than Henry Crawford under-
took to anewer the noxioul inquiry, and, encouraging
him by all mean: to pay in- retpectl to Sir Thoma:

MANSFIELD PARK. 18:
without delay, sent. him after the otheu with delighted
hute

Fanny wan left with only the Crawford: and Mr
Yates. She had been quite overlooked by her cousin;
and as her own opinion of her claim. on Sir Thomas’u
affection was much too humble to give her any idea of
clawing herself with hie children, she wu glad to remain
behind and gain a little breathing-time. Her agitation and
alarm exceeded all that was endured by the rest, by the
right of a di 'tion which not even innocence could
keep from ering. She was nearly fainting: all her
former habitual dread of her uncle wan returning, and
with it companion for him end for almost every one of
the party on the development before him, with aolieiuide
on Edmund’s account indescribable. She had found a
seat, where in exceuive trembling Ill: was enduring all
these fearful thoughts, while the other three, no longer
under any restraint, were giving vent to their feeling: of
vexotion, lamenting over euch an unlooked-for premature
arrival as a moot untoward event, and without
withing poor Sir Thomas had been twice at long on his
passage, or were still in Antigua.

The Crawford: were more warm on the auhject than
Mr Yates, from better understanding the family, and
'udging more clearly of the mischief that must ensue.

he ruin of the play wan to them a certainty: they felt
the total denruction of the scheme to be inevitably at
hand ; while Mr Yates considered it only a a tem-
porary interniption, a dinner for the evening, and could
even luggeet the ‘bility of the rehearsal being re-
newed after tea, wh‘em‘the buade of receiving Sir Thoma-
were over, and he mi ht he at leisure to be amused by
it. The Crawford: laughed at the idea; and having
soon agreed on the propriety of their walking quiet]
home and leaving the family to themselves, proposed r
Yates’a accompanying them and spending the evening

182 umsnrm PARK.

at the Ptrtonage. But Mr Yntet. htving never been
with thote who thought much of parental dainu, or
family conﬁdence, could not perceive that anything of
the kind wnt necessary ; and therefore, thanking them,
taid, “he preferred remaining where he wat, that he
might pay hit remectt to the old gentleman handtomely,
tince he «on: come; and betidet, he did not think it
would be fair by the others, to have everybody run

twill-y."

tnny wu jutt beginning to collect hertelf, and to
feel that if the staid longer behind it might teem dit-
retpectful, when thit point wat tettled, and being com-
mittioned with the brother and titter’t apology, taw
them preparing to go at the quitted the room herself to
perform the dreadful duty of appearing before her
uncle.

Too toon did the ﬁnd hertelf at the drawing-room
door; and after panting a moment for what the knew
would not come, or t courage which the outtide of no
door had ever tupplied to her, the turned the lock in
detperation, and the light: of the drawing-room, end all
the collected family, were before her. At the entered,
her own name caught her ear. Sir Thoma wat at that
moment looking round him, and ﬂying, “ But where it
Funny? Why do not I tee m little Ftnn i”—-and,
on perceiving her, mine forwar with n kin etc which
aatonithed and etmted her, calling her hit dear Fanny,
kiuing her a ectionately, and obterving with decided

enture how much the was grownl Fanny knew not

ow to feel, nor where to look. She wu quite
oppretnd. He had never been to kind, to very kind
to her in hit life. Hit manner teemed changed, hit
voice waa quick from the agitation of joy ; and all that
had been awful in hit dignity seemed km in tenderneu.
He led her nearer the light and looked at her again—
inquired particularly alter her health, and then correct-

muss-run PARK. r 183

ing himself, observed, that he need no! inquire, for her
a penance Ipoke sufﬁciently on that point. A fine

ush having succeeded the revioua paleneu of her face,
he wan justiﬁed in his belief) of her usl improvement
in health and beaut . He inq ' next aﬁer her
family, especial! Wil iam; and his kindnesa altogether
was Inch as male her reproach herself for loving him so
little, and thinking his return a misfortune; and when,
on having courage to liﬁ her eyes to hit face, the cow
that he wu grown thinner, and had the burnt1 fagged,
worn look of fatigue and a hot climate, every tender
feeling waa increased, and lhe was miserable in consider-
ing how much unsuspected vexation was probably ready
to burst on him.

Sir Thomas was indeed the life of the party, who at
hia au sdon now seated themselves round the ﬁre.
He hag}e the belt right to he the talker; and the delight
of his senaationa in being again in hie own house, in the
centre of his family, after such a separation, made him
communicative and chatty in a very unumal degree;
and he was ready to give every information as to his
voyage, and answer every uettion of his two sons
nlmoet before it was put. In business in Antigua had
latterly been prosperously rapid, and he came directly
from Liverpool, having had an opportunity of making
his pasaage thither in a private vessel, instead of waiting
for the packet; and all the little particuler of his pro-
ceedingl and eveuta, his arrivals and dopamine, were
moat promptly delivered,“ he t by Lady Bertram
and looked with heartfelt satisfaction on the faces around
him—interrupting himself more than once, however, to
remark on his good fortune in ﬁndin them all at home
—coming unexpectedly as he did—a I collected together
exutl as he could have wished, but dared not depend
on. r Rushworth waa not forgotten ; a most friendly
reception and warmth of hand-shaking had already met

184 uansrrew nut.

him, and with pointed attention he wu now included
in the object: moot intimately connected with Mantﬁeld.
There wat nothing ditagreable in Mr Ruahworth’t
appearance, and Sir Thoma: wu liking him already.

By not one of the circle wet he liuened to with ouch
unbroken, unalloyed enjoyment u by bit wife, who wat
really extremely happy to tee him, and whale feelingt
were to warmed by hll sudden arrival, at to place her
nearer agitation than the had been for the lat twenty
yearn. he had been alarm ﬂuttered for I few rninutel,
and Itill remained to tenniny animated u to put away
her work, move pug from her tide, and give all her
attention and all the rett of her tofu to her hnthand.
She had no anxien'et for anybody to cloud Let pleature:
her own time had been irreproachably tpent during hit
abtence: the had done a great deal of carpet work, and
made many yard! of fringe; and the would have
antwered u freely for the good conduct and uteful pur-
ruita of all the young peop e at for her own. It wat to
agreeable to her to ace him again, and hear him talk. to
have her ear amuaed and her whole comprehension ﬁlled
by hi. narrativet, that the began particularly to feel how
dreadfully the must have "listed him, and how im-
pouible it would have been for her to bear a lengthened
absence.

Mrt Noni. wat by no meant to be compared in
happinet- to her titter. Not that the was incommnded
by many fears of Sir Thomal’t dinpprobation when the

retent state of hit house should be known, for her
Judgment had been In blinded that, except by the in-
stinctive caution with which the had whitked away Mr
Ruthwonh’t pink utin cloak as her brother-in-law
entered, the could hardly be laid to thew any tign of
alarm ; but Bl’lt: wat vexed by the manner of ill! return.
It had left her nothin to do. Instead of being tent for
out of the room, and teeing him first, and having to

umsnnw PARK. :85

apread the happy new. through the houoe, Sir Thomas,
with a very Runnable dependence, perhapl, on the
nerve! of hi: wife and children,had nought no conﬁdant
butthe butler, and had been following him almoet in-
mntaneoualy into the drawing-room. Mn Norrie felt
her-elf defrauded of m ofﬁce on which the had alwa I
depended, whether his arrival or hie death were In
the thing unfolded ; and Wu now trying to be in a buetle
without having anything to bustle about, Ind labourin to
be important when nothin wu wanted but tranqu‘ ity
and nlenoe. Would Sir home have contented to
eat, the might have gone to the housekeeper with
troublesome direction, and inmlted the footmen with in-
junctione of deepntch; but Sir Thomas resolutely de-
clined ell dinner: he would take nothing, nothing till
tea came—he would rather wait for tea. Still Mn
Non-in was at interval! urging umething different; and
in the moot interesting moment of his postage to Eng-
land, when the alarm of a French rivateer we at the
height, the burst throu h hie reci with the propoul
of coup. “ Sure, my ear Sir Thoman, a basin of aoup
would be- much better thingforyau than ten. Do
have a huiu of noup."

Sir Thomas could not be provoked. “ Still the
same Anxiety for everybody’l comfort, my dear Mn
Non-in," wan hi- anlwer. “ But indeed I would rather
hnveviszthing but tea."

“ ell, then, Lad Bertram, au ou k for
m directly; luppoeeyyou hurry a l'ifle; he
seem- behind hnnd to-night.” She carried thin point,
and Sir Thoma-’1 namtive proceeded.

At length there wu a panic. Hit immediate com-
munication: were exhnuated, and it Ieemed enough to be
looking joyfully around him, now at one, now at another
of the beloved circle; but the pauae waa not long: in
the elation of her Ipiritu Lady Bertram became talkative,

186 musnnm panic.

and wlnt were the eensations other childseuupou han-
ing her lay, “ How do you think the oun people
have been amusing themnelvee lately, gir 'Eholnali
They have been acting. We have been all alive with
actm ."

“ ludeedl and what have you been acting?"

“ Oh! they ’11 tell on all about it."

“The a” will soon be told," cried Tom hutily, and
with aﬂ'ected unconcern ; “ but it is not worth while to
bore my father with it now. You will hear enough of
it to-Inorrow, sir. We have have been trying, by
way of doing nomething, and amusing my mother, just
within the last week, to get up a few scenes: mere
triﬂe. We have had such inwt nine almoet since
October began, that we have been nearl conﬁned to
the house for do I to er. I have hardly tnken out a
gun tincc the 3d: olerable sport the ﬁrst three days,
but then: has been no attempting an thing time. '1 he
ﬁm day I went over Mansﬁeld nod, and Edmund
took the copies beyond Easton, and we brought home
nix brace between us, and might each have killed six
time: as many; but we respect our pheasants, sir, I
auure ou, on much as you could esire. I do not think
you wdl ﬁnd your woods by any means worse stocked
than they were. I never nw Mansﬁeld Wood so full
of pheasants in my life a: this I hope you will
take a day’s [part there yoursel , sir, soon.”

Forthe present the danger was over, and Fanny’s
sick feeling: subsided; but when tea was soon after-
ward: brought in, and Sir Thomas, getting up, said that
he found that he could not be any longer in the house
without just looking into llll own dur room, every
agitation was returning. He was gone before anything
had been said to prepare him for the change he must
ﬁnd there; and a pause of alarm followed his dippear-
ance. Edmund was the ﬁrst to speak—

umsrrew max. 187

“ Something must be done,” laid he.

“ It in limcto think of our visitors," laid Maria, will
leeling her hand preued to Henry Crawford’e heart,
and caring little for anything elee. “Where did you
leave Min Crawford, Fanny 2 "

VFanny told of their depamre,_ and delivered their

“ ghen Yates il all alone,” cried Tom. “ I
will go and fetch him. He will be no bad utietant
when it all come: out.”

To the theatre he went, and reached it juat in time
to witneal the hut meeting of hi: father and hi. friend.
SirThnmaa hadbeen a good deal aurprized to ﬁnd
candlee burning in hia room; and on eating his eye
round it, to tee other aymptoma of recent habitation and
a general air of confusion in the furniture. The re-
moval of the book-cue from before the billiard-room
door atrnck him erpecially, but he had lureer more
than time to feel amniehed at all thin, before there were
mnda from the billiard-room to moniah him dill
further. Some one wan ulking there in a very loud
accent} he did not know the voice—mm than talking
-—almoet hallocing. He Itepped to the door, rejoicing
at that moment in having the mean. of immediate corn-
mnniention, and, opening it, found himself on the nage of
a theatre, and opponed to a ranting young man, who
:ppeared likely to knock .him down backwards. At

e very moment of Yate- perceiving Sir Thoma, and
giving perhapa the very beat Itart he had ever given in
the whole course of hi: reheamlt, Tom Bertram entered
at the other end of the room; and never had he found

her difﬁcult in keeping his countenance. Hie
ather’e loch o Iolemnity and amazement on thin, hia
ﬁm appearance on any mge, and the gradual metamor-
phoei- of the impauioned Baron Wildenheim into the
well-bred and easy Mr Yatel, making his bow and

I. N

188 Hurst-nu) mm.

apology to Sir Thomu Bertram, we: Itch In exhibi-
homnchapieceof manninﬁubewould not have
loat upon my account. It would be the lut—in all
probability—the lut scene on that Inge; but he wan
lure there could not be a liner. The home would clone

with the gnaw“ edit. .
There wu little time, however, for the indulgence of
my image. of merriinent. It W for him to

up forward, too, end aatiat the introduenon, and with
man awkward Ienntiom he did hia beet. Sir Thoma
received Mr Yam with all the lppenrance of cordiath
whichwudneto hi: own characterﬂautwn reallyu
farfrompleuedwiththe neceuityof thee: unintance
at with the manner of in commencement. r Yntee’a
family and connection were «efﬁciently known to him,
to render hi. introduction ya the “ ‘culnr friend."
another of the hundred particular riendr of hit too,
exceedingly unwelcome; and it needed ell the felicity
of being again at home, and all the forbearance it could
u: y, to rave Sir Thoma from anger on ﬁnding him-
Ae thus bewildered in hit own home, makin part of a
ridicule exhibition in the midst of them-inf nonnenee,
and forced in to untoward a moment to admit the
acquaintance of a young man whom he felt aure of dia-
approving, and whoee eary indiﬁ'erence and volubility in
the coune of the lint ﬁve minute! oeemed to mark him
the most at home of the two.

Tom undentood his father’a thought;, and heartily
wishing he might be alwayr an well diepooed to give
them but partial expreuion. began to see more clearly
than he had ever done before, that there might be come

ound of offence, that there might be tome rcanon for
the. glance his father gave towardl the ceiling and atucco
oi the room; and that when he inquired with mild
gravity after the fate of the billiard-table, he war not
proceeding beyond a very allowable curiosity. A few

inmsrrnm nu. r89’

minnm were enough for ouch nntiafnewry tenntione
on etch tide; end Sir Thoma- having exerted hinudf
Ioﬁrutolrpeak nfewwon‘la ofulm Ipprohation in
reply to In uger appeal of Mr Yntea, u to the happi-
neor of the arrangement, the three gentlemen returned
to the drawing-room together, Sir Thoma with Ill
increase of gmvity which wu not lort on all.

" I come from your theatre,” said he, compotedly,
at he at down; "I found mytelf in it rather unex-
pectedly. In vicinity to my own room—but in
relpect,indeed,ittookmebyrurprize,nlhndnotthe
umllevt uuupieion of your acting having summed to
nean a character. V It appear: a neat job, however, I.
fit an I could 'udge by andlelight, and don my friend
Christopher net-on credit." And then he would
have changed the subject, and tipped hie coﬂ‘ee in ac
over dramatic matter: of a calmer hue; but Mr me,
without diroemment to catch Sir Thom’l main or
diﬂidence, or delicacy, or dilcretion, enough to ow
him to [ad the diacourae while he mingled nmong the
other- with the lean obtrulivenean himaelf, would keep
him on the topic of the theatre, would torment him
with quenionl and remark: relative to it, end ﬁnally
would make him hear the whole hlml'y of his din

'ntment It Eccletford. Sir Thoma- lirtened moot
ml” but found much to oﬂend hie ideal of decorum,
end conﬁrm hi- ill opinion of Mr Yntu'a habit: of
drinking, from the beginnin to the end of the atory;
and when it wu over, can] give him no other allur-
ane: of uympothy than what a elight bow conveyed.-

“Thia wet, in fact, the origin of our actin ," said
Tom, after I moment’e thought. “ My frie Yatet
brought the infection from Ecclesford, nnd it rprend—
II thoee thingl alwn l rprend, you know, air—the fatter,
probably from {our ving to often encouraged the I011
of thing in un orrnerly. t Vina like trending old ground
ngaln.’

19° UANSHILD PARK.

Mr Yatee took the eubjeet from hil friend no noon on
possible, and immediately gave Sir Thoma: on noeount
of what they Ind done and were doing ;' told him of
the gndnal mcreue of their viewl, the hIppy conduiop .
of their ﬁrst difﬁculties, and ore-cut mining Kate of
nlﬁin; relating everything with to h ind In inmneet u
made him not only totally uncontcimu of the
movemenu of many of hll friendl no they at, the
change of countenance, the lidget, the hem! of un-
quietoeu, but prevented him even from seeing the ex-
pre-ion of the face on which hit own eye: were ﬁxed
—from eeeing Sir Thomu'l dark brow contact no he
looked with in uiring earneetnue at hil daughter: and
Edmund, dwelling particularly on the latter, end uptak-
in e lenguage, I remomtnnoe, n reProof, which I»
felt at hie heart. Not lent Icutely wu It felt by Fanny,
who had edged hack her chair behind her nunt’e end of
the tofu, nod, acreened from notice hereelf, law ell that
wee paling before her. Such I look of reproach at
Edmund from hil father the could never have expected
to witneu; and to feel that it wat in an degree de-
oerved war In aggravation indeed. Sir homu’t look
implied. " On your judgment, Edmund, I deyended;
what have you been about?” She knelt in Ipirit to
her uncle, and her hoeom twelled to utter, “ 0h, not to
bill! Lookootoalltheothert, hutnottobim!”

Mr Yntet wan Itill talking. “ To own the truth, Sir
'I'homu, we were in the middle of a rehearsal when
you mind thi- evening. We were going through the
three lint nets, and not unmcceufully upon the whole.
Our company is now no dieperted, from the Crawford:
ha'ng gone home, that nothing more can be done to-
night; but if you will give u the honour of your com-
pny to-morrow evening, I lhould not be afraid of the
lullt. We hetpeak your indulgence, you understand,
a young performers; we helpeak your indulgence."

MANSFIELD PARK. 1 9 I

" My indul ence llllii be given, lir," replied Sir
Thoma! gnv , “but without any other rehea .”
Andwithl relenting mile he udded,"I come home
to be happy and indulgent." Then turnin awn
tow-rd- an or all of the reet, he tnnqnilly aid, “ r
and Min rawford were mentioned in my In letter-
from Mnnefield. Do you find them Igleenble acquaint-
onoe ? "

Tom we: the only one at I" ready with In met,
but he bein entirely without perticular regard for either,
withoutj ouay either in love or acting, could Ipeak
very handsomely of both. “ Mr Crawford was I mout
plunnt gentlemanlike man; his timer I Iweet, pretty,

, ele ant, lively girl."

r Runhworth could he silent no longer. “I do
not any he in not gentlemanlike, convidering; but you
should tell your father he in not above ﬁve feet eight, or
he will be expecting a well-looking man."

Sir Thomas did not quite understand this, and looked
with tome lurprize It the Ipeaker.

“ If I must my what I think,” continued Mr Rlllll-
worth, “in my opinion it in very dingneahle to he
Ilwnyt rehearing. It in having too much of 1 good
thing. I am not no fond of acting at I wan at lint. I
think we are a great deal better employed, ﬁtting com-
fortably here among ounelvee, and doing nothing."

. Sir Thoma looked again, end then replied with In
approving lmile, “I am happy to ﬁnd our Icntimentl
on thin nhject I0 much the name. It give! me eincere
uu‘af-ction. That I should be uutioul and quick-
uighted, and feel many scru lea which my children do
not feel, in perfectly natural)? and equally to thnt my
value for dome-tic tranquillity, for a home which churn
out noily plenum, lhould much exceed theirl. But
It your time of life to feel all thin, in a moot favourable
circumetanoe for yourself, Ind for everybody connected

192 MANSFIELD IARK.

with you; and I am lensthe of the importance of hav-
ing III ally of arch weight."
Sir Thoma: meant to be giving Mr Rndaworth’l
'niou in better word. than he could ﬁnd hilluelf.
e was ewnre tint he mutt not expect a geniua in Mr
Ruehworth 5 but u I well-judging, tteady onng man,
with better notion- thlu hip elocution would. do juice
to, he intended to value him very highly. It wen im-
p‘ouible for man of the other: not to mile. Mr
mhwonh har y knew what to do with to much
maning; but by lookin , as he rellly felt, moot
exceedingly pleated with ir Thoma-’5 good opinion,
and ﬂying anarcer anything, he did hie beet towards
prenerving that good a little longer.

cblpttr if.

DMUND’S lint object the next morning wit to
Ice hit father alone, and give him a fair mtement
of the whole acting scheme, defending hi! own
thare in it an far only at he could then, in a guberer
moment. feel his motive: to deter", and acknowled ing,
with rfect ingenuoumeu, that his concealion had
amen ed with luch artial good a: to make hit judg-
ment in it very doubtful. He was anxioul, while
vindicating himself, to any nothing unkind of the otheru;
but there was only one among-t them whose conduct he
could mention without tome necessity of defence or
palliation. “ We have all been more or let: to blame,”
laid he, “every one of us, excepting Fanny. Fanny
in the only one who has judged rightly throughout;
who has been con-intent. Her feeling: have been
eteadily agninat it from first to last. She never ceaued
to think of what was due to you. You will ﬁnd Fanny
everything you could wish.”

MANSFIELQ,PARK. [93

Sir Thoma- nw all the imp riety of vuch o acheme
among luchaparty,and at one atime,u monglyu
-hia eon had ever euppoeed he molt; he felt it too
much, indeed, for many words; and having Ihaken
hand: with Edmund, meant to try to lone the diugree-
able i reunion, and forget how much he had been for-

' fan loan a he could, after the house had
been cleared of every object enforcing the remembrance,
and retored to it: proper state. He did not enter into
an moon-trance with hi: other children : he wan more
Vllhn' ' g to believe they felt their error, than to run the
3:] of invefetigotion. The "proof; of an immediate

uliono eve hin ,thelw o eve re tion,
would be lnllicierliz.t g “P W P Pm

There waa one person, however, in the house, whom
he could not leave to learn hie sentiments merely through
hi0 conduct. He could not help givin Mn Non-ia a
hint of hie having hoped, that her advice might have
been interposed to prevent what her judgment muat
certainly have dinpproved. The young people had
been very inconliderate in forming the plan ; they ought
to have been capable of a better decrrion themlelvea;
but they were young; and, excepting Edmund, he
believed, of unsteady characlen ; and with greater eur-
prize, therefore, he must regard her ac uiencence in
their wrong meaniree, her countenance 0 their unaafe
amuaunentl, than that Iuch meaaurea and vuch amine-
menu ahould have been summed. Mn Norrie was a
little confounded and at nearly being silenced an ever
she had been in her life; for the wan aahamed to confu-
having never seen any of the impropriety which was no
glaring to Sir Thomas, and would not have admitted
that her inﬂuence wan incuﬂicient—that she might have
talkodinvain. Heron] reeourcewutogetoutof
the u.fnt at possible, and turn the current of
Sir Thomaa’a idea: into a happier channel. She had a

194 menu!) Pdll.

glutdnlmininnneinhermpnileumgml
mmdonrotheinraenandmfortofhiaﬁmily,much
exertion-rid nunyna-iﬁoeetoglanoeatintheformof
hurriedwalhnndmddenremovnlnﬁm her own lim-
ide, and many excellent hinta of dinnat and economy
to Lady Bennm and Edmund to detail, whereby:
moonidmbleuvinghadalmylarimandlnore
than one had eemnt been detected. But her chief
mgth lay in Sotherton. Her grate“ nqrport and
glory wan in having formed the connexion with the
Rulhworthl. The" ahe wu impregnahle. She took
to her-elf all the credit of bringing Mr Runhwonh’l
admiration ofMar-iatoanyell‘ect. “IfI had notheen
active," aid the, “and made a point of intro-
ducedtohilrnotherﬁndthenpreniledonmyiuerw
yaytheﬁnt viit,I amucerraiu u I Iitherethat
nothing would hue come of it; for Mr Ruehworth la
the sort of amiable modcet young man who want- a
great deal of encouragement, and there were girl. enough
on the catch for him if we had been idle. But I left
no Itone unturned. I wan ready to move heaven and
earth to penuade my liner, und at lat I did Perluade
her. You know the distance to Sotherton; It was in
the middle of winter, and the made almost imp-Italic,
but I did pernrade her." '

"I know how great, how junly great, your inﬂuence ,
is with Lady Bertram and her children, and am the
more wncemed that it should not have been—”

“My dear Sir Thoma, if you had teen the mate of
the roads Ibal day! I thought we ehouId never have got
through them, though we had the four horses of tonne;
and poor old Coachman would attend In, out of his
great love and kindneu, though he was hardly able to
lit the box on account of the rheumatiun which I had
been doctoring him for ever aince Michaelma. I cured
him at last; but he wan very bad all the winter—and

umsneu) PARK. 195

thin wu such a day, I could not help going to him up
in hit room before we net of to edit: him not to
venture: he wan putting on hie wig; no 1 mid,
‘Conchman, you had much better not go; your Lady
and I shall be very ﬁfe; you know how' Mendy Stephen
it, and Charle- hu been upon the lenderl Io oﬂen now.
that I am lure there in no fear.’ But, howmr, I Ioon
found it would not do; he wu hent upon going, and u
I hate to he worrying and oﬁcioue, I card no more;
but my been quite Iched for him at every jolt, Ind when
we got into the rough lanel about Stoke, where, what
with front and now upon bed: of Itonee, it wu worle
then an 'ng you can imagine, I was quite in II! agony
ahoutlnrn. Andthenthe poor hornet too! To tee
them staining aw: | You know how I nlwayl feel
forthehoreee. ndwhe'nwegottothehottom
of Sundcroﬁ Hill, what do you think I did? You will
laugh at me; but I got out and wnlked up. I did in-
deed. It might not. be I'lllg them much, but it w
Iomething, and I could not hear to lit at m eue, and
he dragged It the ex 1: of thoee nohe anirmle.
I caught I ful col , but (but I did not regurd.
My object wan Incompliehed in the wit.”

"1 hope we Ihall elwnyl think the Icquaintance
worth my trouble that might be taken to eetablilh it.
There in nothing ve Itriking in Mr Ruahworth’l
mannen, but I we: peued lat ' ht with what up-
pared to he hie opinion on m n ject; hie decided
preference of a quiet family puny to the hude Ind
oonfuion of noting. He seemed to feel exnctly In one
could wiah."

"Yet, indeed, ind the more you know of him the
hhelttehreyouwill like him. He in not I shining character,

t hunthounndgoodqualitiennndit Iodrqroeed‘
to look to you, that I am quite hughed at about it,
for e' y con-'den it u my doing. ‘Upon my

:96 IANSHILD PARK.

word. Mrs Non-is,’ aid Mrs Grant, the other day, ‘ if
Mr Rushworth were a son of your own, he could not
hold Sir Thomas in greater respect.’ "

Sir Thomas gave up the point, foiled her evldon‘l,
dim-med by her ﬂattery; and was oblig to rest satie-
lied with the conviction that where the resent ensure
of those she loved was at stake, her ' ness d' some-
times overpower her judgment.

It was a busy morning with him. Conversation with
any of them occupied but a small part of it. He had
to reinstate himself in all the wanted concerns of his
Mansﬁeld life; to see his steward and his bailiﬂ‘; to ,
examine and compute, and, in the intervals of business,
to walk into his stables and his gardens, and nearest
plantations; but active and methodical, he had not only
done all this before he resumed his seat as master of the
house at dinner, he had also set the carpenter to work
in pulling down what had been so inter put I: in the
bil lard-room, and given the scene-painter his ' 'snl,
long enough to justify the pleasing belief of his being
then at least as far oi? as Northampton. The scene-
painter was gone, having spoilt only the ﬂoor of one
room, mined all the coaehrnan’s sponges, and made ﬁve
of the under servants idle and dissatisﬁed; and Sir
Thomas was in hopes that another day or two would
sufﬁce to wipe away every outward memento of what
had been, even to the destntction of eve unbound
copy of “Lover's Vows ” in the house, r he was

. huming all that met his eye.

Mr Yates was beginning now to understand Sir
Thomas’s intentions, though as far as ever from under-
standing their source. He and his friend had been out
with their guns the chief of the morning, and Tom had
taken the opportunity of explaining, with proper apolo-
gies for his father's particularity, what was to be ex-
pected. Mr Yates felt it as acutely as might be supposed.

iumsnnw mm. .197

To be Ieecondtimedinp‘ﬁointedintheumewlywu
In imnce of Ievere luck; and hiI indignation
wan Inch, that it not beat for delicacy towarda hi-
ﬁiend, and hi- friend'e youngeat I'lIte’l’, he believed he
Ihould certainly attack the baronet on the ahvurdity of
hi- pmoeedinge, and argue him into I little more ration-
ality. He believed thin very Itoutly while he wu in
Mmﬁeld Wood,'and all the way home; but there via
a Iomething in Sir Thoma, when they at round the
. Ime table, which made Mr Yatea think it wiser to let
him purine hiI own way, and feel the folly of it without
0 ‘tion. He had known man dingreuble father-
, and often been much vi the inoonveoienm
theyoccaioned.hut oever,in the whole came of hi:
life, had he eeen one of that clue, Io unintelliginy
moral, Io infamoualy tyrannical II Sir Thomaa. He
VII not I man to be endured but for Ma children’a Ike.
and he might be thankful to hie {Iir daughter Julia that
Mr Yatea did, yet mean to ttay a few dayI longer under
hil roof.

The evening panned with external moothneln, though
Ilmoet every mind wan rufﬂed; and the muaic which
Sir Thoma called for from hiI daughter: helped to
conceal the want of real harmony. Maria van in a
good deal of agitation. It wan of the utmoet conne-
quence to her that Crawford Ihould now lote no time
in declaring himeelf, Ind Ihe wu dimmed that even a
day Ihould be gone by without Ieeming to advance that
paint. She had been expecting to Ice him the whole

momin , and all the evening. too, waa Itill expecting
him. ifr Rnahworth had Iet olf earl with the great
news for Sotherton; and the had fon y hoped for auch
an immediate eclaircinaement an mi 1: nave him the
trouble of ever coming back again. ut they had Ieen
no one from the Pamnage, not I creature, and had
heard no tidinga beyond I friendly note of congan-

198 MANSFIELD nu.

tion and inquiry from Mn Grant to Lady Bertram.
It was the fir: day for many, my weeks, in which
the families had been wholly divided. Four-snd-twenty
hours had never psued before, eince Airgun began,
without bringing them together in come wny or other.
It war 1 nd nnxiou- day; and the marrow, though
differing in the sort ofevil, did by no means brin less.
A few moments of feverith enjo ntwere lowed
by houn of acute Iulfering. enry Crawford VIII
again in the house: he walked up with Dr Grant, who
was anxious to pay hie mpects to Sir Thoma, and at _
rather an early hour they were ushered into the break-
fan room, where were moot of the ﬁmily. Sir Thomu
noon appeared, and Marin saw with delight and agitation
the introduction of the man the loved to her father.
Her Ieneationl were indeﬁnahle, and so were they afew
minutee afterward. upon hearin Henry Crawford, who
had a chair between henelf emf'l‘orn, ask the latter in
an under voice, whether there were any plam for resum-
ing the play after the present ha py interruption (with n
courteous glance at Sir Thomas , because, in that cue.
he should nuke a dpoint of returning to Mansﬁeld at any
time required by e party: he won going nway imme-
diate] , being to meet his uncle at Bath without delly:
hut igthere were any prospect of a renewal of " Loven’
Vows," he should hold himself poitively engaged, he
should break through every other claim 5 he thould
absolutely condition with his uncle for attending them
whenever he might he wanted. The play Ihould not be
lost bi: Ihoence. ‘

“ rorn Bath, Norfolk, London, York; wherever I
may he," aid he: “ I will attend you from any place
in England, at an hour’s notice."

It was well at that moment that Tom had to speak
and not hil liner. He could immediately lay with my
ﬂuency, “ I am lorry you are going ; but as to our play,

MANSFIELD PARK. I 199

the: ie all over—entire] at an end—(looking eigniﬁ-
candy It hie fadzer). The Painter wae eent o yeeter-
day, andvery little will rerun of the theatre to-morrnw.
I knew how Ibo! would be from the lint. It ie urly
for Bath. You will ﬁnd nohod there."

" It in ebont my nncle’e neunlytime.”

“When do think ofoning i ”
r In Ben

“ I me get u aux-dz.”
“Who: cables do you me It Bum wu next
queuion; and while thil branch of the wee

under diecneeion, Maria, who wanted neither pride nor
reeolution,’wea prepering to encounter her ehare of it
with tolerable eelrnneel.

To herhe eoon turned, repeating much of what he
had already aid, with only a loftened air and etronger
expreeeione of regret. But what availed hie ex reedone
or hie air? He wee going, and, if not volun ‘ y going,
yolnnhrily intending to etay any; for, excepting whet -
might he due no hie uncle. hie engagements were ell eel!-
impneed. He might talk of neceleity, hut ehe knew
hie independence. The hand which had en reeled here
to hie hml thehand nndthe heertwereehkernoﬁon-
leee and 've ow 1 Her epirit up]:on her, but the
agony her mind we: term. She had not long to
endure whet Iroee from lieteniug to lenguage which hie
action- oontndicted, or to hurry the tumult of her feel-
ing- nnder the restraint of i for general civilitiee
noon culled hie notice from her, end the farewell vieit,
n it then became openly Icknowledged, W I ve ehort
one. Hewu e—hehadtnnchedherhand or the
lentime,he Imdehie rtin how,aodehemight
reek directly III that eoliuid: could do for her. Henry
Crawford wee gone, ¥ane from the houee, and within
two houre aﬂerwerdl ram the parieh; and eoend'edell
the hope hie eelﬁlh vanity had nieedin MeriundJnlia
Benn-n.

20° ' MANSFIILD PARK.

Julincouldre' ieethathewu gone. Hie pretence
wheginningtopheodiwnoher; nndifMariagnined
him not, the wan new cool mongh to dilpenee with any
other revenge. She did not want expqure to he added
to duertion. Henry Crawford gone, the could even
pit her liner.

ith a purer lpirit did Funny re'oice in the intelli-
oe. She heard it at dinner, an felt it A Healing.
ﬁe“ the other: it me mentioned with": 5mdhu
merite honoured with due gradation of feeling. from the
inoerity of Edmund’l too regard, to the uncon-
cern of hit mother epealung entirely by rote. Mn
Norrie began to look about her, and wonder that hit fall-
ing in love with Julia hnd come to nothing; And conld
almoet fear that Ihe bed been lemiu her-elf in forwarding
it; but with to many to care for, how wat it pottible
for even [Mr activity to keep ce with her witheti

Another day or two, end I Yam vm gone llkﬁ
wine. In bi: rture Sir Thoma felt the chief inter-
est; wanting to alone with his family, the presence
of a arranger lu rior to Mr Yate- mutt have been
irhmne; but 0 him, triﬂing and conﬁdent, idle and
cxpentive, it wan every way ventioue. In himlelf he

‘ wan wearieome, but an the friend of Tom and the
admirer of Julia he became oﬂ‘entive. Sir Thonm had
been uite indifferent to Mr anford’e going or nay-
ing; t hie good withea for Mr Yatee’e having I
pleaaant journey, at he walked with him to the hall door,
were given with genuine tad-faction. Mr Yntee had
ttaid to see the destruction of every theatrical preparation
at Mantiield, the removal of everything a 'ning to
the pin : he left the home in all the m of it:

generaly character; and Sir Thoma hoped, in oeeing
him out of it, to be rid of the worn object connected
with the tcheme, and the latt that mutt he inevitably
reminding him of its existence.

MANSFIELD PARK. ~ 20!

Mr- Norria contrived to remove one article from hil
light that might have dime-ed him. The curtain over
which ahe had preaided with much talent and Ml! 1m:-
oela, went off with her to her cottage, where the
haypened to be particularly in want of green lulu.

' cm": an.

IR THOMAS’S return made a atrildn change
in the we I of the family, independent 0 Lovera’
Vam. nder hie government, Mansﬁeld W an

altered place. ' Some member- of their Iociety lent
awny, and the spirits of my otherl widened—it wu
all aameneer Ind gloom compared with the put—a
cornbre family party rarely enlivened. There was linle
intercoune with the Panonage. Sir Thoma, drawing
back from intimaciel in general, waa particularly din-
inclined, It thia time, for any engagement: but in one
quarter. The Ruahworthl were the onl 'eddition to
hia own domenic circle which he could to icit
Edmund did not wonder that Inch ahonld be hit
father'l feelingl, nor could he regret anything but the
exelnaion of the Gnnta. “ But they," be oheerved to
Fanny, “havea claim. Th teem tohelongto nu
theyleemtohepartofo mlcwldwiehmy
fatherwere more Ienaible of their very great attention to
my mother and litter: while he wu IVII . I am afraid
they may feel them-elven neglected. ut the truth in,
thtt myﬁther hardlyknovn them. T had notheen
here a twelvemonth when he let! Eng nd. If he
knew them better, he would vnlue their ooc' u it de-
Iervel; for theyare in fact exactly the tort a people he
would like. We are nometimel a little in want of ani-
mation among our-elm: my ﬁlter: seem out of epirita,

201 MANSFIELD PARK.

IndTomiloeruinlynotathiauae. Dranerl
Grant would enliven us, and nuke our evening
nwny with more enjoyment even to my fa ."

“ Do you think in l " mid Funny: “in my opinion,
my uncle would not like an} addition. I think he value-
dleveryguietneuyou lpeakoﬁnnd thattherjxne of
hinown milycircleielnllhewnnu. Andi: ot
appurtomethatwelremoreeerioul thanqu to
be—I rnenn before my uncle went ebrold. AI well u
I can recollect, it wu alwayl much the name. There
wal n'ever much laughing in hit pretence; or. ifthere it
any diﬁ‘elence it in not more I think than such an aboence
ha: a tendency to produce at lint. There mun: be a
not: of ahyneu; but I cannot recollect that our evenings
formerly were ever merry, except when my uncle w
in town. No young penple'l me, Ituppoee, when time
theylookuptnarenthorne." ‘

“ I believe you are right, Funny,” VIII hie reply,
after: short. comidention. “ I believe our evenings ale
nther returned to what they were, than auurning a new
diameter. The novelty wan in their being livel .
Yet, how etrong the impreuion that only a few wee!-
will give! I have been feeling n if we had never lived

“I Iuppoee I am graver than other people," laid
Fanny. “The eveningl do not appear long to me.
[love to hear my uncle talk of the Went India. I
could linen to him for an hour together. It entertain-
m more than many other thing- have done ; but then I
am unlike other ple, I dare say.”

“Why Ihnul you dare nay (but? (Imiling). Do
you went to be told that you are only unlike other people
In being more wise and discreet? But when did you,
or anybody, ever get a compliment from me, Fanny?
Go to m father if you want to be complimented. He
will eating you. Auk your uncle what he thinlu, and

“Anselan PARK. :03

you will hear compliments enough: and though they
mlalkdidymywpawn,ywmmwtupﬁmig
a put to his seeingurnuch heautyof mindin
time. '
Such language was so new to Funny that it quit:
her

“Your uncle thinks on , dear ann —
and that is the long and {he all: gm matter. Ayny-
body but myself would have made something more of It,
Ind snyhody but you would resent that you had not been
though: very retty before; but the truth is, that our
uncle never did admire you till now—and now he on.
Your complexion is soimprovedl—nnd you here 'ned
so much countenance l—and your ﬁgure—nay, anny,
do not turn way about it—it is but an uncle. If you
cannot hear an uncle’a admiration, what is to become
of you? You mun really begin to harden yourself to
the idea of being worth looking IL You must try not

to mind win u into a my woman."

“ 0h mom? talk so, dgn't talk so,” cried Funny,
distressed by more feelings than he was aware of 1 but
seeing that she was distressed, he had done with the
subject, and only added more seriously,—--

“Your uncle is to be pleased with you in
every ct; and I only wieh you would talk to him
more. ou are one of those who are too silent in the
evening circle.” -

“BntIdo talk to him more than I used. I am
cure I do. Did not you hear me ask him shout the
slave-trade last night? ’

- “I did—and was in hope! the question would be
followed up by others. It would have pleated your
uncle to he inquired of farther.” .

.“And I longed to do it—h_ut there was luch u dead
silence! And while my coutins were sittin by without
spesking a word, or seeming at all inte in the sub-

1. o

204 MANSFIELD PAR K.

ject, I did not like—I thought it would appear a if I
wanted to net myaelf of at their expenee, by ahewing a
curioaity and plea-tire in hie information which he mun
wish hia own daughter! to feel."

“ Mill anford wn very right in what Ihe Hid of
you the other day: that you eeemed elm u fearful of
notice and [mine In other women were of neglect. We
were talking of you at the Panonage, and thoee were
her word; She ha- great ditcernrnent. I ltnow no-
body who diatinguiahea character: better. For to young
a women, it in remarkable l She Certainly undemndl
you better than you are underuood hy the greater yart
of than who have known you to long, and withregard
to tame othen, I can perceive, from oceanicnal lively
hintl, the un rded expreaionl of the moment, that
the could de ne many at accurately, did not delicacy
forbid it. I wonder what the think: of my fatherl
She must admire him at a line-looking man, with molt
gentlemanlike, digniﬁed, continent manners; hut, per-
hape, having eeen him no aeldom, his reterve may be a
little repuleive. Could they be much together, I feel
lure of their liking each other. He would enjoy her
livelineu, and the has talents to value hil powen. I
with they met more frequentlyl I hope the duet not
Inppoae there ll any dillilte on hie aide."

“ She mutt know hemlf too secure of the regard of
all the rest of you," aaid Fanny, with half a nigh, “ to
have any euch apprehention. And Sir Thomal'l with-
ing jurt at ﬁrat to be only with llll family, in to very
natural, that the can argue nothing from that. Aﬁer a
little while I dare my we ahall be meetin again in the
name tort of way, allowing for the di erence of the
time of year." .

“ Thin in the lint October that the ha- in the
country since her infancy. I do not call unhridge or
Cheltenham the country; and November in a etill more

MANSFIELD PARK. 205

Jen'onn month, Ind I can oee that Mn Gnutil
Inxiooe for her not finding Men-ﬁeld dull In winter
come. on.” '

Fanny could have laid a greet deal, but it was nfer
to uy nothing, and leave untouched all Miu anford’l
resource, her Iccomplilhmenu, her Ipirite, her import-
nnce, her friendl. let it Ihonld hetﬂ her into an
aberration. Ieemingly unhnndlome. in Crawford I
kind opinion of henelf deterred It lean a grateful for-
henrlnce, and the begin to ulk of Ion-rething elIe.

“ To-rnormw. I think, my uncle dine: It Sotherwn,
and you end Mr Bertram too. We almll bequite I
Imall partyat home. I hope my uncle may continue
to like Mr Ruehworth."

“ That in impouihle, Fanny. He mutt like him leer
eﬁer to-Inorrow’e Vilit, for we Ill!" be ﬁve houn in hie
company. I nhould dread the nupidity of the day, if
there were not a much greater evil to follow-41¢
impreuion it moat leave on Sir Thomas. He cannot
much longer deceive himself. I am lorry for them all,
and would give nomething that Ruohworth and Maria
lud never met." .

In thin quarter. indeed, die: intment war impend-
ing over Srr Thoma. No! l hie good-will for Mr
Ruhworth, not all Mr Rushworth’u deference for him,
could prevent him from noon dieceming acme part of
the truth—that Mr Ruhworth W an inferior young
nun, an ignorant in holine- u in book, with opinions
in general unﬁxed. and without accruing much ewue of
It hmnlf'

hie her! ex I very diﬂ'erent eon-in-lnw; ind

monies to grave on Merin’e Iccount, tried to
ermd hr feelings. Little oheemtion there vm
necetury to tell him thlt indiﬁ'erence vm the man
fovonnble lute they could he in. Her behaviour to
Mr Ruthth wu careleee Ind cold. She could not.

:06 umsrxeno PARK.

didnotlikehirn. SirThornatretolved to tpetk tai-
outly to her. Advanngeout ll would be the tlliance,
and long landing tnd niblic tt wtt the engtgement,
herht ' muttnot neriﬁoed to it. MrRuth-,
worthPﬁ—perhapt. been accepted on too thort In
acquaintance. end, on knowing him better, the wtt

(III

Withbtolemn kindnett Sir Thoma tddreled her;
told her hit fun. inquired into her withet, entreeted
hertobeopentnd tineere,tnd tttured her that every
inconvenience thould be bnved, tnd the connexion
entirely given up, if the felt henelf uuhopp in the
Wet of it. He would not for her tud re eate her.
m had I moment’t ttruggle at the linened, and only
a moment't; when her father ceated, the VIII tble to
give her antwer immediately, decidedly, tnd with no
apparent agitation. She thanked him for hit great
attention, hit paternal kindnett, but he me quite mit-
taken in euppoting the had the tmallett detire of break-
ing throu h her engagement. or wat tentible of any
change 0 opinion or inclination tince her forming it.
She had the highest etteeln for Mr Ruthworth’t char-
acter'tnd ditpotiu'on, and could not have I doubt of her

ha meat with him.
ir Thomaa wot tatitﬁed; too glad to be Iatitﬁed,
perhaps, to urge the matter quite to far at hit judgment
might have dictated to otheru. It wat tn alliance which
he could not have relinquished without pain ; and thut
he remned. Mr Ruthworth was youn enough to
improve. Mr Ruthworth mutt and woul improve in
good tociety; and if Maria could now opal: to tecurely
of her happinett with him, tpealting certainly without
the mudlﬂ, the blindnett of love, the ought to he
belie Her feelingt, probably, were not tcute; he
had never tup them to‘be to; but her comfortt
might not be can on that account; and if the could

MANSFIELD PARK. 307

diapenae with aeeing her huaband a leading,
thunder, there would Ceruinly he everything elae in
her favour. A young woman, who did
not marry for love, was In general botthemore anaehed
to her own family; and the nearneaa of Sotherton to
MaudieId mun naturally hold out the gmteet tempta-
tion, and would, in all probability, be a continual augpl
of the moat amiable and innocent enjo menu. uch
and loch-like were the reaminga of Sir *‘homu, ha y
toeaea theemhamaaingevilaofarupuue,diewon ,
the regions, the reproach that Inuit attend it; happy
to aeeure a marriage which would bring him such an
addition of respectability and inﬂuence, and very happy
to think anythiu of hie danghter‘a diapoeition that waa
moot favourable for the purpose.

To her the conference cloned aa utinfutnril u to
him. Shewuinauteofmind to be glad t ahe
had aecured her fate beyond recall ; that the had pledged
heraelf new to Sotherton; that ahe was safe from the

‘bility of giving Crawford the triumph of govemin

actiona, and destroying her proapectl; and
in mud . reeolve, deterrmned only to behave more
eanuoualy to Mr Ruahworth in ﬁnture, that her father
mi ht not he again nupecting her.

Sir Thomaa applied to hia daughter within the
ﬁnt three or four daya after Henry Crawford'a leaving
Manﬁeld, before her feelingl were at all tranquilliaed,
before ahe had given up every ho of him. or absolutely
reaolved on enduring hia rival, er anlwer might have
been different; but aﬁel- another three or four daya, _
when there waa no return, no letter, no manage. no
Iymptom of a softened heartI no hope of advantage from
aeparation, her mind became cool enough to leek all the
comfort that pride and aelf-reven could give.

Henry Crawford had cleatmyedl her happineu, but he

ahonldnot knowthathehaddoneit; Ihouldnot

ans . nusnnn' PARK.

her credit, her appearance, her rit , too.
He thould not have to think of her nlpwhinfg in the
retirement of Man-ﬁeld for Lin, rejecting gothenon and
London, independence and lendour, for Li: nke. 1n-
dependence wan more n than ever; the want of it
at Man-ﬁeld more Ienlibly felt. She wan lean and less
able to endure the restraint which her father impoted.
The liberty which hit ahtence had given wu now
become abcolutely neceuary. She mun eocnpe from him
and Manlﬁeld it won an ponible, and ﬁnd coneolution
in fortune and conlequence, bultle and the world, for u
wounded spirit. Her mind wu quite determined, and
varied not.

To ouch feelingl delay, even the dela of much pre-
paration, would have been an evil, and {Jr Ruehworth
could hardly be more impatient for the marriage than
her-elf. In Ill the important 1: ratiom of the mind
the war complete: being p for matrimony by In
hatred of home, rettramt, and tranquillity; y the
mieery of dilappointed affecu‘on, Ind contempt of the
man the we: to marry. The rent might wait. The

reparation: of new carringel and fumitnre might wait
gor London and Ipring, when her own rate could have
fairer play. r

The principal: being all agreed in thit respect, it
noon nppeared that a very few week: would be
luﬂicient for Iuch amngcmenta an mutt precede the
wedding. I

Mrr Rulhworth war quite ready to retire, and make
wa for the fortunate youn woman whom ber dear son
had, nelected; and very ear y in November removed her-
eelf, her maid, her footrnan, and her chariot, with true
downger pro riety, to Bath, there to parade over the
wonden of otherwn in her evening parties ; enjoying
them :- thoroughly, perhaps, in the animation of a card-
tahle at the had ever done on the spot; and before the

MANSFIELD PARK. 309

middle of the lame month the ceremony had taken
place which gave Sorherton another mitten.

It was a very roper wedding. The bride wan ele-
gant] dreued ; e two brideernaida were duly inferior;
her ther gave her away; her mother mod with alt:
in her band, expecting to be agitated; her aunt tried
wcry; Ind the eervice wu impreuively read by Dr
Gnnt. Nothing could be objected to when it came
under the dilcuuion of the neighbourhood, except that
the carriage which conveyed the bride and bridegroom
and Julie from the church door to Sotherton W the
time chniae which Mr Ruahworth had uaed ibr n
twelvemond: before. In everything elee the etiquette
of the day might and the uricteit mveetigltion.

It vu done, and they were gone. Sir Thoma felt
II an anxionl father must feel. and um indeed ex ‘-
eneing much of the agitation which hie wife had

henaive of for hereelf, but had fortunately escaped.

re Norrie, moot happy to ulint in the dunes of the
day, by lpending it at the Park to support her sister’-
Ipirin, and drinking the health of Mr and Mn Rulh-
worth in n on mumemry glue or two, vm alldioyona
delight; for t:hxul match; the hﬁav daze
marlin” g In no one have Iuppoeed, in r
eon dentgtrinmph, that Ihe had ever heard of conjugal
infelicity in her life, or could have the indie“ insight
into the diepoeition of the niece who had been brought

up under her .
The ayethe young couple wan to proceed, after
I few to Brighton, and mine a home there for

. IonIe weeks. Every public place wee new to Maria,
and Brighton in almoet in gay in winter I: in eumrner.
When the novelty of amuaement there wu over, [it]
would be time for the wider nnge of London.

Julia we: to go with them to Bri hton. Since
rivalrybetweentheaietenhadceaeed, eyhadbeen

only young womn in the driving-mom, the on]

occupier of that intending divilion of I family in v1 '
the had hitherto held no humble a third, it VIII impou-
eible for her not to be more looked at, more thought of
and attended w,¢han she had ever been before; end
“when in Funny?” became no uncommon quenion,
even without her being wanted for any one’l conveni-
ence.

Not only at home did her value increase, but at the
Pemnage too. In that home which lhe had hardly
enacted twice a year Iinoe Mr Non-if: death, the be-

MANSFIELD PARK. 1! I

came Iwelcnme, an invited gum, and in the loom
end dirt of I November day, most accePtnble to ury
Crawford. Her visit: there, be inning by chance,
were continued by Iolicitation. rl Grant, renlly
eugertogetnny changefor hereitter, cauld,hy the
ul'eltoel-deceit, pemnde heroelf thnt the wu doing
the kindelt thing by F any, and giving her the moot
im mnt nine. of ' rovement ll’l pie-ing her
"an: m” ""P
tony, having been lent into the village on some
emnd by her Aunt Norrie, w:- overtaken by a heavy
thower clone to the Pencnage; and bein deecried
from one of the window endenvouring to nd ehelter
under the bunchel and lingering leave. of an oak
beyond their premises, wan forced, though not without
tome modeu reluctance on her part, to come in.
civil Iervxnt the had withstood; but when Dr Grant
himeelf went out with an umbrella. there wu nothing
to be done but to be very much Ithnrned, and to get
into the houle as fat to pouible; and to poor Milt
Crawford, who had just been contemglnting the dim-ml
m‘n in I very detponding rtate of mind, righing over
the ruin of Ill her plan of exercire for that morning.
' end of chance of teeing I tingle creature beyond
themelvee or the next twenty-four houn, the Iound of
1 little hultle et the front door, and the right of Mine
Price drippin with wet in the veeu'bule, wu delightful.-
Thevnlneo an event on ewet dayin the coun
_wu moot forcibly brought before her. She w l
olive Ignin directly, and nmong the molt active in being
uneful to Funny, in detecting her to he wetter then the
would It lint lllOVI, and providing her with dry clothe”
and Funny, after being obliged to lublnit to all thi-
uttention, Incl to being named end waited on by
mime-en nnd midi, being ul-o obliged, on returning
down mire, to be ﬁxed in their druw'u-rg-roorn for III

3 I I IANSHILD PARK.

hourwhilethenineontinned,thehle-'ngoflomething
{Creahooteenndthinkofwaathna extendedtn Mi-

nwfnrd,andmiht onher "tatothe 'od_
of druing and w Pen

Thetworiatenwereaokind toher,andaopleannt,
that Fanny mi ht have enjoyed her vitit could ehe have
believed her-eel not in the way, and could the have for-
nen that the weather would certainly clear at the end
of the hour, and rave her from the than): of having
Dr Grant’r carriage and hone: out to take her home,
with which the war threatened. Al to anxiety for any
alarm that her aheence in ouch weather might occaaion
at home, the had nothing to mﬁer on that wore; for
.aaherheingnut wa- ltnown onlywhermammahe
wu perfectly aware that none would he felt, and that
in whatever cottage aunt Non-it might chute to enabliah
her during the rain, her being in Inch cottage would be
induhitahle to aunt Bertram.

It wu beginning to look brighter, when Fanny, oh-
aerving a harp in the room, aaked tome question: about
it, which noon led to an acknowledgment of her withing.
very much to hear it, and a confection, which could
hardly be believed, of her having never yet heard it
since it- being in Manaiield. To Fanny heraelf it
appeared a very limple and mum] circumstance. She
had anarcer ever been at the Panonage Iinoe the in-
mment’t arrival, there had been no rennon that the
ahould; hut Mira Crawford, calling to mind an early
expressed wish on the Iubject, wat concerned at her
own neglect; and “Ihall I play to you now?" and
“what will you have?" were questions immediately
following with the readies! good humour.

She played accordingly; happy to have a new
linener, and a limner who aeemed so much obliged, to
full of wonder at the performance, and who chewed
hemlf not wanting in taste. She played till Fanny'e

MANSFIELD PARK. 3 l 3

eyel, mying to the window on the weather’s being
evidently fair, lpoke what the felt must he done. ‘
. " Another quarter of an hour,” laid Mie- Crawford.
“and welhalllee howit will be. Donot rnn awn
the ﬁrst imment of its holding up. Thou cloud: loo
alnrming."

“ But they are paused over," laid Fanny. “I have
been watching them. Thin weather is all from the
mm.”

“South or north. I know a black cloud when I are
it; and you mun not set forward while it is to
threatening. And besides I want to Iislay something
more to you—a very pretty iece—e your couin
Edmund'l prime favourite. fou muat stay and hear
your eon-in I favourite.”

Fann felt that Ill: must; and thou h she had not
waited or tlut Ientenee to be thinkio o Edmund, much
a memento made her particularly awn to his idea, and
the fancied him Iitting in that room again and again,
perhapl in the very spot where she nt now, linening
with conmnt delight to the favourite air, played, as it
appeared to her, with euperior tone and ex reunion;
and though pleased with it heraelf. and gln to like
whatever wu liked by him, she wu more sincerely
impatient to go away at the conclusion of it then she
had been before; and on thin being evident, the wan
l0 kindly uked to call again, to take them in her walk

I Whenever sheveould, to come and hear more of the harp,
‘.thl‘ the felt it neoeuary to he done, if no objection
‘ arooe nt home. '

Such svu the origin of the tort of intimacy which
took lace between them within the ﬁrst fortnight after
the {ﬂu Bertnml’ going away—an intimacy relulring
principally from Min anford’u desire of something
new, and which had little reality in Fanny'u feeling;
Faoy went to her every two or three days: it ueemed

2:4 IIANSHILD Pan. '

akindoffueination:ahecouldnotbe without
going, and yet it waa without loving her, mom ever
thinking like her, without any aenae of obligation for
beingeou htafternowwhennobodyeleewutobehad;
and deriving no higher pleum'e from her conmvation
than occasional amuaement, and that often at the expenve
of her judgmt, when it me railed by Enemy on
e or eubjecta which the wiehed to

he went, however. and they nuntered about
many an_half hour in Mn Grant'a Ihrubbery, the
weather being ununally mild for the time of year,
and venuning sometimes even to it down on one of the
benches now comparativer uneheltered, remaining there
perhape till, in the midst of name tender ejaculation of
Fanny'u, on the meet: of en protruted an autumn, they
were forced by the madden well of a cold guat Ihaking
down the hut few yellow leavee about them, to jump
up and walk for warmth. . -

“This ll pretty, very pretty," aid Fanny, looking
arotmd her no they were thul sitting together one day;
"every time I come into thin ehmbbery I am more
muck with its growth and beauty. Three‘yean ago,
thie waa nothing but a rough hedgerow along the u
ride of the ﬁeld, never thought of as anything, or am
of becoming anything; and now it in converted into a
walk, and it would be difﬁcult to lay whether moat
valuable aa a convenience or an ornament; and perhap,
in another three year: we may be forgetting—almost
forgetting what it wal hefore. How wonderful, how
very wonderful the oyemtionl of time, and the changoa
of the human mind! ' And following the latter train
of thought, the Icon afterward: added: “If an one
faculty of our nature may be called mar: wonde than
the rent, I do think it ll memory. There eeeme some-
thing more Ipeakingly incompnheneible in the powen,
the failuree, the inequalitiee of memory, than in any

MANSFIELD PARK. 2 l 5

other of our intelligence; The memory ll eorneﬁmel
ao retentive, no eervicuble, no obedient: at othen, an
bewildered end no weak; and 1t otherl again, no tynnnic
aobeyondcontmull Weare,tobe Iureaminde
every way; but our wenof reeollectingand of for-
genang do Ieem pecuﬁzrly pen ﬁnding out." '

Mien Crawford, untouched Ind inattentive, had
nothing to my; and Fanny, eiving it, brought beck
her own mind to what ahe mm must inherent.

“Itmayleemi 'nentinuutopniee,butlmuet
adrniretheune nGmnthuehewnin all this.
There in Inch a quiet aim licity in the phn of the walk]
Not too much mem " .

“Yea,” replied III Crawford, oareleuly, “ it don
very well for I place of thia tort. One doe. not think
of extent lien,- and between ounelvee, till I came to
Mandeld, I had not imagined a country per-on ever
upired to a nhmbbery, or anything of the kind.”

“I am wild to lee the evergreen thrive!” laid
Fanny, in . “My uncle’l gardener alwayl eaye
the nail here u better than his own, and no it appear.
from the growth of the laurel: and evergreens in general.
The evergreenl How beautiful, how welcome, how
wonderful the evergreen! When one thinlu of it,
how ennui-hing a variety of nature! In some countries
weknowthetreethat Ihede iuleufia thevariety,but
that does not make it leu annzin ,thnttheeameeoil
and the same In nhould nurture p mt- difl'erin in the
lint rule and law of their exinence. You ' think
me 'ziug; but when I em out of doors, eepecially
when em lining out of doon,I em very Iptto get
into thin tort of wondering Itnin. One cannot ﬁx
one’e eyel on the commoneat natural production without
ﬁndin food lbr e rumbling ﬁncy.”

“ 0 any the truth," replied Mina Crawford. “I am
nomethin; like the fnmoue Doge at the court of Lewie

216 IANSHILD PARK.

XIV.; and maydeclare that I see nowonderinthis

equal to seeing myself in it. If anybody had
told me a year ago that this place would be my home,
that I should be spending month after month here, as I
have done, I certainly should not have believed them.
I Iuve no'w been here nearly ﬁve months; and, more-
over, the quietest live months I ever "

“ Too quiet for you, I believe.”

“I should have thought so that:th myself, but,”
and her eyes brightened as the spoke, “ take it all and
all, I never spent so he py a summer. But then,"
with a more thoughtful air and lowered voice, “there
is no layingwhat it may lead to." _

Fanny‘s heart heat quick, and she felt quite unequal
to surmizing or soliciting anything more. Miss Claw:
ford, however, with renewed animation, soon went
on:—

“I am conscious of being far better reconciled to .
s country residence than I had ever expected to he.
I can even suppose it pleasant to spend half the
year in the country. under certain .circumstanou,
very pleasant. An elegant, moderate sized house in
the centre of family connections; continual engage-
ments among them; commanding the ﬁrst society in
the neighbourhood; looked-up to, perhaps, as lading
it even more than those of larger fortune, and turning
from the cheerful round of such amusements to nothing
wane than a téte-‘a-téte with the rson one feels most
agreeable in the world. There ll nothing frightful in
such a picture, is there, Miss Price? One need not ’
envy the new Mn Ruthworth with such a home as
that.” “ Envy Mrs Rushworthl ” was all that Fanny
attempted to say. “Come, come, it would he very
unhandsome in us to he aevete‘ on Mrs Rulhworth, for
I look forward to our owing her a great man gay,
brilliant, happy hourl. I expect we shall be a] very

KANSHILD PARK. 2 l 7

InuhntSothettonnnotheryear. Suchnnntchu
Mine Bertnm he! made in I public Hating; for the
ﬁru plenum of Mr Ruhwonh’l wife mun be to ﬁll
her home, end give the belt belle in the country."
ann w IlentI Ind Min Crawford rehpeed into
thughﬁynlnelt. till luddenly looking up II the end of a
few minutet, the excl-ﬁned, “Ah! here he in.” It
wu not Mr Ruehworth, however, but Edmund, who
then append welking toward. them with Mn Grunt.
“My Inter and Mr Bertrlm. I am to glld your
eldelt nouin it gone. that he my be Mr Bern-um
Tn. There it eomethin in the mind of Mr

aha-d Bertram la forme, Io pitiful,» younger-
bmdm-lilze, um I detel! it."

“How dilferently we feel!" cried Fanny. “To
Ine,tllelound of MrBertrarniI-ooold and nothin -
meaning, to entirely without wnrmth or chmcterl t
'uot mud: for a gentleman, and that’s Ill. But there
:- nobleman in the name of Edmund. It is I name of
heroin and renown; of kings, princel, and Knight;
and teem to bmthe the lyirit of chivalry Ind warm
nﬂ'ectimu."

“I grant you the name it in itlelf, Ind Lord
Edmund or Sir Edmund Iounxdwdlelightfully; but link
it under the chill, the Innihilntian of a Mr and Mr
Edmund in no more tlun Mr John or Mr Thoma.
Well, Ihnll we join Ind dinppoint them of half their
lechnenmlimn down out of door: It thiptimeof
yenr,by ' g upiefore they can begin?" -

- '5Edmnd met them with penicqu pleasure. It um
theint time of hil win; them together linee the
' beginning of the! better lcqminunce which he had
been‘hearing of with great ntiefacﬁon. A friender
betweentvolo verydear to himwu exutl whethe
oouldhnve winhed:andto thecredit of lover'-
undemnding.heitetnted,thsthedidnotbynny

238 nansnm can.
‘meanaoonl'derFannyaatheonly,orevenuthe
‘ 'ner by ouch I friendahip.

“ ,” Bid Miaa Crawford, “and do you not
wold ua for our imprudenoe? What do u think We
haveboeniuingdown forhutmbe toaboutit,
Indenueatedand-u licatednevertodoloagain?"

“ Perhapa I mightPhave Icolded," aaid Edmund, “if
either of you had been aitting down alone; but while
you do wrong together, I can overlook I great deal.”

“They cannot have been Iitting long," cried Mn
Grant, “for when I went up for my ahawl I law them
from the mircue window, and then they were walking.”

“ And really," added Edmund, “the day in an mild,
that your Iittin down for I few minutea can be hardly
thought impru nt. Our weather mun not alwaya be
judged by the calendar. We may eornetimea take
greater lihertiea in November than in Mt ."

“Upon my word,” cried Miu Crow rd, “ you are
two of the moat diaprointing and unfeeling kind
friend: I ever met with There in no giving you a
moment'a uneaaineaa. You do not know how much
we have been mﬁering, nor what chillI we have feltl
But I have long thought Mr Bertram one of the worn
Iuhjecta to work on, in any little mamuvre againlt
common acme, that I woman could he lagued with.
I had very little hope of bin: from the rat; but you,
Mn Grant, my liner, my own ainer, I think I had I
right to Ilarrn you a little."

“ Do not ﬂatter yourself, my deareat Mary. You have
not the mallert chance of moving me. I have my
alannl, but they are quite in a different quarter; and if
I could have I tered the weather, you would have had
a good Iharp east wind blowing on you the whole
time—for here are Iorne of my planu which Robert
will leave out because the night! are Io mild, and I
know the end of it will he, that we shall have a Iudden

MANSFIELD PARK. 2 lg

change of weather, a hard frost setting in all at once,
taking everybody (at least Robert) by surprize, and I
shall lose every one; and what is worse, cook has
been telling me that the cur , which I particularly
wiched not to be dressed till unday, became I know
how much more Dr Grant would enjoy it on Sunday
after the fatigues of the day, will not keep beyond to-
morrow. These are something like grievances, and
make me think the weather most unseasonably close."

“ The sweets of housekeeping in a country village I ”
said Miss Crawford, archly. " Commend me to the
nurse n and the poulterer."

“ ydar child, commend Dr Grant to the deanery
of Westminster or St Paul’s, and I should» be as glnd
of your nurseryrnan and poulterer as you could be. But
we have no Inch people in Mansﬁeld. What would
you have me do I "

“ Oh! you can do nothing but what you do already:
be pla ed very often, and never lose your temper."

“Tslilank ou; but there is no escaping these little
vexatione, Nl'ary, live where we may; and when you
are settled in town and I come to see you, I dare say
I shall ﬁnd you with yours, in spite of the nurserynuin
md the pouterer—or perhaps on their very account.
Their remoteness and unpunctuality, or their exorhiuint
charges and frsuds, will be drawing forth bitter lamenta-
tions.” .

u I mean to be too rich to lament or to feel anything
of the can. A large income is the best recipé for
happiness I ever heard of. It certainly may secure all
the In rtle and turkey part of it."

t “ ou intend to be very rich?" said Edmund, with
alook which, to Fanny’s eye, had a great deal of serious
meaning. _ '

" To be sure. Do not you? Do not we all l"

- .“ I cannot intend anything which it must he so

I. P

220 IANSHILD PARK.

60 etel beyond In wer to command. Mil
Crlﬂilfordymy chute hyerpgegree of walth. She he:
only to ﬁx on her number of thounndl e yenr, end
there can be no doubt of their coming. My Intention:
are only not to be poor."

“By moderation and economy, and bringing down
your want. to your income, end all that. I undemnd
you—end a very proper plan it in for I perIon It your
time of life, with euch hmited mean: Ind indiﬂ'erent
connection; What coup-went but I decent main-
tenance? You have not much time before you; nnd
your relations are in no titration to do anything for you,
or to mortify you the mutant of their own wealth
and con uence. hm and’poor, by all mne—
butI Ihal not envy ou; I do not much think I dig)“r
even reepect on. have I much greater reepect
that: that anyhoneet Ind rich." -

“Your degree of reapect for hon , rich or poor,
in inely what I have no manner 0 concern with.
I m mean to be poor. Poverty in exactly what I
have determined again-t. Honeny, in the ecmelhing
between, in the middle note of worldly circummncee,
in all that I am anxious for your not looking down on."

“ But I do look down upon itI if it might have been
higher. I mun look down upon nuything contented
with oblcurity when it might rise to dlltinchm."

“But how may it rise? How my my honeety at
lee: rite to any dretinction P "

Thi- wu not to very easy a queerion to newer, Ind
occarioned an “Ch!” of name length from the fair
‘lady before eh: could add, “ You ought to be in parlia-
ment, or you Ihouid have gone into the nrmy ten year:
I o." ‘
g“Thrrlirnot muchtothe pu now; end-eta
my being in parliament, I believeﬁurt wait till there
in an upecial unemny for the repreuemation of younger

KANSHELD PARK.

- lone who have little to live on. No, Min Crawford,"
he edded, in I more eerionl tone, “ there are distinction-
which I lhould he mineruhle if I thought myself without
my chance—abnlumy without chance or possibility of
ohtniuing—hut they Ire of u different character.”

A look of canxiaumeu, :- he kc, and what
teerned n ooneciaulneu of manner on in Crawford's
aide u Ill: nude some laughing Inlwer, war eorrowful
food for Fenny’a oheervatiou r Ind ﬁnding hereelf uite
unnhle to ntend u she ought to Mn Grant, w oee
l'de the wu now following the others, the ha nearly
reuolved ongoing home immedinely, and only wlited
for conn e to my oo,-when the oound of the greet clock
It Man eld Park, wilting three, made her feel that Ihe
had really been much longer Iheent than mal, and
brought the previous self-inquiry of whether she should
lake leave or not juet then, and how, to a very speedy

iuue. With undouhn'ng decision the directly began her -

adieu; Ind Edmund began at the same time to
recollect, that hi- mother had been inquiring for her,
end that he had walked down to the Parsonage on
pu to bring her back.

anny’l hurry increneedr and without in the lean ex-
pecting Edmund’l mendunee, the would have hutened
away alone; but the general pace wu quickened, and
they ull‘ucmnpunied her into the home through which
it we: neceuar to pan. Dr Grunt wu in the vesti-
hnle, and u ey «opt to lpeek to him the found,
from Edmund’l manner, that he did men to go' with
her. He, too, war taking leave. She could not but
be thankful. In the moment of parting, Edmund wu
invited by Dr Grant to eat hie mutton with him the
next dny; and Funny had barely time for an unpleuant
feeling on the occasion, when Mn Grunt, with mdden
recollection, turned to her, and uked for the plenum:
of her company too. Thin wu no new an attention, so

221'

o

' 222 r KANSHILD PARK.

y new a circumuance in the emuof Fanny’e
' ,thatehewaaallmrprieeundemharnunennaud
while mmering out her glut obligation, and her—
“but the did not mppooe it would be in her power,"
waa looking at Edmund for hia opinion and help. But
Edmund, delighted with her hann Inch en ha inert
offered, and nacertaining with half a look, and hal a ten-
tcnce, that the had no oh'ection but on her aunt’l
account, could not imagine t hie mother would mite
any diﬁiculty of apanng her, Ind therefore gave hir
, decided open advice that the invitation dnuld he
Iccepted; and though Fanny would not venture, even
on hu encoungement, to such a ﬂight of audacioua in-
dependence, it waa coon settled, that if nothing were
heard to the contrary, Mn Grunt might ex her.

“And you know what your dinner w' ,” said
Mn Grant, uniling—“ the turkey, and I auure you a
very ﬁne one; for, my dear," turning to her humand,
“cook indm upon the turkey’a being to-
morrow.” ‘

“ Very well, very well," cried Dr Grant, “ all the
better; I am glad to hear you have any thing I0 good in
the house. But Mia: Price and Mr Edmund Bertram,
I dare say, would take their chance. We none of ua
want to hear the hill of fare. A friendly meeting, and
not a line dinner, ll all we have in view. A turkey, or
a gooce, or a leg of mutton, or whatever you and your
cock chute to give “a.”

The two cousins walked home together; and, except
in the immediate diacunlion of thin engagement, which
Edmund lpoke of with the wannelt satiefaction, :- no
particularly deairable for her in the intimacy which he
now with no much lcaaure established, it we a n‘lent
walk ; for having ﬁnuhed that Inhject, he grew thought-
ful and indispoecd for any other.

MANSFIELD PARK 223

Charm- “333.

“ UT why ahould Mr! Grant ask Fanny?" laid
Lady Bertram. "How came Ihe to think of
uking Fanny? Fanny never dine. there, you

know, in thin non of way. I cannot npare her, and I

amonreohedounotwantto go. Fanny,you donot

want to go, do you 1’ "

“ Ifyou t ouch a question to her," cried Edmund,
prevennng is couain’l ' g. “ Funny will im-
mediatel nay, No l but um lure, my dear mother,

.Ihe wonliketogo; and I canoee no Moon whyahe
should not.”

“ I cannot imagine wh Mn Grant nhould think of
alking her? She never 'd before. She uoed to uk
your sitter: now and then, but the never Inked Fanny.”

“If cannot do without me, ma’am—" aid

Faun , In I oelf-denyin tone.

“ ut my mother 'l have my father with her all
the evening." .

“ To be lure, on I Ihall."

“ Suppoee you take my fltlter'a o 'nion, mn'am.”

“Thnt’l well thought of. So will, Edmund. I

.will uk Sir Thon'm, an Icon n he comet in, whether

I can do without her."

“ Al you please, min, on that head; but I meant
in father'l opinion an to the l of the invitation’e
being accepted or not; and think he will connider it a
right thing by Mr! Grant, u well an by Funny, that
hem the ﬁn! invitation it Ihould he accepted."

“ do not know. We will ask him. But he will
he very much aurorized that Mn Grant thould uk
Fanny at all.”

There wu nothing more to he aid, or that could be
laid. to any purpole, till Sir Thoma: were yreaeut; but

   
 
 
 
 
  
  

224 ~ minnow-nu.

the subject involving. a it did, her own evening’u oun-

fort hr the marrow, W In much in ley
Bennm’e mind, that half an hour 'rwnrdn, on hi-
looking in for a minute in his vuy from his cation to

hiadrul'og-room,lhe celledhiln hock-MWhen he
ind alums! cloned the door, with “SirThomuop
: moment—I hove unething to my to you."

Her woe of calm hoguor,for he never took the
trouble of ruin; her voice, wu IlVIIyI heard and
attended to; andSir'l'honm came hack. Her story
began 3 and Faun immedinelyslippedout oftheroom;
for to her henel the subject ofnoydilnulion with her

- uncle vu more dun her nerve: could bear. She war
anxioue, Ihe knew—more anxiou- perln than she
ought to be—for who: we it after ollwhe she went
or mid? but if her uncle were to he I great while coo-

Iidering and deciding, and with very ve looks, Ind
the» grave look: directed to her, at lut decide

ngnimt her, lire mi ht not be oble to Ippul' meu-ly
luhmi-ive and indi erent. Her cause, mnvrh ,
on well. It began, on Lady Bertram'l part, with—
“I have Iomething to tell you that will lurpriu you.
Mn Grant har alked Fanny to dinner."
“Well,” said Sir Thoma, u if waiting more to
n‘ccomplilh the ear-prize.
“ Edmund want: her to go. But how can I lpare
her."
‘_‘ She will be late," raid Sir Thoma, taking not hit
watch ; " but what in your difﬁculty ?"
Edmund found him-elf obliged to epcak and ﬁll up
the hlnnkl in hit mother’s nary. He told the whole 3
and the had only to add, “ So strange I for Mn Grant
never need to ask her."
“ But in it not very natunl,” obnerved Edmund,
Jr that Mn Grant should wish to procure l0 agreeable I
visitor for her sister l”

MANSFIILD PARK. 225

“Nothing an be more menial," aid Sir Thoma,
nﬂernuhmdelihendon; “nor,wered1erenouiderin
the we,qu anythinginmyopinionﬁenme nmml.
Mn Gnnt'l Iheﬁcivilhy to Mi- Priee, to Lady
Bennm'l niece, never want ex 'on. The
onlynrpﬁulunfedhdutdﬁulwul bedleﬁvﬂime
of in being plid. Funny mpafecdy right in giving
onlyamndiﬁonal mum. She I nfofeel unhe.
ought.”le :- I conclude a: muaninh to go, ,

' inc: elikelo er, canneno

m... m: m be M.

"Botanldowithoulhcr,8ir'l‘hom?”

“Indeedlthinkywnny.”

“ShellvqumkaMyouknow,whenmyiueI-ic

Mk?" be d
“ miner, ma ' onto
mum’s." {ﬂammxw

“ equLrhemFanny may go, Edmund.” '

Thegoodnevuoonfollowedher. Edmund knocked
uherdoorinhiawaytohiaovu. '

“Well, Fanny, it in II] luppily nailed, Ind without
the mulleut hu'mion on your uncle'l lide. He had
Moneopinim. Youarew ."

“TIan you, I um to glad.’ wu Fanny’l inuinctive
y; Mghwkndnehadmmd from him Ind shut.
door, lhe could not. be] feeling, “And yet why

lbeglad? forum Ivnot «min ofueeing or
landlinng ' me?”

In qaite of thin oonvicuon,however,ohe was glad.
umbnenpganentmighta inodm
itludnoveltyudimpomnoein qforexcept-
' the byu Bo . Ihe lad scarce] nudism!

smallhouﬁnov going «:1thth
loan")? nillitwudining

&
a-

H.

.52

iii

ﬁns

2:6 unusnno PARK.

from thote who ought to have entered into her feelings
Inddirected her tone; forLad Bertnmneverthought
of being uneful to anybody, IndyMn Norrie, when Ill:
came on the mot-row, in oontequence of In early call
and invitation from Sir Thoma, van in I very ill
humour, and teemed intent on] on leaning her
niece’l pleasure, both present In future, at much u
poaIibIe.

“Upon my word, Fanny, you are in high luck to
meet, with such attention and indulgence! You on ht
to he very much obliged to Mn Grant for thinking
of you, and to your Iuot for letting you go, end you
ought to look upon it u Iomething extraordinary; for
Ihopeyouareawamthatthereilno real ocoaaion br
your going into company in thin tort of way, or ever
dining out It all; and it ll what you more not depend
upon ever being repeated. Nor mutt you be l'nncying that
the invitation ll meant at any particular com liment to
you ,- the compliment it intended to your un e and aunt
and me. Mr. Grant think: it a civility due to w to
take a little notice of you, or clan it would never have
come into her hd, and on may be very certain, that
if your coan Julia had at home, you would not
have been asked at all."

Mn Norrit had now I0 ingenioualy done away all
Mn Grant'l part of the favour, that Fanny, who found
henelf expected to sink, could only my that the wan
ver much obliged to her aunt Bertram for sparing her,
an that the will endeawuring to put her aunt’t evening
work in aueh a Itate an to prevent her being mined.

“Ohl depend upon it, your nunt un do very well
without you, or you would not be allowed to go. I
lhlll be here, to you may bexquite my about your aunt.
And I hope you will have a very We day, and
ﬁnd it all mighty Mgby’ul. But. I mun oblerve that
live in the very awkwardett of all possible numberl to

umsrinun PARK. :27 '

Iitdowntotahle; andIcannot but he that
arch an than! lady u Mn Grant Ihould not contrive
betm'l And round their enorrnoua mt wide table,
one, which ﬁll: up the room oodreadliillyl Had the
Doctor been contented to take my dining table when I
came awn , as anybody in their new would have done,
inﬁeld having tint ahmrd new one of hi: own, which
in wider, litenﬂy wider than the dinner table here, how
inﬁnitely better it would have been! and how much
more he would have been respected! for people are
never when they step out of their roper
Iphere. ememher that, Fanny. Five—only veto
be sitting round that table. However, you will have
dinner enough on it for ten, I dare any."

Mn Norrie fetched breath, and went on again.

“The nomenae and folly of people's ing out of
their rank and trying to appear above themee vea, malteo
me think it right to give you a hint, Fanny, now that
you are going into company without any of un; and I
do heoeech and entreat (you not to he gutting yourself
forward, and billing an giving your opinion in if
were one of your con-ins, II If you were dear r-
Rulhworth or Julia. That will never do, believe me.
Remember, wherever you are, you mun he the loweet
and In; and though Min Crawford in in a manner at
home at the Pmage, you are not to be taking place
of her. Andn to coming away at night, you are to
nay just u long an Edmund chuael. Leave him to
nettle that."

“ Yen, ma’nm, I should not think of anything elae."

“And if it should rain, which I think exceedingly.
likely, for I never aw it more threatenin for 1 wet
evening in my life, you mun wage II as you can,
undnotheexpectingthecarriagewhelentforyou. I
certainly do not go home to-night, and, therefore, the
carriage will not be out on my account; no you mun

228 uAnsnlw PARK.

nuke up your mind to what may happen, and the your
thin accordingly.”

er niece thought it perfectly remnable. She med
her-own claim- to comfort a low even a Mn Norrie
could; and when Sir Thom”. noon ofterwnrde, jun
opening the door, uid, “ Fanny, at what time would
you have the carriage come round ?" Ihe felt I degree
of utoniahrnent which made it imponibIe for her to

“My dear Sir Thomas! ” cried Mn Norrie, red
with anger, “ Funny can walk."

“Walk! " repeated Sir Thom», in a' tone of moot -
unanswenhle dignity, and coming farther into the room.
“My niece walk to I dinner engagement at this time
of the, yearl Will twenty minutes after four unit

on i '
y “Yes, Iir," wan anny’l humble louver, 'ven with
the feeling: almost of a criminal toward: rt Non-i1;
and not hearing to remain with her in what might teem
a rate of triumph, Ihe followed her uncle out of the
room, having mid behind him only long enough to hear
these words spoken in angry agitation :—

" Quite unnecesea l a great deal too kindl But
Edmund goee; true, it in u n Edmund'e account. I
oblerved he wal hoane on hunday night."

But thil could not impoee on Farm . She felt that
the carriage won for herself, and herse f alone ; and her
uncle'l conlideration of her, coming immediately after
Inch reprelentationl from her aunt, coat her aome rear:
of gratitude when the wan alone.

The coachman drove round to a minute; another
minute brought down the gentleman g and u the lady
had, with a moat scrupuloul fear of being late, been
many minutel Ieated in the drawing-room, Sir Thomaa
law them off in at good time as hil own correctly
punctual habit: requimd.

IANSHILD PARK. :29

“Now I Innat look at you, Fann ,” laid Edmund,
with the kind unile of In aﬁectionahe r, “ and tell
you how I like you; anduwell u I can judgeby
thil light, you look very nicely indeed. Whn have
’m m V!

“ newdrealdmmynnelewueogooduto
'vemeonmycouain’a marriage. Ihopeitia not too
ne; but I thought I ought to wear it on loan a I

could, and tint I might not have Inch another oppor-
all the winter. I hope you do not think me too
ne.

“ A woman can never be too line while the in ell in
white. No, I aee no ﬁnery about you; nothing but
what it perfectly proper. Your gown seem very my.

Iliketheleg ta. HunotMinCn rda
gown eornethingogyie rim ?” 1

In a roachmg the Panonage patted cone by
the miss-yard and coach-home. M

“Hey-dayl” aid Edmund, “here’a company,
here'aa caniagel who have they got to meet on?”
And letting down the Aide-gla- to dininguieh, “ ’Tin
Crawford’a, Crawford’l barauche, I protettl There
are hia own two men puahing it back into in old
qunrtera. He in here, of course. This in quite a
on rile, Fanny. I shall be very glad to ace him."

here was no occalion, there war no time for Fanny
to any how very different! ahe felt; but the idea of
having Iuch another to rve her, wan a great in-
creue of the trepidation with which Ihe performed the
very aweful ceremony of walking into the drawing-
room.

In the drawing-room Mr Crawford certainly wnn
hnving been juat ong enough arrived in be ready for
dinner; and the milel and pleaaed [ooh of the three
other: tending round him, alwwed how welcome wan
hia ludden reeolution of coming to them for a few day:

230 MANSFIELD PARK.

on leaving Bath. A very cordial meeting passed be-
tween him and Edmund; and with the exception of
Funny, the plmure was general; and even to Iver, there
might be tome advantage in his resence, since every
addition to the party mud rather rwnrd her favourite
indul nce of being suﬁ'ered to lit Iilent and unattended
to. he Wu soon aware of this herself; for though
the must submit, as her own propriety of mind directed,
in ite of her aunt Norrin's opinion, to being the prin-
cipa lady in company, and to all the little dietinctionl
consequent thereon, she found, while they were at table,
ruch a happy ﬂow of conversation prevailing, in which
she was not re uired to take any part—there war so
much to he tai between the brother and sister about
Bath, so much between the two young men about hunt-
ing, so much of politics between Mr Crawford and Dr
Grant, and of everything and all together between Mr
Crawford and Mn Grant, as to leave her the fairett
rmepect of linvin onl to listen in uict, nnd of 'ng
it very agreeable any. y She could that complimelitatmthe
newly-arrived gentleman, however, with any appearance
of interest, in a scheme for extending his stay at Mane-
ﬁeld, and sending for his hunters from Norfolk, which,
suggested by Dr Glut, advised by Edmund, and warmly
urged by the two Iilten, was soon in possession of hll
mind, and which he seemed to want to be encouraged
even by her to resolve on. Her opinion wu sou ht
as to the probable continuance of the o n weather, ut
her answerl were as short and indi rent as civility
allowed. She could not with him to my, and would
much rather not have him speak to her.

Her two absent cousins, erpecially Maria,- were much
in her thoughts on seeing him; but no embarrassing re-
membrance affected bi: tpirits. Here he war again on
the tame ground where all had passed before, and
apparently as willing to stay and be happy without the

HANDHELD PARK. 23!

Min Bemme, u if he had never known Man-ﬁeld in
an other Rate. She heard them apoken of by him

y in a general way, till they were ell nmmbled in
the drawing-morn, when Edmund, being engaged apart
in name matter of busineu with Dr Grant, which
seemed entirely to engroea them, and Mr: Grant occu-
pied at the tea-table, he began talking of them with
more particularity to hit other sitter. With a Iignili-
cant mile, which made Funny quite hate him, he said,
“ So Rnrhworth and hit fair bride are at Brighton, I
understand; happy man ! "

“ Yet, they have been there about a fortnight, Min
Price, have not? And Julia iI with them.’ ’

“ And Mr ates, I prelume, it not far off."

“Mr Yeteul Oh! we hear nothing of Mr Yateo.
I do not irmgine he ﬁgures much in the letter! to
Mantﬁeld Park; do you, Min Price? I think my
friend Julia known better than to entertain her father
with Mr Yates." -

“ Poor Rnahworth and his two-and-fony speech"! ’,’
continued Crawford. “ Nobody can ever forget them.
Poor fellow! I see him now—hie toil and his despair.
Well, I am much mirtaken if his lovely Maria will ever
want him to make two-and-forty speeches to her;”
adding, with a momentary eeriourneu, “She it too
good for him—much too good.” And then changing
his tone again to one of gentle gallantry, and addreoeing
Fann , he said, “You were Mr Ruehworth’e‘ beet
frien Your kindneu and patience can never be for-
gotten, your indefatigable patience in trying to make it
possible for him to learn his part—in trying to give him
I brain which nature had denied—to mix up an under-
mnding for him out of the Iuperﬂuity of your own!
If: mi ht not have tense enough him-elf to eltimate
your lundneu, but-l may venture to any that it had
honour from all the rent of the party"

231 MANSFIELD PARK.

Fanny coloured, and laid nothing.

“It ran a dream: pleuantdreaml" heexelaimed,
breaking forth again. after a few Ininntee’ naming. “I
the]! alwayl look back on our theatricala with exquiu'te
plealure. Thene wan ouch an intern, Inch an anima-
tion, such I Ipirit diﬂiued. Everybody felt it. We
were all alive. There was employment, hope. eolici-
tude, bottle, for every hour of the day. Alwaye come
little objection, tome little doubt, tome little anxiety
to be got over. 1 never vm happier."

With lilent indignnn‘on, Fanny repeated to heroelf,
“ Never happier l—oever ha ier than when doing what
you mutt know was not ble l—never happier than
when behaving no diohonourubly and unfeelinglyl Ohl
what a corrupted mind l "

“ We were unlucky, Miu Price,” he continued, in a
lower tone, to avoid the pouibility of being heard by
Edmund, and not at all aware of her feelinga, “ we cer- -
tainly were very unlucky. Another week, only one other
week, would have been enough for in. I think if we
had had the dirpoeal of events—if Manlﬁeld Park had
had the government of the winda juet for a week or two,
about the equinox, there would have been a difference.
Not that we would have endangered his ut'ety by any
tremendoul weather—hut only b a eteady contrary
wind, or a calm. I think, Mist lyrice, we would have
indulged ounelvee with a week’l calm in the Atlantic
at that aeuon.”

He aeemed determined to he unrwered; and Fanny
evening her face, aid with a ﬁrmer tone than uaual,
“ Al far no I am concerned, air, I would not have
delayed hie return for a day. My uncle diupproved it
all no entirely when he did arrive, that in my opinion
everything had gone quite far enough.”

She had never Ipoken to much at once to him in her
life before, and never so angrily to any one ; 'and when

museum PARK. 1 33

her lpeed) wu over, Ihe trembled and hluahed at her
own daring. He wan mrprized; hut after a few
momenu’ dent oonlidention of her, lied in a calmer,
graver tone, and u if the undid reﬁt of conviction,
uI believe‘gou are right. Itwu more pleuant than
prudent. e were getting too noisy.” And then
. burning the comer-lion, he would have engaged heron
name other subject, but her mm were I0 shy and
rellﬁtantcthat ge’drimdd notdadmce in any.

in raw who ha repeated] e ' Dr
Grant and Edmund, now oheerved, “ Thu);
mun have tome very intereating point to diaeuaa."

“ The most interming in the world,” replied her
brother—“ how to make money ; how to turn a good
income into a better. Dr Grant in giving Bertram in-
etructiona about the living he is to step-into l0 anon. I
lindhetaketordenin afewweeh. Th wereat it
.in the dining-parlour. I am glad to hear will
he on well off. He will have I very pretty income to
make duck: and drake: with, and earned without much
trouble. I apprehend he will not have let: than aeven
hunde a yur. Seven hundred I year ll a ﬁne thin
for a younger brother; and as of course hewill etil
live at home, it will be all for hil Mu plaid” ; and a
Iermon at Chrietrnu and Easter, I mppooe, will be the
sum total of mtifice.” ‘

Hil lint tried to laugh at? her feelingl by laying,
“Nothing amine. me more than the ealy manner with
which everybody nettlee the abundance of than who have
I great deal lean than themselveo. You would look
rather blank, Henry, if your menu: plailin were to be
limited to Ieven hundred a year."

“ Perhapl I might; but all lbdl you know i: entirely
comparative. l3irthright and habit mult nettle the buli-
neaa. Bertram in certainly well off for a cadet of even
a hernnet’a family. By the time he in four or live and

234 HANSHILD PARK.

twenty he will have seven hundred 3 year, and nothing
to do for it."

Miuanfordt-ouldhave aid thattherewonldhea
romething to do and to euﬁ‘er for it. which ll): could
not think lightly of; but Ihe checked herIelf Ind let it
pole; and tried to look calm and unconcerned when the
two endemen ehortly afterward: joined them.

“ rtram," nid Henry Crawford, “I uhall make
a point of coming to Mansﬁeld to hear you preach your
lint lemon. I shall come on purpoae to encourage a
young beginner. When in i: to he? Mi- Prioe, will
not you join me in encouraging your eonan Will
not you engage to attend with your Iteadily ﬁxed
on him the whole time—ac I shall o—notto lone a
word ; or only looking olf 'uu to note down any len-
tence pmminently beauti I We will provide our-
nelvoe with tablet. and a pencil. When will it be?
You mun preach It Mandicld, you know, that Sir
Thoma and Lady Bertram may hear you.” v

“ I ehnll keep clear of you, Crawford, an long an I
can,” aid Edmund; “for you would be more likely
to dieconcert me,nnd I should he more lorry to ace you
tryin at it than nlmon any other man.”

“ ill he not feel this?" thought Fanny. “ No,
he can feel nothing as he ought." -

The party being now all united, and the chief talk:
attracting each other, she remained in tranq ' ‘3'; and
an a whist uble wan formed after really
for the amusement of Dr Grant, by Me attentive wife,
though it wan not to he so posed lo—and Mill Craw-
ford toolt her harp, Ihe ha nothing to do but to listen 3
and her tranquillity remained undieturbed the rent of the
evening, except when Mr Crawford now and then Id-
dreued to her a queuioo or observation, which Ihe
could not avoid answering. Min Crawford wan too
much vexed by what had parsed to he in a humour for

nmsnm PARK. 235

anything but music. With that she soothed herself and
amused her friend.

Theauurance of Edmund'l being so soon to take
orders, coming upon her like a blow that had been sus-
pended, and still hoped uncertain and It a distance, was
elt with resentment and mortilicalion. She was very
angry with him. She had thought her inﬂuence more.
She M begun to think of him 3 she felt that she had,
with great regard, with almost decided intentions; but
she would now meet him with his own cool feelings.
It was plain that he could have no serious views, no
true attachment, by ﬁxin himaelf in a situation which
he mun know she woul never stoop to. She would
learn to match him in his indifference. She would
henceforth admit his attentions without any idea he and
immediste amuaement. If be could so common his
aﬂ'ections, Let-’1 should do her no harm.

chum: my.

ENRY CRAWFORD had quite made up his
mind by the next morning to give another fort-
night to Mansﬁeld, and havm sent for his

hunters, and written a few lines of exp nation to the
Admiral, he looked round at his sister as he sealed and
threw the letter from him, and seeing the coast clear of
the rest of the family, said, with a smile, “ And how do
you think 1 mean to amuse myself, Mary, on the days
that! do not hunt? I am grown too old to goout
more than three times a<week; but I have a plan for
the interrnedihte days, and what do you think it is l"

“ To walk and ride with me, to be sure.”

“Not exactly, though I shall be happy to do both,
but Ibo! would be exercise only to my body, and I

I. Q

236 usnsnuw PARK.

must take care of my mind. Besidee, Ibo! would he all
recreation and indulgence, without the wholesome alloy
nthbour,andldo not like to eatthe bread ofidle-
near. No, my plan in to make Funny Price in love
with me."

“ Fanny Price! Nonseuae! No, no. You ought
to he wished with her two eouains."

“ But I cannothe satieﬁed without Fanny Price, with-
out trialling a small hole in Fanny Price’t heart. You
do not teem properly aware of her claims to notice.
When we talked of her last night, you none of you
eeerned tenlible of the wonderful llu rovement that has
taken place in her look: within lut nix weeks-
You tee her every day, and therefore do not notice it;
but I assure you the is quite a diﬁ‘erent creature from
what she was in the autumn. She wan then merely a

uiet, modest, not plain-looking girl, but she in now
a lutely pretty. I used to think the had neither com-
plexion nor countenance; but in that soft akin of her'a,
to frequently tinged with a blush II it waa yeeterday,
there is decided beauty; and from what I oheerved of
her a and mouth, I do not deepair of their being
ca e of expression enough when she has anything to
express. And then, her air, :r manner, her tout
ensemble, is so indeacribably improvedl She must be
grown two inches, at least, since October.”

“Phool phool This is only because there were
no tall women to compare her with, and because she
ha- gnt a new gown, and you never saw her so well
dreued before. She is just what she was in October,
believe me. The truth is, that the was the only
girl in company for you to notice, and you mutt have a
somebody. I have always thought her pretty—not
striking] pretty—but ‘pretly enough,’ in people y;
a sort 0 beauty that grows on one. Her eyel should
be darker, but she ha: a sweet smile; hut as for this
wonderful degree of improvement, I am tore it may all

MANSFIELD PARK. 237

henwlvedinweheweruyleofdmudyourhaving
nobodyelle to look It; and therefore,'il'you do see
about I ﬂimtion with her, you never will persuade me
thatit in in cmn‘pliment to her beauty, orthnt it made
from unz'thoing but your own idleness and folly.

Her ther gnve only a smile to thil actuation, and
non :fmwnrda aid, “1 do not quite know what no
make of Min Funny. I do not undemnnd her. I
could not tell whit the would be at yrmrday. What
ilhercharaeter? Inheoolemn? uhequeeri II
the yrudinhi Whydid Ilse dnw buck and look no
gave-tine! Icmildhnrdlygethertolpeok. I
never w no long in company with I irl in my life,

'ng to entertain her, and mcceed Io il I Never met
“the 'rl wholooked no grave on me! I mun try
togetge better of thin. Her looks ny,‘lwillnot
likeyon,Iamdetenninednottolikeyou;’ endl any
she Ihall.”

“ F ooliuh fellowl And no this is her attraction
nﬂer alll Thin it in, her not. caring about you. which
given her web I Ioft Ikin, and make- her no much
taller,and pmduceo all then charm: and graces I I do
denim that you will not. be making her really unha y;
a ﬁfth love, perhapl, may mimic and do her but
Ivillnothnveyou plun eher deepJorlheinngood
a little u ever ived, and ha a great deal of
feelin . '

“ Igt can be but for a fortnight," laid Henry, “and
if: fortnight can kill her, Ihe mun have I constitution
which nothing could lave. No, I will not do her
any harm, denr little ooull I only want her to look
kindly on me, to give me miles at well n hlulheo, to
keep 1 chair for me by herIelf whereVer we are, and he
nll inimtion when I take it and all: to her; to think
u I think, he intervened in Ill m poueuionl and plen-
um, oy to keep me longer at nnulield,and feel when

238 MANSFIELD PARK.

I go away that the Ihall he never happy again. I want
notbin more."

“ adoration inelfl ” raid Mary. “I can have no
Icruplet now. Well, you will have opportunities enough
of endeavouring to recommmd yourtelf, for we are a
grunt deal together."

And without attempting any further rcmonttrance;
the left Fanny to her fate, a fate which, had not
Faun r hrt been guarded in a way unsuspected b
Miu y(low/ford, might have been a little harder than ah:
deserved ; for although there doubtleaa are such uncon-
querahle young ladiea of eighteen (or one should not
read about them) at are never to be persuaded into love
against their judgment by all that talent. manner, atten-
tion, and ﬂatte can do, I have no inclination to believe
Fanny one of t em, or to think that with to much ten-
derneaa of diapoaition, and to much taste u belonged to
her, the could have eacaped heart-whole from the coun-
thip (thou h the couruhip only of a fortnight) of such
a man as rawford, in spite of there being come pre-
vioua ill opinion of him to be overcome, had not her
affection been engaged elsewhere. With all the security
which love of another and dia-eateem of him could give
to the peace of mind he was attacking, hil continued
attendant—continued, but not obtruaive, and adapting
themaelvea more and more to the gentlemen and deli-
cacy of her character—obliged her very noon to dialilte
him let: than formerly. She had by no meant forgotten
the plat, and the thought an ill of him in ever; but the
felt hia powen: he waa entertaining; and hi- manner-
were IO improved, to polite, to terioualy and blameleuly
polite, that it waa impouilrle not to be civil to him in
return.

A very few daya were enough to effect thin and at
the end of thoee few dayl, circummncea arm: which
had a tendency rather to forward hia view: of pleating

MANSFIELD PARK. 239

her,inumneh u theygave her a tee of ha ‘neaa.
which llllllt dilpoae her to be le with ev
William, her brother, the so ong absent and dary
loved brother, war in England again. She had a letter
from him heraelf, a few hurried happy linen, written an
the Ihip came up Channel, and sent into Portlmouth
with the ﬁrst boat that left the Antwerp at anchor in
Spithead ; and when anford walked up with the new.-
in his hand, which he had hoped would bring the
rat tidinga, he found her trembling with joy om thi-
letter, and listening with a glowing. grateful countenance
to the kind invitation which her uncle was most col-
lectedly dictm‘ng in reply.

It waa but the day before, that Crawford had made
himself thorougth mater of the lubject, or had in fact
become at all aware of her having euch a brother, or hit
being in auch a ship, but the interest then excited had
been very properly lively, determining him on his return
to town to a 1y for information as to the probable

‘od of the ntwerp’s return from the Mediterranean,
&c.; and the good luck which attended his early ex-
amination of ship new: the next morning, seemed the
reward of hi: ingenuity in ﬁnding out such a method of
pleaaing her, as well u of hi: dutiful attention to the
Admiral, in having for many year- talten in the pa r
eneemed to have the earliest naval intelligence. £1:

roved, however, to be too late. All those fine ﬁm
feelin of which he had hoped to be the exciter, were
al y given. But his intention, the kindne- of ltll
intention was thankfully acknowledged: quite thank-
fully and warmly, for Ihe was elevated be and the
common timidity of her mind by the ﬂow 0 her love
for William.

Thin dear William would man be amonglt them.
There could be no doubt of hi: obtaining leave of
absence immediately, for he was atill only a midship-

24° MANSFIELD PARK.

man; and u hit parenta, from living on the apt», mun
already have teen him, and be eeeing him perhapa daily,
hie direct holiday: might with junice be innantly given
to the deter, who had been hie beet ooneapondent
through a period of leven yearn, and the uncle who had
done mm for his Iu rt and advancement; and ac-
cordingly the reply to er reply. ﬁxing I very early day
for,hia arrival, came at noon u 'ble; and coercer
ten da I had placed tince Fanny d been in the 'ra-
tion 0 her lint dinner visit, when the found heree' f in
an afitation of a higher nature, watching in the hall, in
the obby, on the min. for the ﬁrst mud of the car-
ria e which wan to bring her a brother.

I came ha ‘y while the war thua waiting; and
there being neither ceremony nor fearﬁrlneae to delay
the moment of meeting, the was with him u he entered
the home, and the tint minute. of ex uiaite feeling had
no interruption and no witneuee, un etc the Iernnu
chieﬂ intent u n opening the proper door- could be
call Inch. hie was exactly what Sir Thoma and
Edmund had been tepantely conniving at, at each
proved to the other by the I pathetic alacrity with
which they both advieed Mre rigid-’- continuing where
nhewagineteadofruahingontinto the hallu noon on
the noieea of the arrival mched them.

William and Funny noon shewed themnelm; and
Sir Thoma- had the pleasure of receiving, in hie antigi,
certainly a very different person from the one had
equipped Ieven yearn ago, but a young man of an ,
pleanant countenance, and frank, mudied, but fee ing
and relpectful manners, and Auch u conﬁrmed him his
friend.

It was long before Fanny could recover from the
agitating happineu of Inch an hour In wan formed by
the lat thirty minutes of expectation, and the ﬁre: of

msnem nae. - e41

fruitiongitwueomen'meevenheforeherhlppineee
couldhenidtomakeherhnp ,heforethedinppoint-
ment inseparable from the' mention of non had
uni-hednndlhecouldeeein himthenme illiamal
hefom, and talk to him, in her heart had been yearning
to do, through my a pm year. That time, however,
did gndully come. forwarded by an eﬁ'eetion on hie
ode to wnnn :- her own, and much lea inenmhered by
reﬁnement or eelf-diotrun. She w the lint oh'ect of
hie love, but it was 1 love which hie etronger spirits, and
bolder tem r, made it on natural for him to expreu n
to feel. die marrow, they were welking obout
together with true enjoyment, and every succeeding
monow renewed e téte-‘a-téte, which Sir Thoma could
not but obeene with complacency, even before Edmund
had pointed it out to him. i
E 'ng the momente of peculiar delight, which
on or unlocked-for insurance of Edmund’e con-
." elation of her in the lut few monthe had excited,
Finn lud never' known no much felicity in her life, no
in the unchecked, equal, fearleu intercom with the
brother and friend, who won opening nll hie been to
her, telling her all hie hopcl and fears, plane, and solici-
tndee ﬁrming that long thought of, durly earned, and
{IL-ﬂy v lied leasing of romotion; who could give
r direct and minute in mntion of i the father and
mother, brothen and linen, of whom ehe ‘very eeldorn
heard; who was interested in all the comfort: and all
the little hardehipe of her home, It Man-field ; read to
think of every member of that home In the direc , or
diﬁ'erin only b n leee ecrnpuloul opinion, and more
noin eguee of eir aunt Norrie, end with whom (per-
the denreet indulgence of the whole) all the evil
And good of their eulieet years, could be gone over
Igein, and every'former united pain and pleasure re-

241 ' IANSHELD PARK.

tuned with the fondec recollection. An advantage
thin, I mngtlrener of love, in which even the conjugal
ﬁe iI beneath the fraternal. Clrildren of the lame
Emily, the lame blood, with the nme lint a-ociatinul
Ind habits, have come mean- of enjoyment in their

wer. which no lubeequent connection. can I I ;
lI’l'ld it urnIt he by I lon Ind unnatqu emanng
by I divorce which no II um connection can juttify,
i arch preeioru remain- of the earliett amchmentt'are
ever entirely outlived. 'I‘oo oiten, II»! it in to.
Fraternal love, Iornetimee almost everything. ie at
othen worse than nothing. But with William and
Farm Price it wu till a Ientiment in all in prime
and reehneu, wounded by no oppocition of interest,
cooled by no rate attachment, and feeling the inﬂu-
ence of time an abtence only in in increue.

An affection Io amiable wII advancing each in the
o 'nion of all who had heartl to value anything good.

enry Crawford wen a much struck with it In any.
He honoured the warm-hearted, blunt fondness of the
young uilor, which led him to la , with hie hands g
etretched towards Faun 'I head, “ 0 you know, I
begin to like that queer gahion already, though when I
first heard of euch things being done in England, I
could not believe it; and when Mn BrownI and the
other women, at the Comminioncr’l, at Gibraltar,
appeared in the lame trim, I thought they were mad;
but Fanny can reconcile me manything; " and law,
with lively admiration, the glow of Fanny’l chick, the
brightneu of her eye, the deep interelt, the abIorbedtat-
mention, while her brother wae describing any of the im-
minent hazards, or terriﬁc menu, which such I >period,
at lea, mun tupply.

It wan I picture which Henry Crawford had moral
tule enough to value. Fanny’a attraction- increaIed—

.

IlANSFlILD PARK. I :43

increased two-fold ; for the senaibility which besutiﬁed
her complexion and illumined her countenance was an
attraction in itself. He wse no longer in doubt of the

' tin of her heart. She had feeling, genuine feel-
ing. It worrld be Iomething to be loved by luch a girl,
to excite the ﬁn ardourl of her young, unso histicated
mind! She interested him more than he ha foreseen.
A fortnight was not enough. Hie my became in-
deﬁnite.

William was often called on by his uncle to be the
talker. His recitals were amuling in themselves to Sir
Thoma, but the chief object in seeking them was to
understand the recitor, to know the young man by his
hinoriee; and he listened to his clear, aim le, spirited
details with full satisfaction, eeein in them e proof of
good princi lee, pmfeuional know edge, ener , courage,
and chee ueu, everything that could eserve or
prorm'se well. Youn as he was, William had already
seen a t dell. e had been in the Mediterranean;
in the est Indies; in the Mediterranean again; had
been often taken on shore by the favour of hu captain,
And in the course of seven years had known every
vlriety of danger which sen and war together could
oﬂ‘er. With such means in his wcr he had a right to
be linened to; and thou h rs Norris could ﬁdget
about the mom, and dirt eve body in quest of two

- needlefuls of thread or a secon -hand shirt button, in
the midst of her n hew’s account of n shipwreck or an
engagement, every y else was attentive; and even
Lady Bertram could not hear of such horrors unmoved,
or wrthout sometimes lifting her e es from her work to
say. "Dear me! how ding el I wonder any-
bod can ever go to sel."

9 Henry Crawford they gave a different feeling.
He longed to have been at sea, and seen and done and
r. n

a“ murmur) max.

cuﬂeredaamuch. Hiaheartwuwanned,hiafancy
ﬁred,andhefeltthehighettrevpectforaladwho,
before'he war twenty, had gone’ through luch‘bodily
hardships, and given lllCh proof- of mind; The glory
of heroi-n, of uaefulneu, of exertion, of endurance, .
made. hia own habit: of aelliah indulgence a in
‘ahamefnl contract; and he wiahed he
a William Price, diltinguiahing himaelf and working
hia way to fortune and conaeqnence with to much
aelf-reapect and happy ardour, inuead’of what he
WI

alfﬁu‘riah' war rather feager than laltin . 'He wan
mu m the reverie o retroapecn'on regret ro- ,
dnccd by it, by come inquiry from Edmund as top hie
plane for the next day’- hnnting ; and he found it wan
uwell tobearnanoffortuneatoncewithhonel and
groom at his command. In one relpect it wu better,
a! it gave him the mean: of confenin a kindneu where
he wished to oblige. With rpinta, courage, and
curioaity up to an hing, William expreaaed an inclina-
tion to hunt ; an Crawford could mount him without
the alighreat inconvenience to himaelf, and with only
come rcrnplea to obviate in Sir Thoma. who knew
better than hi: nephew the value of such a loan, and
some alarm: to reason away in Fanny. She feared for
William; by no man: convinced by all that he could
relate of hi: own horaemanlhip in varioua countrier, of
the rcrambling partiea in which he had been engaged,
the rough horse: and mulea he had ridden, or llll many
narrow eacapea fmm dreadfiil falls, that he wu at all e um]
to the management of a high-fed hunter in an En iah
fox-chase; nor till he returned cafe and well, without
accident or discredit, could she be reconciled to the
risk, or feel any of that obligation to Mr Crawford for
lending the horse, which he had fully intended it should

MANSFIELD PARK. I45

“Induce. When it was proved, however, to have done
ilIianI no harm, Ihe could Illow it to be a kindness,
anduenrewnrdtheowner with a nil: whendae
Imimllvuonelninnte tendered whiuuoe again; end
the next with the gluten cordhlity, and in a manner
not to be reﬁned, mlde over to hie nae eminly no lung
n he remained in Northampton-hire.

  

 

