0 one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have mppoaed her born to he
an heroine. Her situation In life, the character

of her father and mother, her own person and diqxssi-
tion, were all equally against her. Her father was a
clergyman, without being neglected or r, and a very
respectable man, though his name wan 'chartl, and he
had never been handsome. He had a considerable
independence, besides two good livings, and he was not
in the least addicted to locking n his daughters. Her
mother wan a woman of useful p 'n sense, with a good
temper, and, what is more remarkable, with a good
constitution. She had three sons before Catherine was
born; and, instead of dying in bringing the latter into
the world, as any body might expect, she still lived on
-—lived to have six children more—to see them grow-
in up around her, and to enjoy excellent health her-
seff. A family often children will be always called a
fine family, where there are heads, and arms, and]

enough for the number; but the Morlands had Iii
other right to the word, for they were in general very
plain, and Catherine, for many years of her life, as plain
as any. She had I thin awkward ﬁgure, I allow skin

2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

without colour, dark lank hair, and nrong features; so
much for her penon, and not less unptopitionl for
heroism seemed her mind. She was fond of all ’
gays, and greatly preferred cricket, not merely to do Is,
t to the more heroic enjoyment: of infancy, nursing
a donnouoe, feeding a canary-bird, or watering a rose-
hush. Indeed the had no taste for a garden, and if she
ﬂowers at all, it was chieﬂy for the pleasure of
mischief, at least no it was conjectured from her always
preferring those which Ihe wan forbidden to rake.
Such were her propensities; her were quite as
exuaordina . She never could learn or undeMand
anything bezre she was taught, and oomen'mes not even
then, for the was often inattentiw, and occasionally
stu id. Her mother was three months in teaching her
on y to repeat the “ Beggar'l Petition,” and, aftu’ all,
her next sitter Sally could say it hem than she did.
Not that Catherine was alwa l snipid; by no means;
she learnt the fable of “ The are and many Friends,"
as quickly as my girl in England. Her motherwished
her to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should
like it, for she was very fond of tinkling the keys of the
old forlorn spinnet, so at eight years old she an.
She learnt a year and could not bear it; and rs
Morland, who did not insist on her daughters being
accomplished in spite of incapacity or ditute, allowed
her to leave of. The day which dilmi-ed the music-
maner was one of the of Catherine's life. Her
taste for drawing war not :‘perior; though whenever
she could obtain the outside a later from hermother,
or seine upon any other odd piece of paper, she did
what she could in that way by drawing homes and
treeu, hens and chickens, all very much like one another.
Writing and account: she was taught by her father; .
French by her mother. Her pmﬁdency in either was
not remarkable, and ﬁre shirhd her lawns in both

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3

whenever she could. What a strange maceountahle
character! for with sll these symptoms of pmﬂigacy at
ten years old, she had neither a bad heart dbr a had temper,
was seldom smbhom, scared ever quarreloome, and very
kind to the little ones, with interruptions of tyranny.
She was, moreover, noisy and wild, hated conﬁnement
and cleanliness, and loved nothing so well in the world
as rolling down the green slope at the hack of the
house.

Such was Catherine Marland at ten. At ﬁfteen
appearancesweremending; she began to curlherhair
and long for balls, her complexion improved, her {unites
were softened by plumpness and colour, her eyes
gained more animation, and I her ﬁgure more conse-
quence. Her love of dirt gave way to an inclination
for ﬁnely, and she grew clean as she grew smart; she
had now the pleasure of sometimes hearing her father
and mother remark on her ual in: rovernent.
“ Catherine grows quite a good-looking girl; she is
almost pretty to-day,” were words which caught her
can now and then ; and how welcome were the sounds!
To look alarm p is an acquisition of higher delight
to a girl who hat looking plain the ﬁrst ﬁfteen
yearn of her life than a beauty from her cradle can ever
receive.

Mrs Morland was a very good woman, and wished to
see her children everything they ought to be: but her
time was so much occu ied in lying-in and teaching the
little ones, that her e1 er daughters were inevitath left
to shift for themselves; and it was not very wooderﬁrl
that Catherine, who had by nature nothing heroic about
her, should prefer cricket, hate ball, riding on horas
back, and running about the county, at the age of
fourteen, to books, or at least books information, (in,
provided that nothing like useful knowledge could be
gained from then, provided they were all nary and no

/

4 ' NORTHANGER ABBEY.

reﬂection, she had never any objection to books at all.
But from ﬁfteen to seVeuteen she was in valuing for a
heroine; she food all such works as heroines must read
to supply their memoria with those quotations which
are so serviceable and so soothing in the vicissitudes of
their eventful lives.

‘Fron: Pope, she lam: to censure those who

“ bar shout the mockery of woe.”

From Gray, that

I'Mmysﬂmi-borntohlushumem,
And “sult- fngrlneeontheduen air.”

'Frorn Thomson, that

..“ It is s delightful ask
To Lush the yopng idea how to m”

Andfrom Shakspeomshegainedsgrwmofin-
formation: amongst the rest, that
-—-“ Trlllu light As Ilr,

Are to the ' conﬁmldon strung,
As proofs Haly'wmr

That

“ The poor beetle, whldi we and upon,

ln corporsl sulfur-Ines feels I pan :3 greet
As when s glut dies.” I

And that a young woman in love always looks

—"llks Pstienoe on a monument
Smiling u: Grief."

So far her improvement was sufﬁcient, and in my
other points she came on exceedingly well; for though
Ihe could not write sonnets, she brought herself to read
them; snd though there seemed no clunce of her

throwing a whole party into ruptures by a prelude on the
piano-forte of her own composition, she could listen to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 5

other people'e yerformance with very little fatigue. Her
greatest deﬁciency was in the pencil—the had no notion
of drawing—mot enough even to attempt a aketch of her
lover's proﬁle, that the might be detected in the design.
There she fell miserably thort of the true heroic height.
At present she did not know her own poverty, for she
had no lover to pounray. She had reached the age of
menteen, without having seen one amiable youth who
could call forth her uenuhility: without having inspired
one real passion, and without having excited even any
admiration but what was very moderate and very
tmnrient. This was strange Indeed! But strange
things may be generally accounted for if their cause be
fairly searched out. There wu not one lord in the
neighbourhood; no, not even a banner. There wan
not one family among their acquaintance who had
reared and Hupported a boy accidentally found at their
door; not one young man whose was unknown.
Her ﬁtherhadmwardandthesquireofthepaﬁdrno
children. ‘

But when a young lady it to he a heroine, the per-
veneneea of forty rurmunding families cannot prevent
her. Something must and will happen to throw a hero
in her way.

Mr Allen, who owned the chief of the property about
Fullerton, the village in Wiltshire where the Morlanda
lived, was ordered to Bath for the beneﬁt of a gouty
cormitution; and hiIlady, a good-humoured woman,
fond of Miss Morland, and probahl aware that, if
adventures will not befall a young édy in her own
village, the mutt seek them abroad, invited her to go
with them. Mr and Mr! Morland were all compliance,
and Catherine all happineu.

6 noun-Imam: ABBEY.

chapter I].

N addition to what has been already raid of Catherine
Morland'a penonal and mental endowrnenu, when
about to be launched into all the diﬂicultiee and

dangers of: dxweeka’ relidenoe in Bulkit may be
elated, for the render’a more certain information, lent the
following pages should otherwise fail of giving any idea
. of what her character ia meant to he, that her heart wan
affectionate, her dirpoaition cheerful and open, without
conceit or aﬁ‘ectation of any kind; her rnanneru just
removed from the awkwardneu and Ihyneu of a girl;
her perlon pleasing, and, when in good loch. pretty;
and her mind about at ignorant and uninformed u the
female mind at seventeen ueually is.

When the hour of departure drew near. the maternal
anxiety of Mn Menard will be naturally auppoaed to be
most aevere. A thousand alarming preeentirnenu of evil
to her beloved Catherine from thit terriﬁc reparation must
oppreas her hurt with aadneas, and drown her in tears
for the last day or two of their being together; and
advice of the most important and applicable nature must
of course ﬂow from her wise lips in their parting con-
ference in her closet. Cautions again“ the violence of
such noblemen and baroneta as delight in fordng young
ladies away to none remote {am-house, mum, at Iuch a
moment, relieve the ﬁrlneu of her heart. Who would
not think no? But Mn Morland knew to littleof lords
and baroneta, that ahe entertained no notion of their
general mischievoumeu, and was wholly unnupicioua of
danger to her dau hter from their machinationa. Her
cautiont were conzned to the following intt: “ I beg,
Catherine, you will always wrap younel up very wurm
about the throat when on come fromthe Roonu atnight;
and I with you won] try to keep come account of the

NORTHANGER ABBIY. 7
money you upend; I will give you thi- little hook on

.
P Sally, or rather Sarah for what young lady of
common gentility will reach a age of nxteen without
altering hername as far as shecan.), mustﬁomlituation
be at this time the intimate friend and conﬁdnnte of her
her. It ll remarkable, however, that the neither in-
sisted on Catherine’s wriﬁng by every poet, nor exacted
her promise of transmitting the character of every new
acquaintance, nor a detail of every interesting conven-
tion that. Bath might produce. Everything, indeed,
relative to thin important journey we done on the part
of the Morlands with a degree of moderation and com-
pomre, which seemed rather conth with the common
feelings of common life, than with the reﬁned sincepdbili-
tiet—the tender emotionl which the ﬁrst separation of a
heroine from her family ought always to excite. Her
father, instead of giving her an unlimited order on hi-
banlter, or even putdng an hundred pounds hank-bill
into her hands, gave her only ten guinea, and promised
her more when she wanted it.

Under these unpromising auspice, the parting took
place and the journey began. It wan rforrned with
suitable quietneu and uneventful safety. either robber:
nor tern em befriended them, nor one lucky overturn
to int uce them to the hero. Nothing more alarming
occurred than a fear, on Mn Allen's side, of having
once left her clogs behind her at an inn, and that for-
tunately proved to be groundless.

They arrived at Bath. Catherine we. all eager de-
light; her eyes were here, there, everywhere, no they
a touched its ﬁne and striking environs, and aﬂerwnrds

through those streem which conducted them to the 
hotel. She was come to be happy, and the felt happy
'1'?” ttled fo u ‘
hey were soon se in com m e lodgmgn‘ in
Pultency Street. >

8 won-rumour any.

It is now expedient to give some description of Mrs
Allen, that the reader my be able to judge, in what
manner her actions will hereafter tend to promote the
general distress of the work, and how the Will probably
contribute to reduce poor Catherine to all the desperate
wretchedneas of which a last volume is capable—whether
by her imprudence, vulgarity, or jealousy—whether by
intercepting her letters, ruining her r, or turning
her out of doors.

Mrs Allen was one of thatnumemosdau of females,
whose society can raise no other emotion than eurprize at
there being any men in the world who could like them
well enough to marrythem. She lm‘l neither beauty,
genius, accomplishment, nor manner. The air of a
gentlewornan, a great deal of quiet, inactive good tem-
per, and a triﬂing turn of mind, were all that could
account for her being the choice of a Ienn'ble, intelli-
gent man, like Mr Allen. In one respect [he was
admirably ﬁtted to introduce a young lady into public,
being as fond of going everywhere and seeing everything
hemlf, as any young lady could he. Dress was her
passion. She had a most harmless delightin being ﬁne ;
and our heroine’s entrée into life could not take place
till after three or four days had been spent in leaning
what was mostly worn, and her chaperon was provided
with a dress of the newest fashion. Catherine, too,
niadeaomepurchaaesherself, andwhenallthese
matters were arranged, the important evening came
which was to usher her into the Upper Rooms. Her
hair was cut and dressed by the best hand, her clothes
put on with care, and both Mrs Allen and her maid
declared she looked nice as she should do. With
such encouragement, therine hoped at lean to pass
uncensored through the crowd ; as for admiration, it
was always very welcome when it came, but she did not
depend on it.

carnage. 2,-1-

.2'

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 9

Mrs Allen was so long in dreuing that they did not
enter the bell-room till late. The senwn was full, the
room crowded, and the two ladies squeezed in uvlell as
they could. As for Mr Allen, he repaired directly to
the card-room, and left them to enjoy a mob by them-
selves. With more care for the safety of her new
gown than for the comfort of her protegée, Mrs Allen
made her way through the throng of men by the door,
as swiftly as the necessary caution would allow ;

Catherine, however, lent clone at her side, and linked '

her arm too limin within her friend’s to bewrn asunder
by any common effort of a struggling assembly. But,
to her utter amazement, she found that to proceed along
the mom was by no means the way to disengage them-
selves from the crowd; it seemed rather to incmse as
they went on ; whereas she had imagined that, when
once fairly within the door, they should easily ﬁndseats,
and be able to watch the dances with perfect conveni-
time. But thin was far from being the case; and
though by unwearied diligence they gained even the top
of the room, their situation was just the same : they saw
nothing of the dancers, but the high feathers of come of
{ill ladies. Still they moved on: something better was
yet in view ; and by a continued exertion of strength and
ingenuity, they found themselves at last in the passage
behind the highest bench. Here there was something
less of crowd than below ; and hence Miss Morlandhad
a com reheneive view of all the company benmth her,
i and n all the dangers of her late ge through them.
‘ It was a splendid sight ; and she gan, for the ﬁrsttime
‘ that evening, to feel herself at a hall: she longed to
I dance, but she had not an ac uaintance in the room.
v Mn Allen did all that she co d do in such a cue, by
nying very placidly, every now and then, “ I wish you
dance, my dear; I wish on could get: panner.”

1 For some time her young frien felt obliged to her for

 ,....;.- e

'l

I O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

these wishes, but they were re ated so often, and
raved so totally ineffectual, that (Ethexine grew tired at
last, and would thank her no more.

They were not long able, however, to enjoy the
repose of the eminence they had so laboriously gained.
Everybody was shortly in motion for ten, and they must
squeae out like the rest. Catherine 11 to feel
something of disappointment: she was tired of being
continually pressed against by people, the generality of
whose faces possessed nothing to interest, and with all
of whom she was so wholly unacquainted that shecould
not relieve the irksomeness of imprisonment by the ex-
change of a syllable with any of her fellow-ca ﬁves;
and when at last arrived in the tea-morn, she elt yet
more the awkwardness of having no party to join, no
acquaintance to claim, no gentleman to assist them. They
aw nothing of Mr Allen ; and after looking about them
in vain for a more eligible situation, were obliged to sit
down at the end of a table, at which a large party were
already placed, without having anything to do there, or
anybody to speak to, except each other.

Mrs Allen congratulated herself, as soon as they
were seated, on having preserved her gown from injury.
“It would have been very shocking to have it tom,”
said she, " would not it? It is such a delicate muslin.
For my part, I have not seen anything I like so well in
the whole room, I assure you."

“ How uncomfortable it is," whispered
“ not to have a single aequainunce here! ”

“ Yes, my dear," replied Mrs Allen, with perfect
serenit , “ it is very uncomfortable, indeed.”

“ hat shall we do? The gentlemen and ladies at
this table look as if they wondered why we came here;
we seem forcing ourselves into their ."

“Aye, so we do. That is Very ' reeahle. I
wish we had a large acquaintance here.”

Catherine,

NORTEANGER ABBIY. I l

“ I wish we had an]; it would be somebody to go
'0'"

“Very true, my dear; and ifweltuew anybody,“
would join them directly. The Skinners were here lat
year; I wish they were here now.”

“Had not we bettergo away as it in?
tea-things for us, you see.”

“No more there are, indeed. How very provoking!
But I think we had better sit atill, for one get- so
(ambled in such a crowd. How in my head, my dear?
Somebody gave me a push that has hurt it I am afraid.”

“No, indeed, it looks very nice. But, dear Mrs
Allen, are you sure there is nobody you know in all
this multitude of people? I think you mun know
mebody.”

“I don’t, upon my word; I wish I did. I wish I
had a large acquaintance here with all my heart, and
then I should get you a partner. I should be so glad
to have you dance. There goes a strange-looking
woman ! What an odd gown she hat ’got onl How
old-fashioned it in! Look at the back. ’

After some time they received an offer of tea from
one of their neighbours; it was thanle accepted,
and this introduced a light conversation with the gentle-
man who offered it, which was the only ﬁne that any-
body spoke to them during the eveningﬁill they were
discovered and joined by Mr Allen when the dance was
um.
“ Well, Miss Morland,” aaid he, directly, “ I hope
you have had an agreeable ball."

“Very agreeable, indeed,” she replied, vainly endea-
vouring to hide a great yawn.

“ I wish she had been able to dance,” laid hie wife;
“I wish we could have got a artner for her. I have
been saying how glad I rhould if the Skinnen were
here this winter instead of last; or if the Parry!

Herenre no

I! NORTHANGER ABBEY.

had come, as they talked of once, ahe might have
danced with George Parry. I am so sorry Abe baa not

had a partner."

“ e shall do better another evening, I hope,” wan
Mr Allen’a consolation.

The company began to disperse when the dancing
was over: enough to leave space for the remainder to
walk about in some comfort; and now was the time
for a heroine, who had not yet played a very distin-
guished part in the eventl of the evening, to be noticed
and admired. Every ﬁve minutes, by removing name
of the crowd, gave greater openingl for her charms.
She was now seen by my young men who had not
been near her before. Not one, however, med with
rapturous wonder on beholding her, no whitper of eager
inquiry ran round the morn, nor W» the once called a
divinity by anybody. Yet Catherine waa in very good
looks, and, had the company only seen her three yearn
before, they would now have thought her exceedingly
handsome.

She war looked at, however, and with some admira-
tion; for, in her own hearing, two gentlemen pro-
nounced her to be a pretty girl. Such words had their
due effect: she immediately thought the evening plea~
eanter than she had found it before, her humble vanity
waa contented; the felt more obliged to the two young
men for this simple plain, than a true quality heroine
would have been for ﬁfteen Ionnets in Celebnnon of her
charms, and went to her chair in good humour with
everybody, and perfectly satiaﬁed with her share of
public attention.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 13

chutn- 3]].

VERY morning now brought in regular duties;
shops were to be visited, some new part of the
town to he looked at, and the Pump-room to be

attended, where they paraded up and down for an hour,
looking at everybody and speaking to no one. The
wish of as numerous acqaintance in Bath was still upper-
most with Mrs Allen, and she repeated it after every
fresh proof, which every morning brought, of her
knowing nobody at all.

They made their appearance in the Lower Rooms;
and here fortune was more favourable to our heroine.
The master of the ceremonies introduced to her a very
gentleman-like young man as a partner; his name was
Tilney. He seemed to be about four or live and
twenty, was rather tall, had a pleasing countenance, a
very intelligent and lively e e, and, if not quite hand-
me, was very near it. is address was good, and
Catherine felt herself in high luck. There was little
leisure for speaking while they danced; but when they
were seated at ten the found him as agreable as she had
already given him credit for being. He talked with
ﬂuency and spirit, and there was an archness and
pleasantly in his manner which interested, though it
was hardly understood by her. After chatting some
lime on such matters as naturally arose from the objects
around them, he suddenly addressed her with—“I
have hitherto been very remiss, madam, in the proper
attentions of a partner here; I have not yet asked you
how long you have been in Bath, whether you were
ever here before, whether you have been at the Upper
Rooms, the theatre, and the concert, and how you like
the place altogether. I have been very negligent; but
are you now at leisure to satisfy me in these particulars?
If you are. I will begin directly."

r4 NORTHANGER user.

“ You need not give yourself that trouble, sir."

“ No trouble, I assure you, madam.” Then form.
ing his features into a set smile, and aﬁ'ectedly softening
his voice, he added, with a simpeling air, “ Have you
been long in Bath, madam ? ”

“ About a week, sir,” replied Catherine, trying not
to laugh.

“ Really l ” with affected astonishment.

“ Why should you be surprized, sir ?”

“ Why, indeed 3” said he, in his natural tone ;
“ but some emotion must appear to be raised by your
reply, and surprize is more easily assumed, and not less
reasonable, than any other. Now let us go on. Were
you never here before, madam t”

“ Never, sir.”

“ Indeed! Have you yet honoured the Upper
Rooms l”

“ Yes, sir; I was there last Monday.”

“ Have you been to the theatre?”

“ Yes, sir; I was at the play on Tuesday.”

“ To the concert?”

“ Yes, sir; on Wednesday.”

“ And are you altogether pleased with Bath .’ ”

“ Yes; I like it very well.”

“ Now I must give one smirk, and then we my be
rational again.”

Catherine turned away her head, not knowing whether
she might venture to laugh.

I‘ I see what you think of me,” mid he, gravely;
“ I shall make but a poor ﬁgure in your journal to.
marrow.”

“ My journal ! ” .

“ Yes; I know exactly what you will say. Friday,
went to the Lower Rooms; wore my sprigged. muslin
robe with blue trimmings, plain black shoes; appeared
to much advantage, but was strangely harassed by a.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 15

queer half-witwd man, who would make me dance with
him, and distressed me by his nonsense.”

“ Indeed I shall say no such thing."

“ Shall I tell you what you ought to my 2 "

“ If you please.”

“ I danced Wth a agreeable yonn man, intro-
dnoed by Mr King; ha a great deal 0 conversation
with him ; seems a most extraordinary genius; hope I
may know more of him. Tbat, madam, is what I arid:
you to say.”

“ But perhaps I keep no journal.”

“ Perhaps you are not sitting in this room, and I am
not sitting y you. These are points in which I. doubt
is equally possible. Not keep a journal! How are
your absent cousins to understand the tenour of your life
in Bath without one? How are the civilities and com-
pliments of every day to related as they ought to be
unless noted down every evening in a journal! How
are your various dresses to he remembered, and the
particular state of your complexion, and curl of your
hair to be described, in all their diversities, without
having constant recourse to a journal? My dear
madam, I am not so ignorant of young ladies’ ways as
you wish to believe me. It is this delightful habit of
joumalizing which largely contributes to form the easy
ater of writing for which ladies are so generally
celebrated. Everybody allows that the talent of writing
agmble letters is peculiarly female. Nature may have
done something, but I am sure it must be essentially
assisted by the practice of keeping a journal.”

“ I have somtimes thought,” said Catherine, doubt-
ingly, “ whether ladies do write so much better letters
than gentlemen. That is, I should not think the
superiority was always on our side.”

“ As far as I have had 0 portunity of judging, it
appears to me that the u style of letter-writing

Y

16 NORTKANGER ABBEY.

among women is faultless, except in three par-
denim”

“ And what are they ? "

“A general deﬁciency of Iubject, a total inﬂation
to sm and a v uent ignorance of grammar.’

“(Egon my vjbyrdfmlq need not have been afraid of
disclaiming the compliment! You do not think too
highl ofuc in that W: ."

“ should no more ay it down at 3 general rule that
women write better letter: than men, than that they
sing better duets, or draw better landscapes. In every
power of which taste ll the foundation, excellence is
pretty fairly divided between the sexes.”

They were interrupted by Mrs Allen. “My dear
Catherine,” said the, " do take this ‘ out of my aleeve.
I am afraid it bu tom 2 hole already? I shall be quite
wrry if it hay for this is a favourite gown, though it
cost but nine shillings a yard.”

"That i: exactl what I should have guessed it,
madam,” said Mr ilney, looking It the mmlin.

“ Do u understand munlius, sir i”

“Particularly well; I always buy my own cravats,
and am allowed to be an excellent judge; and my sister
hat often trusted me in the choioe of a gown. I bought
one for her the other day, and it was pronounced to be
a prodigioul bargain by every lady who saw it. I gave
but ﬁve ohillings a yard for it, and a true Indian
muslin.”

Mn Allen was quite struck by his genius. “ Men
common! take so little notice of those thing," said
the. “ chan never get Mr Allen to know one of my
gowm from another. You mutt be a great comfort to
your litter, air.”

“ I hope I am, madam."

“ And pray, air, who: do [you] think of Mill Mor-
land’s gown ? ”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 7

“ It is very re , madam," said he, gravely exam-
ining it ; " but l’ddtlimt think it will wall: well. I am
afraid it will fray.”

“ How can you," said Catherine, laughing, “ he
so——? ” she had almoct said “ strange."

“ I am quite of your opinion, sir,” replied Mn
Allen ; “ and so I told Miss Morlsnd when she bought
it.”

“ But then you know, madam, muslin alwayt turn.
to some account or other; Miss Morland will get
enough out of it fora handkerchief, or a on , or a cloak.
Munlin can never be said to be wasted. have heard
my sister say to forty times, when the has been extra-
vagant in buying more than the wanted, or careless in
cutting it to pieces."

“ Both in a charming place, sir; there are so many
good shops here. We are sadly off in the country:
not but what we have very good shops in Salisbury, but
it is so far to go; eight miles is a long way. Mr Allen
say: it is nine, measured nine; but I am sure it cannot
be more than eight; and it is such I fag; I come back
tired to death. Now, here one can step out of doors,
and get a thing in ﬁve minutes.”

Mr Tilney was polite enough to seem interested in
what the said; and she kept him on the subject of
mnllins till the dancing recommenced. Catherine feared
at ahe listened to their discourse, that he indulged him-
self a little too much with the foibles of others.
“ What are you thinking of to earnestly?” said he, as
they walked back to the ball-room; “ not of your
partner, I hope, for by that shake of the head, your
meditations are not satisfactory.”

Catherine coloured, and said, “ I was not thinking of
anything.”

“ That ll artful and deep, to be cure; but I had
rather be told at once that you will not tell me.”

r8 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“ Well, then, I will not.”

“ Thank you; for now we shall soon be acquainted,
as I am authorized to tease you on this subject when-
ever we meet, and nothing in the world ndvances intim-
acy so much.”

They danced again; and when the assembly closed,
parted, on the lady’s side at lent, with a strong inclina-
tion for continuing the acquaintance. Whether she
thought of him so much, while she drank her warm
wine and water, and prepared herself for bed, as to
dream of him when there, cannot be ascertained, but I
hope it was no more than in a slight slumber, or a
morning doze at most; for if it be true, as a celebmted
writer has maintained, that no young lady can be
justiﬁed in falling in love before the gentleman’s love
is declared,‘ it must he very im roper that a young lady
should dream of a gentleman before the gentleman ts
first known to hive dreamt of her. How proper Mr
Tilney might be as a dreamer or a lover, had not yet,
perhaps, entered Mr Allen’s head, but that he was not
objectionable as a common acquaintance for his young
charge, he was on inquiry mtisﬁed; for he had early in
the evening taken pains to know who her psmer was,
and had been assured of Mr Tilney’s being a clergyman,
and of A very respectable family in Gloucestenhire.

chm" 317.

1TH more than usual eagerness did Catherine

hasten to the Pum room the next day,

secure within hersel of seeing Mr Tilney

there before the morning were over, and ready to meet
him with a smile: but no smile was demanded—Mr

' rid: a letter {mm Mr Richardson, No. 97, vol. KL, Rmhler.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 19

Tilney did not appear. Ev creature in Bath, ex-
eepthimselﬂwu to be seenuiii the room It diﬂ'erent
periods of the fashionable houn; crowds of people were
every moment passing in and out, u the steps and
down 3 people when nobody cared about, and nobody
wanted to see; and he only was absent. “What a
delightful place Bath is,” said Mrs Allen, a they eat
down near the great clock, after parading the room till
they were tired ; " and how plealant it would be if we
had any acquaintance here.”

This sentiment had been uttered so oﬁen in vain,
that Mrs Allen had no 'cular reason to hope it
would be followed with more advantage now; but we
are told to "Despair of nothing we would stain,” at
l‘Unwearied diligence our point would gain,” and the
onwearied diligence with which she had every day
wished for the ﬁne thing was at length to have m jun
reward; for hardly had she been seated ten minutes,
before a lady of about her own age, who was sitting by
her, and had been looking at her attentively for several
minutes. addressed her with great complaisance in these
words :—“ I think, madam, I cannot be minalen; it
is a long time since I had the pleasure of oeing you, but
innot your name Allen i” This question answered,
as it readin was, the manger pronounced her‘s to be
Thorpe; and Mrs Allen immediately recognized the
futures of a formerschonlfellow and intimate, whom she
had seen only once since their respective marriages, and
that many years ago. Their joy on this meeting was
very great, as well it might, since they had been con-
tented to know nothing of each other for the last ﬁfteen
years. Cornplimenrs on good looks now passed; and,
after observing how time had slipped away since they
were last together, how little they had thought of meet-
ing in Bath, and whata pleasure it was to see an old
friend, they proceeded to make enquiries and give in-

20 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

telligence as to their families, sisters, and cousins, talking
both together, far more ready to give than to receive infor-
mation, and each hearing very little what the other said.
Mrs Thorpe, however, had one great advantage as a
talker, over Mrs Allen, in 3 family of children; and
when she expatiated on the talents of her sons, and the
beauty of her daughters, when she related their dili‘erent
situations and views, that John was at Oxford, Edward
at Merchant Taylors’, and William at sea, and all of
them more beloved and respected in their diﬂ'erent [sta-
tions] than any other three beings ever were, Mrs Allen
had no similar information to give, no similar triumphs
to press on the unwilling and unbelieviog ear of her
friend; and was forcedtositnndappeartolistentoall
these maternal eﬁ‘usions, consoling herself, however,
with the discovery, which her keen eyes soon made,
that the lace on Mrs Thorpe’s was not half so
handsome as that on her own. '

“ Here come my dear girls," cried Mrs Thorpe,
pointing at three mart-looking females, who, arm in
arm, were then moving towards her. “ My dear Mrs
Allen, I long to introduce them; the will be so
delighted to see you: the hllest is Isahe my eldest;
is not she a ﬁne young woman? The others are v
much admired too, but I believe Iubella is the hand-
somert."

The Miss Thorpes were introduced; and Miss Mor-
land, who had been for a short time forgotten, was
introduced likewise. The name seemed to strike them
all; and, after speaking to her with great civility, the
eldest young lady observed aloud to the rest, “ How
excessively like her brother Miss Morland is! ”

“The very gicture of him, indeed! ” cried the
mother; and “ should have known her any where for
his sister! ” was repeated by them all, two or three
times over. For a moment Catherine was surprized ;

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I l

but Mr: Thorpe and her daughters had scarcely begun
the history of their acquaintance with Mr James Mor-
laod, before she remembered that her eldest brother had
lately formed an intimacy with a young man of his own
college, of the name of Thorpe, and that he had spent
the last week of the Christmas vacation with his family,
near London.

The whole being explained, many ohliging things were
said by the Miss Thorpes of their wish of being better
acquainted with her; of being considered as already
friends, through the friendship of their brothers, &c.,
which Catherine heard with pleasure, and answered with
all the pretty ex ressions she could command; and, as
the ﬁrst proof 0 amity, she was soon invited to accept
an arm of the eldest Miss Thorpe, and take a turn with
her about the room. Catherine was delighted with this
extension of her Bath acquaintance, and almost forgot
Mr Tilney while she talked to Miss Thorpe. Friend-
ship is certainly the ﬁnest balm for the pangs of
disappointed love.

Their conversation turned upon those subjects of
which the free discussion has generally much to do in
perfecting a sudden intimacy between two young ladies;
such as dress, balls, ﬂirtatious, and uizzes. Miss
Thorpe, however, being four years 0 tier than Miss
Morland, and at least four years better informed, had a
very decided advantage in discussing such points. She
could compare the balls of Bath with those of Tun-
bridge; in fashions with the fashions of London; could
rectify the opinions of her new friend in many articles
of tasteful attire; could discover a ﬂirtation between any
gentleman and lady who only smiled on each other;
and point out a quiz through the thickness of a crowd.
These powers received due admiration from Catherine,
to whom they were entirely new; and the respeetwhich
they naturally inspired might have been too great for

2 2 NORM-{ANGER ABBEY.

familiarity, had not the easy gaiety of Miss Thorpc’s
manners, and her frequent expreuions of delight on this
acquaintance with her, softened down every feeling of
awe, and left nothing but tender affection. Their
increasing attachment was not to be satisﬁed with half a
dozen turns in the Pump-room, but required, when they
all quitted it together, that Miss Thorpe should accom-
pany Miss Morland to the very door of Mr Allen’s
house; and that they should there part with a most
aifectionate and lengthened shake of hands, after learn-
ing, to their mutual relief, that they should see each
other across the theatre at night, and say their prayers
in the same chapel the next morning, Catherine then
ran 'directly up stairs, and watched Miss Thorpe’s
progress down the street from the drawing-room win-
dow; admired the graceful spirit of her walk, the
fashionable air of her ﬁgure and dress, and felt grateful,
as well she might, for the chance which had procured
her such a friend.

Mrs Thorpe was a widow, and not a very rich one;
she was a good-humoured, well-waning woman, and
a very indulgent mother. Her eldest daughter had
great personal beauty, and the younger ones, by pre-
tending to be as handsome as their sister, imitating
her air, and dressing in the same style, did very well.

This brief accOunt of the family is intended to
supersede the necessity of a long and minute detail
from Mrs Thorpe herself, of her past adventures and
sufferings, which might otherwise be expected to occupy
the three or four following chapters, in which the
worthlesencss of lords and attomies might be set forth;
and conversations which had passed twenty years
before he minutely repeated.

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23

than”: H.

ATHERINE was not so much engaged at the
theatre, that evening, in ramming the node and
smiles of Miss Thorpe, though they certainly

claimed much of her leisure, as to forget to look with
an inquiring eye for Mr Tilney in every box which
her eye could reach; but she looked in vain. Mr
Tilney was no fonder of the play than the Pump-room.
She hoped to be more fortunate the next day; and
when her wishes for ﬁne weather were answered by
arcing a beautiful morning, she hardly felt a doubt of it;
for a ﬁne Sunday in Bath empties every house of its
inhabitants, and all the world appears on such an
occasion, to walk about, and tell their acquaintance
what a charming day it is.

As soon as divine service was over, the Thorpes and
Aliens eagerly joined each other; and, after staying
long enough In the Pump-room to discover that the
crowd was insupportable, and that there was not a
genteel face to be seen, which everybody discovers
every Sunday throughout the season, they hastened
away to the rescent, to breathe the fresh air of better
company. Here Catherine and Isabella, arm in arm,
again tasted the sweets of friendship in an unreserved
enumeration. They talked much, and with much
mjoyment; but again was Catherine disappointed in
her hope of ne-seeing her partner. He was no where
to be met with; every search for him was equally
“Successful, in morning lounges or evening assemblies,
Hither at the upper nor lower rooms, at dressed or
lllltll'eseed balls was he perceivable; nor among the
Walkers, the horsemen, or the curricle-driven of the
morning. His name was not in the Pump-room hook,
Ind curiosity could do no more. He must be gone

24 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

from Bath; yet he had not mentioned that his stay
would be so short. This sort of mysteriousness, which
is always so becoming in a hero, threw a fresh grace, in
Catherine’s imagination, around his person and manners,
and increased her anxiety to know more of him. From
the Thorpes she could learn nothing, for they had been
only two days in Bath before they met with Mrs
Allen. It was a subject, however, in which she often
indulged with her ﬁir friend, from whom she received
every possible encouragement to continue to think of
him; and his impression on her fancy was not suﬂ‘ered
therefore to weaken. Isabella was very sure that he
must be a charming young man; and was equally sure
that he must have been delighted with her dear
Catherine, and would therefore shortly return. She
liked him the better for being a clergyman, “for she
must confess herself very to the profession;"
and something like a sigh escaped her as she said it.
Perhaps Catherine was wrong in not demanding the
cause of that gentle emotion, but she was not experi-
enced enough in the ﬁnesse of love, or the duties of
friendship, to know when delicate millery was properly
called for, or when a conﬁdence should be forced.

Mrs Allen was now quite happy, quite satisﬁed with
Bath. She had found some acquaintance; had been so
lucky, too, as to ﬁnd in them the family of a most
worthy old friend; and, as the completion of good
fortune, had found these friends by no means so ex-
pensiver dressed as herself. Her daily expressions
were no longer, “I wish we had some acquaintance in
Bath! ” They were changed into, “ How glad I am
we have met with Mrs Thorpe! ” and she was as
eager in promoting the intercourse of the two families
as her young charge and Isabella themselves could be ;
never satisﬁed with the day unless she spent the chief
of it by the side of Mn Thorpe, in what they called

NORTHANGER ABEEY. 25

mutation; but in which then wan acarcely ever any
exchange of opinion, and not often any resemblance of
mh‘ t, ﬁat Mrs Thorpe ulked chieﬂy of her children,
an Mn Allen of her gowns.

The progrett of the friendnhip between Catherine
and label]: was quick as its beginning had been warm;
and they paused so rapidly through every gradation of
loom-in tenderness, that therewas shortly no fresh
roof 0 it to be given to their friends or themselvee.
ll'heytmlled each other bytheir Christiannarne,were
Ilwaya arm-in-ann when they walked, pinned u each
other‘u train for the dance, and were not to be 'vided
inthe net; and, if a rainy morning deprived them of
other enjoyments, they were nil! resolute .in meeting in
deﬁance of wet and dirt, and tho: themselves up to
read novels together. Yes, novels; for I will not
ldopt that ungenemus and impolitic custom, so common
with novel writers, of degrading, by their contemptuoue
CED-IR, the very performance: to the number of
which they are themselves adding: joining with their
greatest enemies in bestowing the harshest epithet: on
lath works, and scarcely ever rrnitting them to be
lead by their own heroine, who, if she accidentally take
up a novel, i! sure to turn over its indpid page: with
' Alanl if the heroine of one novel be not
patronized by the heroine of mother, ﬁom whom can
flit expect protection and regard? I unnot approve of
It Let us leave it to the Reviewer: to abate such
tllilsinrna of fancy at their leisure, and over every new
novel to talk in threadbare strains of the trash with which
the pres. now groans. Let no not desert one another;
we are an injured body. Although our productions
luve afforded more extensive and unall’ected pleaaure
than those of any other literary corporation in the world,
no species of composition has been so much decried.
From pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foes are almoat

C

26 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

as many as our readers; and while the alilities of the
nine-hundredth abridger of the History of England, or
of the man who collects and publishes in a volume some
dozen lines of Milton, Pope, and Prior, with a paper
from the Spectator, and a chapter from Sterne, are
eulogized by a thousand pens, there seems almost a
general wish of decrying the ca city and undervaluing
the labour of the novelist, and orslighu'ng the perfum-
ances which have only genius, wit, and taste to recom-
mend them. “ I am no novel reader; I seldom look
into novels; do not imagine that I ofnen read novels;
it is really very well for a novel.” Such is the common
cant. “ And what are you reading, Miss -——1’”
“Oh! it is .only a novel!” replies the youn lady;
while she lays down her book with atfected indi rence,
or momentary shame. “ It is only Cecilia, or Camilla,
or Belinda; " or, in short, only some work in which
the greatest powers of the mind are displayed, in which
the most thorough knowledge of human namre, the
happiest delineation of its varieties, the liveliest effusion-
nf wit and humour, are conveyed to the world in the
best chosen language. Now, had the some young lady
been engaged with a volume of the Spectator, inmad of
such a work, how proudly would she have produced the
book, and told its name! though the chance: must be
against her being occupied byany part of that voluminous
publication, of which either the matter or manner would
not disgust a young person oftaste; the substance ofim
papers so often consisting in the statement of improbable
circumstances, unnatural characten, and topics of can-
versan'on, which no longer concern any one living; and
their language, too, frequently so coarse a to give no
very favourable idea of the age that could endure it.

 

NORTEANGER um. 27

chapter ‘93.

HE following conversation, which took place
between the two friends in the Pump-room one
morning, after an acquaintance of eight or nine

days, is given as a specimen of their very warm attach-
ment, and of the delicacy, discretion, originality of
thought, and literary taste which marked the reasonable-
neu of that attachment.

They met lay appointment; and an Isabella had
arrived nearly ve minutes before her friend, her ﬁrst
address naturally was: “ dearest creature, what can
have made you so late? {have been waiting for you
at least thit age! ”

" Have you, indeed? I am very sorry for it, but
really I thought I was in very good time. It is but
just one. I hope you have not been here long?”

“ Oh! these ten ages at least. I am sure I have
been here this half hour. But now, let us go and sit
down at the other end of the room and enjoy ourselves.
I have an hundred things to say to you. In the ﬁrst
place, I was no afraid it would rain this morning just as
I wanted to set off; it looked very showery, and that
would have rhrown me into agonies! Do you know I
saw the prettiest hat you can imagine in a shop window -.
in Milsom Street just now; very like yours, only with
enquelicot ribbons instead of green; I quite longed for
it. But, my dearest Catherine, what have you been
doing with yourself all this morning? Have you gone
on with Udolpho 2 ”

“Yes, I have been reading it ever since I woke;
and I am got to the black veil.”

“Are you, indeed? How delightﬁil! Oh ! I
would not tell you what is behind the black veil for the
world! Are not you wild to know .’ ”

28 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“Oh! yes, quite; what can ithe? Butdo not tell
me: I would not be told upon any account. I know
it must be a skeleton; I am sure it is Lanrentina’s
skeleton. Oh! I am deligth with the book! I
should like to spend my whole life in reading it, I auure
you; if it had not been to meet you, I would not have
come away from it for all the world.”

“ Dear creature, how much I am obliged to you;
and when you have ﬁnished Udolpho, we will read the
Italian together; and I have made out a list of ten or
twelve more of the nine kind for you.”

“Haveyou, indeed! How glad I am! What are
they all r "

“I will read you theirnames directly; here theyare
in my pocket-book. Castle of Wolfenhach, Clerrnont,
Myetetioul Warnings, Necromancer of the Black Forest,
Midnight Bell, Orphan of the Rhine, and Horrid
Mysteries. Those will last In none time.”

“Yes; pretty well; but are they all horrid? Are
you sure they are all horrid?”

“Yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine, a
Mist Andrewo, a sweet girl, one of the sweetest crea-
tures in the world, has read every one of them. I wish
you knew Miss Andrews, you would be delighted with
her. She in netting herself the sweetest cloak you can
conceive. I think her as heauu'ful asan mgel, and I
am so Veiled with the men for not admiring her ! I scold
them all amazingly about it.”

“ Scold them! Do you scold them for not admiring
her?”

“ Yes, that I do. There is nothing I would not do
for thou who are really my friende. I have no notion
of loving people by halves; it is not my nature. My
attachments are always excessively strong. I told Capt.
Hunt, at one of our assemblies this winter, that if he
was to tease me all night, I would not dance with him,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 39

mien he would allow Min Andrews to be u beautiﬁrl
u an angel. The men think no incapable of Ialfriend—
Ihip, you know, and I am determined to Ihow them
the diﬁ'erence. Now, if I were to hear anybody Ipeak
alightingly of on, I ahould ﬁre up in a moment: but
that in not It a I likely, for you are just the kind of girl
to he a great favourite with the men.”

“Oh, dear! ” cried Catherine, colouring, “how can

any so P ”
“ I know you ve well; have to much anima-
tion, which is exa y what Andrew: wanta; for

I must confesa there in something amazingly
about her. Ohl I Inth tell you, that, just after we
parted yesterday. I aw a young man looking at you no
tame-ﬂy ; I am sure he is in love with you.” Catherine
coloured, and disclaimer! again. Iuahella laughed.
"It is very true, upon my honour; but I see howitia:
you are indifferent to everybod a admiration, except
that of one gentleman, who be nameletn. Nay,
I cannot blame you ” more oerioualy)—
“ your feeling- ue easily understood. Where the heart in
really attached, I know very well how little one can be
gleaned with the mention of anybody else. Every-
thing ia so inei id, to unintereating, that does not relate
to the belo object! I can perfectly comprehend
your feelingl.”

“But you Ihould not permade me that I think so
very much about Mr Tilney, for perhapa I may never
lee him again."

“Not lee him againl My dearest creature, do not
talkofit. Iamlure you would be miner-able ifynu
thou In no."

“ o, indeed; I should not. I do not pretend to
lay that I we not very much leased with him; but
while I have Udol ho to read, feel asifnobody could
make me mineral: e. Oh! the dreadful black veil!

30 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

My dear Inhella, I am me there mutt be Lanrentina'n
skeleton behind it.”

“ It in so odd to me, that youehould never haveread
Udolpho before; but I suppose Mn Morland objeeu to
novels."

“ No, Ihe doea not. She very often reads Sir Charla
Grandioon henelf ; but new books do not fall in our
wa .”

‘y‘Sir Charlel Gmndinonl That it an amazing
horrid hook, is it not? I remember Mia Andrews
could not get through the ﬁne volume.”

“ It is not like Udolpho at all ; but yet I think it in
very entertaining.”

“ Do you indeed? you curprize me; I thought it
had not been readable. But, my dearest Cetherine,
have you Iettled what to wear on your head to-night?
I am detemiined, at all events, to ' be dreued exactly
like you. The men take notice of that sometimes, you
know.”

“ But it does not tignify, if they do," nid Catherine,
very innocently,

“Signify! oh heaven-l I make it a rule never to
mind what they say. They are very often amazingly
impeninent, if you do not treat them with vpirit, and
make them keep their distance.”

“Are they? Well, I never observed (but. They
alway- behave very well to me.”

“ Oh! they give themselves Iuch sin. They are
the molt conceited creatures in the world, and think
them-elven of to much importance ! By-the-hye, though
I have thought of it a hundred times, I have always
forgot to ask you what in your favourite complexion in
a man. Do you like them belt dark or fair? ”

“I hardly know. I never much, thought Ibout it.
Something between both, I think ; brown : not fair,
and not very dark.”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3 I

“ Very well, Catherine. That ll exactly be. I
have not forgot your description of Mr Tilney: ' a
brown akin, with dark eyes, and rather dark hair.’
Well, my taste it different. I prefer light eyes; and
at to complexion, do you know, I like a allow better
than any other. You must not betray me, if you thould
ever meet with one of your acquaintance nurturing that
ducription.”

“ Betray you! What do you mean i”

“ Nay, do not dintreu me. I believe I have laid too
much. Let us drop the subject.”

Catherine, in some amazemeng'complied; and, after
remaining a few moments silent, wan on the point of re-
verting to what interested her at that time rather more
dun anythin else in the world, Laurentina’l skeleton;
when her riend prevean her, by saying: “ For
Heaven’l lake ! let ue move away from this end of the
room. Do you know, there are two odiuul young men
who have been staring at me this half hour. They
really put me quite out of countenance. Let us go and
look at the arrivals. They will hardly follow u: there."

Away they walked to the book; and while Inbella
examined the names, it was Catherine’a employment to
watch the proceedings of these alarming young men.

" They are not coming this way, are they? I ho
they are not so impertinent an to follow ue. Pray et
me know if they are coming. I am determined I will
not look up.”

In a few momenta Catherine, with unaffected plea-
uue, natured her that the need not be longer uneasy, as
the gentlemen had just left the Pump-room.

“ And which way are they gone P " said Isabella,
turning hattin round. “ One was a very good-looking
young nun.”

“ They went towards the churchyard.”

“ Well, I am amazingly glad I have got rid of them!

32 non-rumour: new.

And now, what my you to going to Edgar‘n Building-
with me, and looking at my new hat? You said you
Ihould like to see it.”

Catherine mdily agreed. “ Only," the added,
“perhaps we may overtake the two young men.”

“ Oh ! never mind that. If we make hate, vie Ihall
you by them presently, and I am dying to‘ uhow you
my hat."

“ But if we only wait a few minuter, there will hem
danger of our Ieeing them at all.”

“ I rhnll not pay them any such compliment, I mute
you. I have no notion of treating men with Inch re-
lpecr. Tim: is the way to Ipoil them.”

Catherine had nothing to oppose againat ruch muon-
ing; and therefore, to show the ind oe of Miss
Tho , and her resolution of humh ing the our, they
net 0 immediately,” fast a they could walk, in Fur—
mit of the two young men. .

 

chapter 17]].

ALF a minute conducted them through thePump-

yard to the archway, 'te Union Pannge ; but

here they were atop Everybody acquainted
with Bath may remember the difficulties nfcrmring Cheap
Street at this point; it i] indeed a street of no impertinent
a nature, I no unfortunately connected with the t
London and Oxford roads, and the princiPal inn 0 the
city, that a day never panel in which parties of ladies,
however important their hurineu, whether in qua of
pantry, millinery, or ewn (u in the Present cue) of
young men, are not detained on one nude or other hy
carriages, horsemen, or cam. Thin evil had been felt
and lamented, at lent three time: a day, by label]:

NORTKANGER ABBEY. 33

inceherreeidenoe in Bath; andehewaenowfnted to
feelandlameutitnncemore; for at theveryrnornent
of coming opposite to Union Pamge, and Within view
of the two gentlemen who were proceeding through the
crowde, end threading the gutter: of that intereeting
alley, they were prevented crossing by the approach of a
gig, driven along on bad pavement by I met kuowin -
looking coachman, with I" the vehemence that no d
molt filly endanger the liver of himself, his companion,
and his hone.

“0h, these odioue gigel ” mid Isabella, looking up,
“how I detest them] ” But thie detemtion, though
In just, was of short duration, for ahe looked again, and
exclaimed, “Delightful! Mr Morland and my
brother! "

“Good heaven! ’5: James!” wan uttered at the
nine moment by Catherine; and, on catchiugthe young
“ftn’l eyea, the horse was immediately checked with a
noise which almolt threw him on his hauochea, and the
Inuit having now tampered up, the gentlemenjumped
M. and the equipage was delivered to hie care.

Catherine, by whom thin meeting was wholl unex-
Ptcttd, received her brother with the liveliest ensure;
Ind he, being of a very amiable diepoeition, and Iinoelely
attached to her, gave ev proof on his side of equal
:ﬁlzaction, hﬁo d have leuure' teach, the

“gt 0 int 0 wereinceuan ch en‘n
“.1 and to her devoiru were linedin
With a mixture of joy and embarrassment which might
have informed Catherine, had Ill! been more expert in
[he development at other people’s feelings, and lens
Imply engroued by her own, that her brother thought
lkr friend quite an pretty an the could do henelf.

John Thorpe, who in the meantime, had been giving
09km about the horses, soon joined them, and from
lam nu.- directly received the nmendn which were her

34 HORN-[ANGER ABBEY.

due; for while he alightly and carelessly touched the
hand of Isabella, on her he bestowed a whole tcrape
and half: Ihort bow. He Via a tout young man, of
middling height, who, with a plain (ice and ungracefnl
form, teemed fearful of being too handme, unlen he
wore the dress of: groom, and too much like a gentle-
man nnleu he were euy where he ought to be civil, and
impndent where he might be allowed to be euy. He ~
took out hi: watch : “How long do u think we have
been running it from Tetbury, Min orland 2"

“I do not know the dimoe." Her brother told
her that it war twenty-three miles.

“The: and twenty!” cried Thorpe; “ﬁve Ind
twenty if it ll an inch.” Morlznd renounced,
pleaded the authori of mad-boob, ink to, and
mileutonet; but hit 'end disregarded them ; he had
a outer tent of diltanoe. “ I know it mun be ﬁve and
twenty," laid he, “ by the one we have been doing it.
It it now half after one; we drove out of the inn-yard
at Tetbury as the town-clock struck eleven ; and I defy
any man in England to make my home go leu than ten
mile! an hour in hameu; that makes it exactly twenty-
ﬁve."

“ You have loot an hour,” said Morland; “ it we. only
ten o'clock when we came from Tethury.”

“Ten o’clock! it wan eleven, upon my toul! I
counted every make. Thin brother of your: would

me out of my tenses, Min Morland; do but
ool: at my hone; did you ever one an animal 00
made for speed in your life ? ” (The servant had just
mounted the carriage and wa- driving of.) “ Such
true blood! Three hourl and I half, indeed. coming
onl three and twenty gill”! Lgok at that cram,
an In it uible ' on can.

“P11851101; very ml to be lure! ”

“Hotl be had not turned a hair till we came to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 35

Walcot church: but look at hit ﬁatehead; look at h'y
loinl ; only nee how he moves; that bone rmnlgolell
than ten miles an hour: tie his leggandhe willgeton.
What do you think of my gig, Min Morland? A neat
oue,ii it not? Well hung; town built: I have not
had it a month. It was built for a Chit—church man,
a friend of mine, a very good non of fellow; he ran it
a few weeks, till, I believe, it was convenient to have
done with it. I happened jun then to be looking out
for some light thing of the kind, though I had pretty
well denennined on a curricle too; but I chanced to
meet him on Magdalen Bridge, II he was driving into
Oxford, lat hem: ‘Ah! Thorpe,’ laid he, ‘do you
happen to want such a little thing “thin? It in a
apital one of the kind, but I am turned tired of it.’
‘Ohl d ,’ said I, ‘I am your man; what do you
ark? ’ And how much do you think he did, Miss
Morland .’ "

“I am sure I cannot gueu at all.”

“Curricle-hnng, you see; neat, trunk, sword-cue,
planting-board, lamps, ailver moulding, all, you nee,
complete; the iron-work no good an new, or .
He asked ﬁfty guinea: I cloned with him directly,
threw down the money, and the carriage was mine.”

“ And I am sure,” said Catherine, “ I know no little
of MC]! things, that I cannot judge whether it wan cheap
or dear.”

“Neither one nor t’other; I might have got it for
lot, I dare I: ; but I hate haggling, and poor Freeman
wanted. cah.’

“That was very good‘natnred of you,” kid
Catherine, quite pleated.

I‘Oh! d—— it, when one has the mean! ofdoinga
kind thing by a friend, I hate to be pitiful."

An inquiry now took place into the intended move-
ment of the young ladie- ; and, on ﬁnding whither they

 

36 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

weregoing,itwu decided that the gentlemen thonld
ucompany them to Edgar‘o Buildings, and pay their
reepecuto Mn Thorfe. James and Inhella led the
way; and lo well lauded war the latter with her lot.
to contentedly was the enduvmuing to cum I plunnt
walk to him who brought the double reconunendntion of
being her brother’s friend and her friend’s brother, 30
pure and uncoqueuieh were her feelin that, though

overtook and pasted the two oﬂ'en ' 3 young men
in 'nom Sum-hewarlofarﬁomneeﬁngwamct
their notice, that the looked hack at them only three
times.

John Tharp kept of course with Catherine, and,
after afew minutes Iilence, renewed the conversation
about his gig: “You will ﬁnd, however, Mi- Mor-
land, it would be reckoned a cheap thing by tome
people, for I might have told it for ten guinea: more
the next day; Jacluon, of Oriel, bid nie uixtyat once ;
Morland was with me at the time."

“Yes,” Iaid Morland, who overheard thin; “but
you forget that your horse wu included."

“My horse! oh, d~—- it! I would not tell my
hone for ahundred. Are you fond of an open corri-
age, Miss Morlnnd 3”

“Yes, very; I have hardly ever an o Panamity of
being in one; but I am particularly fond ogre”

“I am glad ofit; I will drive you outin mineevery
da I),

z"I‘hnnlr you," aid Catherine, in rome dim-ens, from
a doubt of the propriety of acceptin arch in offer.

“ I will drive you up Lanadown ill lo-morrow.”

“ Thank you ; but will not your hone want
rent ? "

“Rest! hehn onlyoorne three and twenty mile-
to-day; all nonaeme ; nothing ruim hone: to much as
net; nothing knockl them up no noon. No, no ; I

NORTH AN GER ABBEY. 37

Ihallexercieemineat the average offour hour! every
while I am here.”

" Shall you, indeed ? ” aid Catherine, very Ierioualy,
“that will be fort miles a day.”

“ Forty l aye, fty for what I care. Well, I will drive
you u Lanndnwn to—morrow ; mind, I am engaged."

“ ow delightful that will be! ” cried Inhella,
turning round; “ my dearer: Catherine, I quite envy
you ; but I am afraid, brother, you will not have room
for a thir ”

“A third, indeed! no, no; I did not come to Bath
to drive In timer! about; that would he a good joke,
faith ! Myorland rnuat who care of you.”

This brought on a dialogue of civilitiee between the
other two ; but Catherine heard neither the
nor the result. Her companion’l dieoonne now sunk
from it: hitherto animated to nothing more than a
short, decidve eentence of praite or condemnation on the
face of every woman they met; and Catherine, after
linening and agreeing on long an the could, with all the
civility and deference of the youthful female mind,
liarful of haurding an opinion of its own in opposition
to that of a uelf-auured man, especially where the beauty
of her own eex ll concerned, ventured at length to vary
the subject by a question which had been long upper-
most in her thoughts: it wan. “Have you ever read
‘ Udol hn,’ Mr Thorpe P ”

“‘ dolpho!’ oh, Lordl not I; I never read
novell; I have something else to do."

Catherine, humbled and aeharned, wu going to
a ogize for her question; but he prevented her
laying, “Novels are all to full of noneenae and cor !
there has not been a tolerany decent one come out
inc: ‘Tom Jones,’ except the ‘Monlu’ I read that
t’other day; hutae for all die other-,they are the
aupideat thing: in creation.

38 nonmmon sum.

“ I think you must like ‘ Udolpho,’ if you were to
read it; it is so very interesting.”

“Not I, ﬁith! No,if I read any, it shall be Mrs
Radcliife’s; her novels are amusing enough; they are
worth reading ; some fun and nature in than.” ‘

“ Udolpho wan written by Mrs Radcliffe,” said
Catherine, with some hesitation, from the fear of mor-
tifying him.

“No, sure; wait? Aye, I remember, IO it was;
I was thinking of that other stupid book, written by that
woman they make such: fuss about; she who married
the French emigrant.”

“ I suppose you menu Camilla

“Yes, that’sthe book; such unnatural m5! An
old man playing at lee-saw; I took up the ﬁn: volume
once, and looked it over, but I soon found it would not
do ; indeed, I guessed what sort of stuff it must be
before I saw it : as soon as I heard she had man-ied an
emigrant, I was sure I should never be able to get
through it.”

“ I have never read it.”

“ You had no loss, I assure you; it it the horriden
nonsense you can imagine; thereisnothing in the world
in it but an old man’s playing at nee-saw Ind leaning
Latin ; upon my soul, there is not.”

This critique, the justness of which was unfortunately
lost on poor Catherine, brought them to the door of
Mrs Thorpe’s lodgings, and the feelings of the diocem-
ing and un rejudiced reader of Camilla gave way to the
feelings ofP the dutiﬁil and affectionate son, no they met
Mrs Thorpe, who had descried them from above, in the
passage. “ Ah, mother, how do you do 2 ” said he,

' giving her a hearty shake of the hand : “ where did you
get that quiz of a hat, it makes you look like an old
witch? Here is Morland and I come to my a few
days with you; to you mun look out for a couple of

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 39

good beds acme where near.” And this arklnesa
seemed to satisfy all the foudest wishes of the mother's
heart, for she received him with the moat delighted and
exulting aﬂ'ection. On his two younger sister: he then
bestowed an equal portion of his fraternal tenderness, for
he asked each of them how they did, and observed that
they both looked very ugly.

These manner! did not please Catherine; but he was
James’s friend and Inabella's brother; and her jluig-
rneut was further bought of hy Isabella’s assuring her,
when they withdrew to see the new hat, that John
thought her the most charming girl in the world, and
by John’s engaging her before they parted to dance with
him that evening. Had she been older or vainer, arch
attacks might have done little; but where youth and
diﬂideuce are united, it requires uncommon steadiness of
reason to redatthe attraction of being called the most
charming girl in the world, and being I0 very early
engaged as a partner; and the consequence was, that
when the two Morlands, after sitting an hour with the
I'horpes, net oi? to walk together to Mr Allen's, and
lumen, as the door was closed on them, said, “ Well,
Catherine, how do you like my friend Thorpe 9 " in-
stead of answering, as she probably would have done,
had there been no friendship and no ﬂattery in the case,
“ I do not like him at all ; ’ she directly replied, “ I like
him very much; he seems very agreeable.”

“ He is as good-natured a fellow as ever lived; a
little of a rattle; but that will recommend him to your
sex, I believe: and how do you like the relt of the
Eunil 9”

“ ery, very much indeed: Isabella particularly.”

“I am verygladto hear you eayeo: sheisjustthe
kind of young woman I could wish to see you attached
to; she has so much good sense, and is so thoroughly
uniﬁected sud amiable; I alwayl wanted you to know

4O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

her; and she eeerns very fondofyou. She laid the
highest things in your praise that could possibly be;
and the praire of ouch a girl as Mi- Thorpe, even you,
Catherine,” taking her hand with aﬁection, “may be
proud of.”

“Indeed I am,” she reolied; “ I love her exceed-
ingly, and am delighted to ﬁnd diat you like her too.
You hardly mentioned anything of her when you wrote
to me nfter your visit there.”

“ Because I thought I should noon see you myself-
I hopeyou will heagreatdealtogether while you are
in Bath. Sheisanmet amiable girl; such a su ‘ r
undemdingl How food all the family are her;
she is evidently the general favourite; and how much
she’ngustbe admired in such a place a: this. Is not
she . ’

“ Yes, very much, indeed, I fancy; Mr Allen think:
her the rettestgirl in Ba .”

“I say he docuandldonotkmwanyruan
who is a better judge of beauty than Mr Allen. I need
not ask you whether you are happy here, my dear
Catherine ; with such a companion and friend as
Isabella Thorpe, it would be impossible for you to be
otherwise; and the Allens, I am sure, are very kind to
you ’

“Yes, very kind; I never was no happ before; and
now you are come it will he more deligh flan ever.
Howgooditisofyouto comesofnronpurpooeto lee
are."

James accepted this tribute of gratitude, and qualiﬁed
his conscienca for ace ting it too, by eaying with r-
fect sincerity, “ odes: Catherine, love you dear y.”

Inquiries and communications concerning brothen
and sisters, the situation of none, the growth of the rest.
and other family matterl, now I‘m-ed between them,
and continued, with only one nnal digression on Jam's

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 4!

in praiee of Miss Thorpe, till they reached
Eilieney Street, where he was welcomed with great
kindness by Mr and Mn Allen, invited by the former
to dine with them, and lumrnoned by the latter to gue-
the price and weigh the merit: of a new muff and tippet.
A pie-engagement in Edgar’e Buildings prevented hit
accepting the invitation of one friend, and obliged him
tnhurryawayaeeoonu he had notiﬁed the demand.
of the other. The time of the two partiee’ uniting in the
Oct: on Room being correctly adjusted, Catherine wan
then ieft to the luxury of a raised, restless, and frightened
inngination over the pages of Udolpho, lost from all
worldly concemu of dressing and dinner, inupahle of
nothing Mn Allen’s fem on the delay of an expected
dreetmaker, and having only one minute in sixty to
bestow even on the reﬂection of her own felicity, in
bdng already engaged for the evening.

Chest" 1733].

N of Udolpho and the dreuntaker, however, the
rty from Pulteney Street reached the Upper-
;{oorne in very good time. The Thorpe: and
Jamel Morland were there only two minuten before
them; and Ieabella having gone through the usual
ceremonial of meeting her friend with the moat tmiling
and affectionate haste, of admiring the set of her gown,
and envying the curl of her hair, they followed their
chaperont, arm-in-ann, into the ball-room, whispering
to each other whenever a thought occurred, and sup-
plying the place of many idea. by a Iqueeze of the hand
or a Imile of affection.
The dancing began within a few minute: after they
were nested; and James, who had been engaged quite
D

42 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

u long In his timer, one very importnnate with Inhella
tomndnp; but John wu goneinto theurd-mom to
upeak to a friend, and nothing, the declared, Ihould
induce her to join the set before her dar Catherine
could join it too. “ I usure you,” eaid the, “ I would
not stand up without your dear sister, for all the world 3
for if! did, we thould certainly be Icy-rated the whole
evening.” Catherine accepted thin kindneu with gati-
tude, and they condoned no they were for three minutes
longer, when Isabella, who had been talking to Jame.
on the other tide of her, turned again to hit litter and
whitpered, “ My dear creature, I am afraid I moat leave
you, your brother ii to amazingly impatient to begin ; I
know you will not mind my going away, and I dare lay
John will be back in a moment, and then you may easily
ﬁnd me out.” Catherine, though a little dinppointed,
had too much good nature to make any opposition, and
the othera rising up, label]: had only time to pre- her
friend’e hand an; ray, “ -hye, In dear love," before
hurried o . The can 1' Th bein
:lllgdancing, Catherine wlha lg to the meat Mtg
Thorpe and Mrs Allen, between whom ahe now
remained. She could not hel being vexed at the non-
: cc of Mr Thorpe: r the not only longed to
he dancing, but waa likewise aware that, an the rul
dignity of her tituation could not be known, the was
sharing with the acora of other young ladiel still Iitting
down all the diaeredit of wnnu'ng a partner. To be
diagraced in the eye of the world, to wear the appear-
ance of infamy while her heart in all ’ , her union;
all innocence, and the rniaconduct 0 another the true
Iource of her debuement, in one of tho-e circumlancee
which peculiarly belong to the hemine’a liqu her
fortitude under It what particularly digniﬁee her charac-
ter. Catherine had fortitude too; the WWW

murmur pan-ed her lipa.

NORTHANG ER ABBEY. 43

From thil name of humiliation the win roused, at the
tnd of an minutes, to a pleasanter feeling, by neeing.
not Mr Thorpe, but Mr Tilney, within three yards of
the place where they not: he eeemed to be moving that
way, but he did not lee her, and, therefore, the smile
and the blush, which hit sudden re-appearance raised in
Catherine, paued away without aullying her heroic
importance. He looked as handmme and u lively at
ever, and wan talking with interest to a fanhionahle and
planing-looking young woman, who leant on his arm,
and whom Catherine immediately gueslcd to be hie
litter; thul unthinkineg throwing away a fair oppor-
tunity of considering him lost to her for ever, by being
married already. But, guided only by what was aim le
and probable, it had never entered her head that ﬁlr
Tilney could be married; he had not behaved, he had
not talked, like the married men to whom Ihe had been
need; he had never mentioned a wife, and he had ac-
knowledged a sitter. From there circumstance span
the innint conclusion of hit liqu now being by hi:
ride; and, drerefore,intread of turning of a deathlilte
planets, and falling in a lit on Mr: Allen’a bosom,
Catherine tat erect, in the perfect one of her rennet, and
with cheeka only a little redder than ulual.

Mr Tilney and his companion, who continued,
though dowly, to approach, were immediately preceded
by a lady, an acquaintance of Mn Thorpe; and thin
lady are ing to Ipeak to her, they, an belonging to her,
ﬂopped 'kew'ue, and Catherine, catching Mr Tilney’e
eye, innantly received from him the amiling tribute of

nition. She returned it with pleasure, and then
advancing ntill nearer, he spoke both in her and Mn
Allen, by whom he war very civilly acknowledged.
“Iarnveryhap ytoaeeyoua' tir,indeed; Iwu
afraid you had left Both." 2: thanked her for her
fear-,nndeaidthathe hadquittcditfor aweekonthe

44 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

very morning after hie having had the pleamre of seeing
her.

“ Well, air, and I dare nay you are not eorry to be
back again, for it is just the place for young p le;
and, indeed, for everybody else too. I tell Mr A en,
when he talk: of being sick of it, that I am lure he
thould not complain, for it ll 90 very agreeable a place,
that it in much better to be here than at home at this
dull time of yea . I tell him he in quite in luck to be
cent here for his health."

“ And I hope, madam, that Mr Allen will be
obliged to like the place, from ﬁnding it of eenice to
him. ’

“Thank on, air. I have no doubt that he will. A
neighbour ofy ours, Dr Skinner, was here for bit health
last winter, and came away quite Itout.”

“ That circumstance must give great encouragement.”

“ Yea, air; and Dr Skinner and hi: family were here
threermnthe; lo I tell Mr Allen hemmwbein a
hu to get away."

ere th were interrupted by a requeet from Mrs
Thorpe to (are Allen, that the would move a little to
accommodate Mn Hughee and Men Tilney with seats,
at they had agreed to join their party. Thia was
accordingly done, Mr Tilney still continuing standing
before them; and, after a few minutee' consideration,
he asked Catherine to dance with him. This compli-
ment, delightful as it was, produced severe mortiﬁcation
to the lady; and, in giving her denial, the expressed
her sorrow on the occasion to very much at if ehe really
felt it, that had Thorpe, who joined her just afterwards,
been half a minute earlier, he might have thought her
suffering. rather too acute. The very easy manner in
which he then told her that he had keyt her waiting,
did not by any meant reconcile her more to her lot; nor
did the particulars which he entered into while they

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 45

were standing up, of the hornet and dog- of the friend
whom he had jult left, and of I proposed exchange of
terriers between them, interest her In much an to prevent
her looking ve often towardl that part of thereon:
where she had eft Mr Tilney. Of her dear Inhella,
In whom ehe arn'cularly longed to point out that gentle-
man, she co d lee nothing. They were in diﬂ'erent
sea. She was cepanted from all her party, and away
from all her acquaintance; one mortiﬁcation succeeded
another, and from the whole the deduced this ruefnl
lcuon, that to go previoucly engaged to a hall does
not nececsarily increase either the dignity or enjoyment
of a young lady. From such a moralizmgstrain ac thin
the w ouddeniy roueed by a touch on the choulder;
and turning round, merved Mn Hugheo directly
behind her, mended Miu Tilney and n gendenun.
“I beg your pardon, 'u Morlond,” aid she, “for
thin libert , but I cannot anyhow get to Miu Thorpe;
and Mn mid ahe was cure you would not have
the lean objection to letting in this young lady by you.”
Mrs Hughel could not have a lied to any creature in
the room more happy to oblige her than Catherine.
The young ladiee were introduced to each other, Mine
Tilney expreuing a proper genie ofeuch goodneu ; Mist
Marland. with the real delicacy of a generous mind,
making light of the obligation; and Mn Hughes. latic-
ﬁed with having so respecth settled her young charge,
returned to her party.

Min Tilneyhad a goodﬁgure,aprettyface,anda
very I e countenance; and her air, though it had
not the decided pretension, the reeolute Juli-hoe“,
of Mill Thorpe’l, had more real elegance. Her man-
ner: ahewed good Ience and good breeding; they were
neither thy, nor Iﬁectedly open; and ahe ceerned
capable of being young, attractive, and at a bell, without
wanting to ﬁx the mention of every man near her, and

46 VDRTHANGER ABBEY.

without exaggerated feelings of extatic delight or in.
conceivable vexation on e little triﬂing occurrence.
Catherine, interested at once y her appearance and her
relan'onship to Mr Tilney, was desirous of being ac-
quainted with her, and readily talked, therefore, when-
ever she could think of anything to say, and had courage
and leisure for saying it. But the lundranoe thrown in
the way of a very speedy intimacy, by the frequent want
of one or more of these requisites, prevented their doing
more than going through the ﬁrst rudiments of an
acquaintance, by informing themselves how well the
other liked Bath, how much she admired its building:
and surrounding Caitlin-Z; whether she drew, or played,
or sang, and whether e was fond of riding on hone-
back.

The two dances were scarcely concluded, before
Catherine found her arm gently seized by her faithful
Isabella, who in great spirits exclaimed, “At last I
have got you. My dearest creature, I have been looking
for you this hour. What could induce you to come
into this set, when you knew I was in the other? I
have been quite wretched without you."

“My dear Isabella, how was it posible for me to
get at you? I could not even see where you were.”

“ So I told your brother all the time, but he would
not believe me. Do go and nee for her, Mr Morland,
said I ; but all in vain, he would not stir an inch. Was
not it so, Mr Morland? But you men are all so im-
moderately lazy! I have been scolding him to such a
degree, my dear Catherins you would be quite amazed.
You know I never stand upon ceremony with such
people.”

“Look It that young lady with the white bends
round her head,” whispered Catherine, detaching her
friend from James: “ it is Mr Tilney's sister."

" 0h heavens! you don’t say so! Let me look at

NORTHANGER assay. 41

her this moment. What a deli tful girl! I never
saw anything half so beautiful! at where is her all-
conquering brother? Is he in the room! Point him
ontmmedﬁsinstangifheisgldiemseehim.
Mr Morland. you are not to listen; we are not talking
about you.” '

“But what is all this whispering about? Wlntjs
gain on?”

“ here now, I knew how it would be! You men
have such restless curiosity! Talk of the cnrioaityof
men, indeed! ’tis nothing. But be satisﬁed; for
you are not to know anything at all of the matter.”

" And is that like] to satisfy me, do you think?”

“Well, I declare,l never knew anything like you.
What can it signif to you, what we are talking of .’
Perhaps we are king about you; therefore I would
advise you not to listen, or you may hapoen to hear
something not very agreeable.”

In this common- lace chatter, which lasted some
time, the original subject seemed entirely forgotten; and
though Catherine was very well pleased to have it
dropped for 'a while, she could not avoid a liule ans-
pician at the total susﬁension of all Isabella’s impatient
desire to see Mr T ney. When the orchestra struck
up a fresh dance, James would have led his fair partner
away, but she resisted. “I tell you, Mr Morland,”
she cried, “I would not do such a thing for all the
world. How can you he so teasing! Only conceive,
m desr Catherine, what your brother wants me to do?
Hz want: me to dance with him again, though I tell
him that it is a most improper thing, and entirely against
the rules. It would make us theralkoftheplaceﬁl’
we were not to change ers."

“U my honour, ’ said James, “in these public
sssernh ies it is as often done as not."

“Nonsense, how can you say so? But when you

48 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

men have a point to , you never nick at anything.
My sweet Catherine, o In rt me; persuade your
brother how impolsihle it in. ell him, that it would
quite you to see me do loch athing; nowwould
not It . ’

“No, not atnll; bozif you think itwrong, youhad
much better change.”

“There,” cried Inhella, “ you hear what your cine:
aayI, and yet you will not mind her. Well, remember
that it in not to fault, if we Ietall the old ladieein Bath
in a bustle. time along, my dearest Catherine, for
heaven’s sake, and stand b me.” And of they went to
regain their former place. ohn Thorpe,in the meanwhile,
had walked away; and Catherine, ever willing to give Mr
Tilney an opportunity of ting the agreeable request
which had already (latte her once, made her way to
Mn Allen and Mrs Tho a fasten aheoould,in
the hoye of ﬁnding him nil with them, a hope which,
when it proved to be fruitless, she felt to have been
highly unreasonable. “ Well, my dear,” aid Mn
Thorpe, impatient for praize of her own, “I hope you
have had In agreeable partner.”

“ Very agreeable, madam.”

"I am glad ofit. John ha charming spirit-,hal
not he i"

“Did you meet Mr Tilney, my dear?" mid Mn
Allen.

“No: where in he?”

“He was with Ill just now, and aid hewuno tired
of lounging about, that he wan resolved to go and dance;
IOI thoughtperhaprhewonlduk you,if hemetwith

ou.’
y “Where on he he?”nidCatherine,looking round;
but she had not looked round long, before the aw him
leading a young lady to the dance.

“Ah! hehugotaplrtner; I will he lad naked

e v4 .4

NORTHANGER new. 49

you,” said Mu Allen; and after a short silence, she
added, “he is a very agreeable young man.”

“ Indeed he is, Mn Allen,” said Mn Thorpe,
smiling complacently; “ I must say it, though I as his
mother, that thereis not a more agreeable young mo
in the world."

This inapplicable answer might have been too much
for the comprehension of many; but it did not puzzle
Mn Allen; for, after only a moment’s consideration,
the said, in a whisper, to Catherine, “ I dare say she
thought I was speaking of her son."

Catherine was disapfointed and vexed. She seemed
to have missed, by so ittle, the very object she had had
in view; and this persuasion did not Incline her to a
very gracious reply, when John Tho came up to her
soon afterwards, and mid, “Well, ' Morland, I
neroge’yonandIare to stand up and jig it together
I [I].

“Oh, no I I am much ohligedto you, our two dances
mover;and,hesides,1untired,and donotmemto
dance any more.”

“ Do not you? then let us walk about and quiz
people. Come along with me, and I will show you
the {our gratest quizzers in the room; my two younger
sisters and their partners. I have been laughing at them
this half hour.”

Again Catherine excused herself; and at last he
walked off to quiz his sisters by himself. The rest of
the evening she found very dull ; Mr Tilney was drawn
away from their party at tea to amend that of his partner ;
Miss Tilney, though belonging to it, did not sit near
her i and James and Isabella were so much engaged in
conversing together, that the latter had no leisure to
bestow more on her friend than one unilg one squeeze,
and one "dearest Catherine."

50 NORTHAN GER ABBEY.

cbsnttr a”.

HE progress of Catherine’s unhappineu from the
events of the evening wus as follows. It ap«

peered ﬁrst in a general dissatisfacﬁon with
everybody about her, while she remained in the rooms,
which ' y brought on considerable various and a
violent esire to go home. This, on arriving in Pul-
teney Street, took the direction of extraordinary hunger,
and when that was a , changed into an earnest
longing to he in bed. uch was the extreme "nt of
her distress: for when there she immediately linto
a sound sleep, which lasted nine hours, and from which
she awoke perfectly revived, in excellent spirits, with
fresh hopes and fresh schemes. The ﬁrst wish of her
heart was to improve her no uaintance with Miss
Tilney, and almost her ﬁrst reso uu'on to seek her for
that purpose in the Pump-mom at noon. In the
Pump-room one so newly arrived in Bath must be met
with; and that building the had already found so
favourable for the discovery of female excellence, and
the completion of female intimacy, so admirably adapted
for secret discourses and unlimited conﬁdence, that she
was most reasonably encouraged to expect another
friend from within its walls. Her plan for the mom-
ing thus settled, she sat quietly down to her book sfmr
breakfast, resolving to remain In the same place and the
same employment will the clock struck one; and from
habitude very little incommoded by the remarks and
ejaculations of Mrs Allen, whose vscancy of mind, snd
incapacity for thinking, were such. that, as she never
talked a great deal, so she could never be enu'rely l'lent;
and, therefore, while she sat at her work, if she lost her
needle, or broke her thread, if she heard a carriage in
themegorsawaspeckuponhergown,shemnst

NORTHANGER ABBEY. SI

observe it aloud, whether there were any one at leisure
to answer her or not. At about half-put twelve a re-
markably loud rap drew her in hate to the window,
and scarcely had she time to inform Catherine of there
being two open carriages at the door, in the ﬁrst only a
servant, her brother driving Miss Thorpe in the second.
before John Thorpe came running up stairs, calling
out, “ Well, Miss Morland, here I am. Have you
been waiting long? We could not come before, the
old devil of a coachmaker was such an eternity ﬁnding
out a thing ﬁt to be got into, and now it is ten thousand
to one but they break down before we are out of the
ntreet. How do you do, Mrs Allen 9 A famous hsll
lut night. was not it? Come, Miss Morland, bequick,
for the others are in a confounded hurry to be all:
They want to get their tumble over."

“ What do you mean?" said Catherine; “where
are you all going to i”

" Going to ! Why, you have not forgot our en—
gagement? Did not we agree together to take a drive
this morning ? What a head you have? We are going
up Claverton Down."

“ Something was said about it. I remern ,” said
Catherine, looking at Mrs Allen for her opinion; “but
reall , I did not expect you."

“ ot expect rnel That’s a good one! And
what a dust you would have made, if I had not
come! ”

Catherine’s silent appeal to her friend, meanwhile,
wan entirely thrown away; for Mrs Allen, not being at
all in the habit of conveying any expression herself by a
loch was not aware of its being ever intended byany
body clue; and Catherine, whose desire of seeing Miss
Tilney again, could at that moment bear a short delay
in favour of a drive, and who thought there could be no
impropriety in her going with Mr Thorpe,as Inbella

5 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

was going It the some time with James, was drerefore
obliged to Ipeak plainer. “ Well m’atn, what do you
any to it? Can you apare me for an hour or two?
Shall I go P”

“Do 'uet I. learnt, in dear,” ied Mn
Allen, with the manlacid irrydiff'erencenpilatherine
took the advice, and run of to get ready. In a very
few minutes, the reappeared, having marcer allowed
the two other: time enough to get through a few short
sentences in her praise, after Thorpe had procured Mm
Allen’s admiration of hit gig, and then, receiving her
friend’s parting good wieheu, they both hurried down
stairs. " M dearen cmwre,” cried Inhelln, to whom
the duty of 'endnhip immediately called her before the
could get into the carriage, “you have been at lean
three hours getting ready: I wu afraid you were ill.
What a delightful ball we had last night! I have a
thousand thing: to lay to you; but make ham and get
in, for I long to be off.”

Catherine followed her orders and turned away, but
not too soon to hear her friend exclaim aloud to
James, “What a tweet girl the it! I quite doat on
her.”

“ You will not be frightened, Mine Morland,” aid
Thorpe, an he handed her in, “if my horse should
dance about a little at ﬁn: netting oﬁl He will most
likely give a plunge or two, and perth take the rest
for a minute; but he will noon know hrs master. He
is full of spirits, playﬁrl at can be, but there in no vice
in him.”

Catherine did not think the portrait a very inviting
one, but it wan too late to retreat, and the wax too
young to own herself frightened; so, resigning henelf
to her fate, and trusting to the animal'a boosted know-
ledge of its owner, the at panel-ably down, and aw
Thorpe lit. down by her. Everything being then ar-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 53

unged,theuemntwho mod at the hone’eheldwu
bid in an important voice “to let him go," and of they
went in the quietelt manner innginahle, without a
plunge or a caper, or anything like one. Catherine,
delighted at to happy an escape, epoke her plea-ore
aloud with grateful tux-prize; and her companion im-
mediately made the matter perfectly aim e by naming
her that it was entirely owing to the pecu iarly judiciout
manner in which he had then held the nine, and the
singular discernment and dexterity with which he had
directed his whip. Catherine, though the could not
help wondering that, with lush perfect command of his.
home, he should think it nece-ry to alarm her with a
relation of its tricks, congramlated henelf inserer on
being under the care of .0 excellent a coachman; and
perceiving that the animal continued to go on in the
lame quiet manner, without thawing the smallest pro-

lity towards any unpluaant vivacity, and (consider-
mg in inevitable ce vm ten mile: an hour) by no
menu: alarmingly lit, gave heruelf up to all the enjoy-
ment of air and exercise of the moat invigorating kind
in a ﬁne mild da of February, with the conscioueneu
of safety. A Ii ence of oevernl minutes succeeded their
ﬁnt than dialogue. It wu broken by '1 saying
very nhru tly, “ Old Allen in as rich u a aw, in not
he?” atherine did not understand him, and he re-
peated hie question, adding in explanation, “ Old Allen,
the man you are with.”

“0h! Mr Allen you mean. YeI.I believe he is
very rich."

“ And no children at all i "

“ No, not any.”

“A famoul thing for hi: next heirs He in your
godfather, in not he ? "

" My godfather! No."

“ But you are alwayl very much with them 9 "

54 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“Yet, very much.”

uAye.that in what I meant. Heteemsa good kind
of old fellow enough, and has lived very well in hi;
time, I dare say; he in not gouty for nothing. Does
he drink his bottle a. day now ?”

“Hi: bottle a-da ! No. Why Ihould you think
of such a thingi. e it a very temperate man, and you
could not fancy him in liquor last night?”

“ Lord help you! You women are dwnyu thinking
of men’s being in liquor. Why, you do not luppoae a
man it ovenet by a bottle? I am sure of Ibix, that if
everybody was to drink their bottle 8-day. there would
not be half the disorden in the world there are now.
It would be a famous good thing for us all.”

“ I cannot believe it.”

“ Ohl lord. it would be the saving of thonnnda.
There is not the hundredth part of the wine consumed
in thin kingdom that there ought to be. Our foggy
climate wants help.”

"AndyetIhaveheordthatr-here is: gmdealof
wine dnnk in Oxford.”

“Oxford! There is no drinking It Oxford now,
I assure you. Nobody drink: there. You would
hardly meet with a man who goes beyond hi: four
pints at the utmout. Now, for instance, it wu reckoned
a remarkable thing at the he: party in my room, that
upon an average we cleared about ﬁve Pint: a head. It
we looked upon at something out of the common way.
Min: is famous utuﬁ', to be lure. You would not
often meet with anything like it in Oxford, and that
may account for it, But this will jun. give you a notion

‘of the general nee of drinking there."

“ Yes, it does give a notion,” mid Catherine, warmly,
“andthatigthatynualldrinka greatdealmorewine
than I thought you did. However, I am tune Jamel
does not drink so much.”

5‘ "lit-4'; H

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 5 5

This declention brought on a loud and empowering
reply, of which no pm um very dininct. except the
frequent exclamation, amounting almost to ootho,
which adorned it, and Catherine was left, wha: it
ended, with rather I strengthened belief of there
being a great deal of wine drunk in Oxford, and
the same happy conviction of her bmther’r comparative
Iohriety.

Thorpe’t idea then all reverted to the merit: of hie
own equipage, and the wan called on to admire the
mint and freedom with which hir hone moved along,
and the ease which hit paces, a well u the excellence
of the springs, gave the motion of the carriage. She
followed him in all hit admiration an well u she could.
To go before, or beyond him, we impossible. Hie
knowledge and her ignorance of the subject, his rapidity
of expression and her diﬂidence of herself, put that out
of her power; the could Itrike out nothing new in
commendetion, but Ihe readily echoed whatever he
ehoee to Inert, and it war ﬁnally needed between them,
without any difﬁculty, that his equi ge wan altogether
the moat complete of in kind in ngland, his carriage
the neuteet, hit hone the best goer, and himself the
bent coachman. "You do not really think, Mr
Thug," aid Catherine, venturing after Iorne time to
con-i r the nutter an entirely decided, and to offer
eon-re little variation on the ruhject, “that Janet'- gig
will break down?"

“ Break down! Oh, lord! Did you ever tee ouch
I little tittupp thing in your life? There in not a
nund piece 0 iron about it. The wheel- hnve been
fairly worn out these ten yem It lean; and a for the
body, upon my low], you might ehake it to piecel your-
relf with I touch. It ll the moat devilieh linle ricker
buinel I ever beheld! Thank God! we havegota
hater. Iwouldnotbeboundtogotwomileeinizfor
ﬁfty diamond poundt."

56 nox'rrumcnx ABBEY.

“ Good heavens! " cried Catherine, quite frightened,
“then pray let us turn hack; they will certainly meet
with an accident if we go on. Do let us turn hack, Mr
Thorpe; stop and speak to my hrother,and tell him
how very unsafe it is.”

" Unsafe! Oh, lor'dl what is there in that? They
will only get I roll if it does break down ; and there is
plenty of dirt, it will be excellent falling. 0h, curse
it! the carriage is safe enough if a man knows how to
drive it; a thing of that sort in good hands will last
above twenty years sfter it is ﬁirly worn our. Lord
bless on! I would undertake for five pounds to drive
it to hark and back again without losing a nail."

Cstherine listened with astonishment. She knew
not how to reconcile two such very different accounts
of the same thing; for she had not been brought up to
understand the ropensitier of a rattle, nor to know
to how man i e assertions and impudent falsehoods
the excess 0 vanity will lead. Her own family Were
plain mtter-of-fact people, who seldom aimed at wit of
any kind; her father at the utmost being contented
with a pun, and her mother with a proverb; they were
not in the habit, therefore, of tellrng lies to increase
their importance, or of asserting at one moment what
they would contradict the next. She reﬂected on the
affair for some time in much perplexity, and was more
than once on the point of requesting ﬁom Mr Thorpe a
clearer insight into his real opinion on the subject; but
she checked herself, because it appeared to her that he
did not excel in giving those clearer insights, in making
those things plain which he had before made ambi out,
and, joining to this the considention that he would not
really suﬁ'er his sister and his friend to be exposed to a
danger from which he might easily premve them, she
concluded at last that he must know the carriage to be
in fact perfectly safe, and therefore would alarm herself

NORTHANGER ABBEY. s 7

no longer. By him the whole matter eeemed entirely
forgotten; and all the mt of hi- couvemtion, or
rather talk, began and ended with him-elf and hit own
conoerne. He told her of hornet which he had bought
for a riﬂe and sold for incredible sums; of racing
matcheo, in which his judgment had infalliny foretold
the winner; of cheating partiel, in which he had killed
more bird- (though without having one good ehot) than
all hit companion: together; and described to her come
famous day’s sport with the fox—hounds, in which hie
ibreaight and altill in directing the doge had
the mittakea of the most experienced huntlrnan. and in
which the holdnen of his riding, though it had never
endangered hie own life for a moment, had been con-
ttantly lading others into diﬂicultiee, which, he calmly
concluded, had broken the neclu of many.

Little u Catherine was in the habit of judging for
hereelf, and unﬁxed as were her general notion. of what
men ought to be, ehe could not entirely repreu a doubt,
while the bore with the eﬂ'uaione of hit endlen conceit,
of his being altogether completely agreeable. It was a
bold air-mite, for he was Inabelh’e brother, and the had
been marred by James that his manner: would recom-
mend him to all her sex; but in spite of thin, the ex-
treme wearinesa of his company which crept over her
beibrc digiy had been out J? hour, and which continued
unceaIin to increase ’ th in Pu rene
Street again, induced her in non: mega to resin:
ouch high authority, and to distrult hie powen of giving
univenal pleasure.

When the arrived at Mn Allen's door, the as-
tonishment o Isabella wu hardly to be expand on
ﬁnding that itwutoo late in thedayforthemtn
amnd her friend into the lwule : ——-" Put three
o’clock! ” it was inconceivable, incredible, impouible,
Ind ehe wwld neither believe her own watch, nor her

E

58 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

brother’s, nor the servants, she would believe no assur-
anca of it founded on reason or reality, till Morland
produced his watch and ascertained the fact: to have
doubted a moment longer 1501, would have been eqnally
inconceivable, incredible, and impossible, and she could
only rotest over and over again, that no two hours and
a hal had ever gone of so swiftly before, as Catherine
was called on to conﬁrm; Catherine could not tell a
falsehood even to please Isabella; but the latter was
spared the misery of her friend's dissenting voice by not
waiting for her answer. Her own feelings entirely en-
grossed her; her wreschedness was most acute on ﬁnd-
ing herself obliged to go directly home. It was ages
since she had had a moment’s conversation with her
dearest Catherine, and though she had such thousands
of things to say to her, it appeared as if they were never
to be together again; so with smiles of most exquisite
misery, and the laughing eye of utter despondeoey, she
bade her friend adieu, and went on.

Catherine found Mrs Allen returned from all
the busy idleness of the morning, and was immediately
greeted with, “ Well, my dear, here you are! ” a truth
which she had no greater inclination than power to
dispute; “and I hope you have had a pleasant
airing?”

“ Yes, ma’am, I thank you; we could not hive had
a nicer day.”

“So Mrs Thorpe said. She was vanly pleased at
your all going.”

“ You have seen Mrs Thorpe, then P ”

“ Yes ; I went to the Pump-room as soon as you
were gone, and there I met her, and we had a great
deal of talk together. She says there was hardly any
veal to he got at marker this morning, it is so on-
commonly scarce."

“ Did you see any body else of our acquaintance?"

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 59

“Yes; we agreed to take a turn in the Crescent,
and there we met Mrs Hughes, and Mr and Miss
Tilue walking with her."

“ id ou, indeed? and did they to 9”

“Yenywe walked along the Great: togygtuher for
half an hour. They seem very agreeable people. Miss
Tilney was in a very pretty spotted muslin, and I fancy,
by what I can learn, that she always dresses very hand-
somely. Mrs Hughes talked to me a great deal about
the family.”

“And what did she tell you of them 9 "

“Oh! a vast deal, indeed; the hardly talked of
anything else."

“ Did she tell you what part of Gloucestershire they
come from 9 "

“Yes, she did, but I cannot recollect now. But
th are very good kind of people, and very rich. Mrs
'1" hey was a Miss Drummond, and she and Mrs
Hughes were school-fellows; and Mitt Dnmunond
had a very large fortune, and, when she married, her
father gave her twenty thousand pounds, and ﬁve
hundred to buy wedding clothes. Mrs Hughes saw
all the clothes after they came from the warehouse?

“ And are Mr and Mrs Tilney in Bath ? ”

“ Yes, I Fancy they are, but I am not quite Certain.
Upon recollection, however, I have a notion they are
both dead; at least the mother is; yes, I am sure Mn
Tilney is dead, because Mrs Hughes told me there was
a very beautiful set of pearls that Mr Dmmmond gave
his daughter on her wedding-day, and that Miss Tilney
has got now, for they were put by for her when her
mother died.”

" And is Mr Tilney, my yartner, the only
son 2 "

" I cannot be quite positive about that, my dear; I
have some idea he is; but. howeVer, he is u very ﬁne

Go NORTHANGER ABBEY.

yoriln’g’ man, Mr: Hughes Eye, and likely to do very
we .

Catherine inquired no further; she had heard enough
to feel that Mrs Allen had no real intelligence to give,
and that she was most particularly unfortunate herself
in havin missed such a meeting with both brother and
sister. ould she have foreseen such a circumstance,
nothing should have persuaded her to go out with the

others; and, as it was, she could only lament her ill~ -

luck, and think over what she had lost, till it was clear
to her that the drive had no means been very
pleasant, and that John Thorpe himself was quite

disagreeable.

cbsottt ﬂ.

HE Allens, Thorpes, and Morlands, all met in
the evening at the theatre; and, as Catherine
and Isabella sat together, there was then an

opportunity for the latter to utter some few of the many

thousand things which had been collecting within her
for communication in the immeasurable length of time
which had divided them. “ Oh, heavens! my beloved

Catherine, have I got you at last?” was her address

on Catherine’s entering the box and sitting by her.

“Now, Mr Morland,” {or he was close to her on the

other side, “I shall not speak another word to you all

the rest of the evening; so I charge you not to expect
it My sweetest Catherine, how have you been this
long age? but I need not ask you, for you look de-
lightfully. You really have done your hair in a more
huvenly style than ever; you mischievous creature, do
you want to attract everybody? I units you, my
brother is quite in love with you already; and as for
Mr Tilney—but that is a- settled thing—even Jam-

NORTHANGER um. 6r

modesty cannot doubt hie attachment now; hie coming
back to Bath makes it too plain. Oh! whatwouldnot
I giveto see him! I reallyam quite wild with im-
patience. My mother says he is the most delightful
young man in the world; she saw him this morning, you
know. You must introduce him to me. I. he in the
home now? Look about, for heaven’s take! I ame
you I can hardly exiat till I see him.”

“No,” said Catherine, “ he is not here. I cannot
tee him any where."

“ Oh, horrid I am I never to beacquainted with him ?
How do you like my gown? I think it does not look
min; the sleevel were entirely my own thought. Do
you know, I. get so immoderaoely lick of Both! Your
brother and I were agreeing this morning, that, though
it it vastly well to be here for a few weeks, we would
not live here for millions. We mu found out that our
tame were exactly alike in preferring the country to
every other place ; really our opiniom were so exactly
the some, it war quite ridiculous! There was not a
single point in which we differed. I would not have
had you by for the world; you are such I sly thing, I
am sure you would have made some droll remark or
other about it.”

“ No, indeed, I should not.”

“ Oh, yea! you would, indeed. I know you better
than you know yourself. You would have told u. that
we Ieerned born for each other, or Iome nonsense of
that kind, which would have distressed me beyond con-
ception; my cheekt would have been a red as your
rm 3 I would not have had you by for the world.”

“ Indeed, you do me injustice; I would not have
made to improper a remark upon any account; and be-
sides, I am sure it would nem have entered my head.”

Inbella smiled incredulouely, and talked the rent of
the evening to James.

62 NOITHANGER ABBEY.
I ,

Catherine's i-esolution of endeavouring to meet Miss
Tilney again continued in full force the next morning ;
and till the usual moment of going to the Pump-room,
she felt some alarm from the dread of a second preven-
tion. But nothing of that kind occurred, no visitors
appeared to delay them, and theyall three set of in
good time for the Pump-room, where the ordi
course of events and convemation took place. r
Allen. after drinking his glass of water, joined some
gentlemen to talk over the politics of the day, and com-
pare the accounts of their newspapers; and the ladies
walked about together, noticing every new face, and
almost ever new bonnet in the room. The female part
of the Thorpe family, attended by James Morland,
appeared among the crowd in less than a quarter of an
hour, and Catherine immediately took her usual place
by the side of her friend. James, who was now in
constant attendance, maintained a similar position, and
separating themselves from the rest of their party, they
walked in that manner for some time, till Catherine
began to doubt the happiness of a Iitnation which, con-
ﬁning her entirely to her friend and brother, gave. her
very little share in the non'ce of either. They were
always engaged in some sentimental discussion or lively
dispute, but their sentiment was conveyed in such

ring voices, and their vivacity attended with so
much laughter, that though Catherine’s snpporn'ng opin—
ion was not unfrequently called for by one or the other,
she was never able to give any, from not having heard a
word of the subject. At length, however, she was em-
powered to disengage herself from her friend, by the
avowed necrosity of speaking to Miss Tilney, whom the
most joyﬁrllysswjust entering the room with Mrs Hughes,
and whom she instantly joined,with a ﬁrmer detennination
to be ac uainted. than she might luve had courage to
common had she not been urged by the disappointment

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 63

of the daybefore. Misc Tilneyrnetherwith grut civility,
returned her advance: with equal good will, and they
continued talking together as long as both partiel re-
mained in the room; and though in all probability not
an observation was made, nor an expression need by
either which had notheen made and need some thouaanda
of timet before, under that roof, in every Bath season,
yet the merit of their being spoken with simplicity and
truth, and without personal conceit, might be something
uncommon.

“How well your brother dances was an artlese
exclamation of Catherine’s towards the close of their
converlation, which II once snrprized and amused her
companion.

“Henry!” the replied with a mile. “Yes, be
due: dance very well.”

“ He mutt have thought it very odd to hear me say
I was engaged the other evening, when he saw me
aitting down. But I really had been engaged the whole
da to Mr Thorpe." Mina Tilney could only bow.
“ on cannot think,” added Catherine, after a moment’s
tilence, “how snrprized I was to one him again. I felt
to lure of his being quite gone away.”

" When Henry had the plealure of seeing you before,
he wan in Bath but for a couple of days. He came
only to engage lodging: for us."

“ Tbat never occurred to me; and of courae, not
seeing him anywhere, I thought he must be gone.
Wu not the 'young lady he danced with on Monday 3
Mia! Smith! ’

“ Yes ; an acquaintance of Mr: Hughes.”

"I dare lay the was very glad to dance. Do you
think her pretty I ”

“ Not very."

" He never oomel to the Pump-room, I suppose 2 ”

“Yet; sometimes; but he has rid out thin morning
with my father.”

g”

o E:

64 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Mn Hughet now joined them, and mked Min Til-
neyiflhewaereadytogo. “I hopelehallhave the
plmre of leeng you again soon,” laid Catherine.
“Shall you he at the cotillion ball to-morrow 3”

“ Perhaps we—yee, I think we certainly IhalL"

“ I am glad of it, {or we Ihall all be there." Thi-
civility was duly returned, and they parted: on Miss
Tilney’a side with some knowledge of her nevucqunin-
unce e feelingl, and on Cntherine’a without the smallest
oonecioutneu of having explained them.

She went home very happy. The morning had
uswered all her hopes, and the evening of the following
day was now the object of expectation—the future
good. What gown and what head-dre- ehe ahould
weoron the occasion became her chief concern. She
cannot be juniﬁed in it. Dresa in at all times a frivo—
lona distinction, and exceuive oolicitude about it often
denroyn its own aim. Catherine knew all thin very
well; her great aunt had readher alectureon the aub-
ject only the Christmas before; Ind yet ahe lay awake
ten minutes on Wednenday night debating between her
spotted and her tambonred mullin ; and nothing but the
ahnrtneu of the time prevented her buying a new one
for the evening. Thin would have been an error in
judgment, great though not uncommon, from which one
of the other gear rather than her own, a brother rather
than I great aunt, might have warned her; for min
only can be aware of the intentibility of man towards a
new gown. It would be mortifying to the feelingn of
many ladies could they be made to understand how
little the heart of man ll affected by what is costly or
new in their mire; how little it ll hiaued by the text-
ture of their muslin, and how unaueeeptihle of peculiar
tenderness towarda the spotted. the aprigged, the mull,
or the jnclroner. Woman ll ﬁne for her own latiefac-
tion alone. No man will admire her the more, no

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 65

woman will like her the better for it. Neatneee and
fashion are enough for the former, and o Iomething of
dnabbinete or imyroprlet will be moat endearing to the
later. But not one 0 these grave reﬂection- troubled
the tranquillity of Catherine.

She entered the moms on Thunday evening with
feeling- very different from what had attended her
thither the Monday before. She had then been exult-
ing in her engagement to Thorpe, and was now chieﬂy
anxious to avoid hie night. lest he should engage her
again ; for though the could not, dared not expect that
Mr Tilney should all: her I third time to dance, her
wiahee, hopes, and plans, all centered in nothing less.
Every young lady may feel for my heroine in thin
critical moment, for every young lady has at some time
or other known the name agitation. All have been,
or at learn all have believed themselves to be, in danger
from the pursuit of some one whom they wilhed to
avoid; and all have been anxious for the attention: of
tome one whom they wished to please. As soon an
they were joined by the The s, Catherine’s agony
began; the ﬁdgetted about if ohn Thorpe came to-
ward: her, hid herself at much as possible from his
View, and when he spoke to her pretended not to hear
him. The cotillione were over, the country-dancing
beginning, and the saw nothing of the Tilneya. “ Do
not be frightened, my dear Catherine,” whiapered
Inbella, “but I am really going to dance with your
brother again. I declare pouitively it in quite shock-
ing. I tell him he ought to he aohamed of himoelf, but
you and John must keep us in countenance. Make
hate, my dear creature, and come to un. John in just
walked off, but he will be back in a moment."

Catherine had neither time nor inclination to anrwer.
The other! walked away. John Tho was mill in
View, and the gave herself up for ion. she might

,-

66 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

not appear, however, to observe or expect him, she kept
her eyes intently ﬁxed on her fan; and a self-con-
demnation for her folly, in supposing that among such a
crowd they should even meet with the Tilneys in any
reasonable time, had jun ued through her mind, when
she suddenly found be addressed and again solicited
to dance, by Mr T ilney himself. With what sparkling
eyes and ready motion she granted his request, and with
how pleasing a ﬂutter of heart she went with him to the
set may be easily imagined! To escape, and as she
believed, so narrowl escape John Thorpe, and to be
asked, so immediate y on his joining her, asked by Mr
Tilney, as if he had sought her on purpose l——it did not
appear to her that life could supply any grater felicity.

Scarcer had they worked themselves into the quiet
posiession of a place, however, when her attention was
claimed by John Thorpe, who stood behind her.
" Heyday, Miss Morland!” said he, “what is the
meaning of this? I thought you and I were to dance
together."

“"1 wonder you should think so, for you never asked
me.

“Thatissgoodone, by Jove! I sskedymassoou
as I came into the room, and I was just going so ask

on again, but when I turned round, you were gone!

his is a cursed shabby trick! I only came {or the
sake of dancing with you, and I ﬁrml§ believe you were
engaged to me ever since Monday. es; I remember,
I asked you while you were waiting in the lobby for
your cloak; and here have I been telling all my
acquaintance that I was going to dance with the
prettiest girl in the room; and when they see you
standin up with somebody else, they will quiz me
famou y.”

“ Oh! no; they will never think of use, after such
s description as that."

Rout-tans”. ABBEY. 67

“By heavens! if they do not, I will kick themaut
of the room for blackheads. What chap have you
there 3 ” Catherine aatiaﬁed his curiosity. “ Tilney,”
he repeated; “hum; I do not know him. A good
ﬁgure of a man; well put together. Does he want a
horse? Here is a friend of mine, Sam Fletcher, [us
got one to sell that would suit anybody. A famous
clever animal {or the road; only forty guineaa. I had
ﬁfty minds to buy it myself, for it is one of my maxims
always to buy a good horse when I meet with one; but
it would not answer my purpose, it would not do for
the ﬁeld. I would give any money for a real good
hunter. I have three now, the best that ever were
helt’d. I would not take eight hundred guinea for
them. Fletcher and I mean to get a house in Leices-
tershire against the next season. It. is so d—
uncomfortable living at an inn.”

This was the last sentence by which he could weary
Catherine’s attention, for he was just then born of by
the naistlees pressure of a long string of passing ladies
Her partner now drew near, and said, “That gentle-
man would have put me out of patience, had he staid with
you halfa minute longer. He has no business to with-
draw the attention of my partner from me. We have
entered into a contract of mutual agreeableness for the
epace of an evening, and all our agreeablenest belongs
toler to each other for that time. Nobody can fasten
themaelves on the non'ce of one, without injuring the
rights of the other. I consider a country-dance as an
emblem of marriage. Fidelity and complainance are
the principal duties of both; and those men who do
not chute to dance or marry themselves. have no busi-
ness with the partners or wives of their neighbours.”

“ But they are such very different things! "

“ That you think the cannot be compared together! "

“ To be sure not. eople that marrycan neverpart,

' 68 Nona-HANGER annrzv.

but must go and keep house together. People that
dance, only stand opposite to each other in a long mm
for half an hour.”

“ And such is your deﬁnition of matrimony and
dancing. Taken in that light certainly, their resem-
blance is not striking; but I think I could place them
in such a view. You will allow that in both man has
the advantage of choice, woman only the power of re-
fusal; that in both it is an engagement between man
and woman, formed for the advantage of each; and that
when once entered into, they belong exclusively to
each other till the moment of its dissolution; that it
is their duty each to endeavour to give no cause for
wishing that he or she had bestowed themselves
elsewhere, and their best interest to keep their own
imaginations from wandering towards the perfections of
their nei hhours, or fancy-ing that they should have been
better 0 with any one else. You will allowall this? "

“ Yes, to be sure, as you Rate it, all this sounds very
well; but still they are so very different. I cannot
look upon them at all in the same light, nor think the
same duties belong to them."

“ In one respect, there certainly is a difference. In
mnn‘iage, the man is supposed to provide for the support
of the woman; the woman to make the home agreeable
to the man ; he is to purvey, and she is to smile. But
in dancing, their duties are exactly changed ; the agree-
ahleness, the compliance are expected from him, while
she furnishes the {an and the lavender water. That, I
suppose, was the diﬁ'erence of duties which struck on, as
rendering the conditions incapable of comparison. ’

“No, indeed, I never thought of that.’

“Then I am quite at I loss. One thing, however,
I must observe. This disposition on your side is rather
alarming. You totally disallow any similarity in the
obligations; and may I not thence infer, that your

 

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 69

notions of the dutiel of the dancing state are not w
rtrict no your partner might wilh.’ Have I not reason
to fear, that if the gentleman who spoke to you jult
now were to return, or if any other gentleman were to
address you, there would be nothing to restrain you from
convening with him as long as you chose 2 "

“ Mr Thorpe in Iuch a very particular friend of my
brother’s, that if he talk: to me, I mun talk to him
again; but there are hardly three young men in the
room heddeo him that I have any acquaintance w-i ”

“And it that to beiny only lecnrity? also! alas!"

" Nay, I urn sure that you cannot have a better; for
if I do not know anybody, it it impo-ible for me to
talktothem; nnd,beoidec, I do not want to talk to
anybody."

" Now you have given me a security worth having;
and I Ihnll proceed with courage. Do you ﬁnd Bath
u agreeable :- when I had the honour of making the
inqui? before i ”

“ es, quite; more .0, indeed.”

“More IO! Take care, or ou will forget to be
tired of it at the proper time. on ought to be tired at
the end of nix weeks.”

“ I do not think I should be tired, if I were to my
here rix months.”

“ Bath, compared with London, ha- little variety,
and to everybody ﬁnd: out every year. 'For nix
weelu, I allow Both is pleasant enough; but beyond
that, it in the most tirenome place in the world.’ You
would be told so by people of all description, who
come regularly every winter, lengthen their nix week:
into ten or twelve, and go away at last beam they
can afford to any no longer."

“Well, other people mutt judge for themselves, and
those who go to London may think nothing of Bath.
But I, who live in a small retired village in the country,

7O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

can never ﬁnd greater umeness in such a place as this
than in my own home; for here are a variety ofnmnse-
meme, a variety of things to be seen and done all day
long, which I can know nothing of there."

“You are not fond of the country."

“ Yes, I am. I have always lived there, and always
been very happy. But certainly there is much more
sameness in a country life than in a Bath life. One day
in the country is exactly like another."

“ But then you «pend your time so much more
rationally in the country.”

“ Do I P "

" Do you not

“ I do not believe there is much difference."

“ Here you are in pursuit only of amusement all day
long.”

“ And so I am at home: only I do not ﬁndso much
of it. I walk about here, and so I do there; but here
I see a variety of people in eve street, and there I can
on] go and call on Mrs Allen. ’

lair Tilney was very much amused. “ Only go and
call on Mrs Allen ! ” he repeated. “ What a picture
of intellectual poverty! However, when you sink into
this abyss again, you will have more to say. You will
be able to talk of Bath, and of all that you did here.”

" Oh! es; I shall never be in want of something
to talk 01’ again to Mrs Allen, or anybody else. I
really believe I shall always be talking of Bath, when I
am at home again; I do like it so very much. If I
could but have papa and mamma, and the rest of
them here, I In pose I should be too ha y! James’s
coming (my dest brother) is quite dglightful; and
especially as it turns out, that the very family we are
just got so intimate with are his intimate friends already.
Oh! who can ever be ﬁred of Bath?”

“ Not those who bring such fresh feelings of every

9"

NORTHANGER ABBEV. 1!

sort to it as you do. But papa and mammas, and
brothers and intimate friends, are a good deal gone
by, to most of the frequenren of Bath ; and the honest
relish of balls and plays, and everyday sighu, is past
with them.”

Here their conversation closed; the demands of the
dance becoming now too importunate for a divided
attention.

Soon after their reaching the bottom of the set,
Catherine perceived herself to be earnestly regarded by
a gentleman who stood among the. lockers-on, immedi-
ately behind her partner. He was a very handsome
man, of a commanding aspect, past the bloom, but not
pastthe vigour of life; and with his eye still directed
towards her, she saw him presently address Mr Tilney
in a familiar whisper. Confused by his notice, and
blushing from the fear of its being excited by something
wrong in her appearance, she turned away her head.
But while she did so, the gentleman retreated, and her

amer coming nearer, said, “I see that you guess what

have just been asked. That gentleman knows your

name, and you have a right to know his. his General
Tilney, my father.”

Catherine’s answer was only " Oh ! ” but it was an
" Oh I” expressing everything needful; attention to his
words, and perfect reliance on their truth. With real
interest and strong admiration‘did her eye now follow
the General, as he moved through the crowd, and
“ How handsome a family they are!” was her secret
remark. '

In chatting with Miss Tilney before the evening con-
cluded, a new source of felicity arose to her. She had
never taken a country walk since her arrival in Bath.
Mia: Tilney, to whom all the commonly frequented en-
virons were familiar, spoke of them in terms which
made her all eagerness to know them too; and on her

72 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

openly faring that she might ﬁnd nobody to go with
her, it was proposed the brother Ind sister thut they
should join in a w k, tome morning or other. “ I
shall like it," she cried, “beyond anything in the world ;
and do not let us put it of: let us go to-Inorrow,”
Thin wan readily agreed to, with only a- '30 of Miss
Tilney’t, that it did not rain, which Ca erine wn tune
it would not. At twelve o’clock, they were to call for
her in Pulteney Street, and “ remember, twelve o’clock,"
was her parting (pooch to her new friend. . Of her other,
her older, her more established friend, Isabella, of whose
ﬁdelity and worth the had enjoyed a fortnight’t experi-
ence, the namely law anything during the evening.
Yet, though longing to make her acquainted with her
ha pineu, the cheerfully tuhmitted to the wiuh of Mr
A len, which took them rather early away, and her
apirite danced within her, no she danced in her chair all
the way home. »

 

cblpttt $3.

HE monow brought a very sober-looking morn-
ing; the sun making only a few efforts to appear;
and Catherine augured from it everything mott

favourable to her wishes. A bright morning so early
in the year, the allowed, would generally turn to rain 3
but a cloud one foretold improvement an the day ad-
vanced. he a lied to Mr Allen for conﬁrmation of
her hopel, but r Allen not having his own skin and
barometer about him, declined giving any ahoolute ro-
miee of eunuhine. She applied to Mrs Allen, and $41"
Allen’t opinion wan more 'tive. “ She had no
doubt in the world of its being a very ﬁne day, if the
clouds would only go off, and the tun in out.”

At about eleven o'clock, however, a w speck. of

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 73
mall ruin upon the windows caught Catherine’s watch-
ful eye, and “ Oh dear! I do believe it will be wet,"
broke from her in a moat derponding woe.

“ I thought how it would be,” laid Mrs Allen.

“ No walk for me to-day,” sighed Catherine; “ but
Eh!» it may come to nothing, or it may hold up

ore twelve.’

“ Perhapa it may; but then, my dear, it will be so
dirty.”
“ 3h! that will not signify; I never mind dirt."

“ o,” lied her friend v lacidl , “ I know on
never mind-En.” cry P y y

After a short pause, “ It comes on faster and faster ! "
said Catherine, as the mod watghing at a window.

“ So it does, indeed. If it keeps ruining, the streets
will be very wet.”

“ There on four umbrellas up already. How I hate
the eight ofln umbrella! ”

“They are disagreeable thinge to carry. I would
much rather take a chair at any time.”

“ It was such a nice looking morning ! I felt so
convinced it would be dry! "

“ Any body would have thought so, indeed. There
will be very few people in the Pump-room, if it rains
all the morning. I hope Mr Allen will put on his
great coat when he goes, but I dare say he will not, for
he had rather do anything in the world than walk out
in a great coat; I wonder he should dislike it, it must
be to comfortable."

The rain continued, fast though not heavy. Cath—
erine went every live minute: to the clock, threatening,
on each return, that, if it still kept on raining another ﬁve
minutel, the would give up the matter no hopeless.
The clock muck twelve, and it will mined “ You
will not be able to go, my dear."

“I do not quite despair yet. I shall not gin it up

I, .

74 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

till a quarter aﬁer twelve. This in jut the timeof day
for it to clear up, and I do think it looks a little lighter.
There, it it twenty minutes after twelve, and now I
1601/ give it up entirely. Oh! that we lad inch
weather here as they had at Udolpho, or at lent in
Tuscany and the South of F moe l-the night that poor
St Aubin died !——such heantiﬁxl weather! "

At half past twelve, when Catherine’s anxioua atten-
tion to the weather was over, and she could no longer
claim an merit from its amendment, the tky began
volunta ' y to clear. A gleam of sunshine took her
quiteby turprize; Ihe looked round, the clouds were
parting, and she inmntly returned to the window to
watch over and encourage the happy appearance. Ten

. minutes more made it certain that a hri ht afternoon
would succeed, and justiﬁed the opinion 0 Mn Allen,
who had “always thought it would clear up." But
whether Catherine might still expect her friends,
whether there had not been too much rain for Mini
Tilney to venture, must et be a question.

It was too dirty for rs Allen to accompany her
husband to the Pump-room: he accordingl set off by
himself, and Catherine had barely watch him down
the meet, when her notice was claimed by the approach
of the same two open csrringen, containing the same
three peo le that had surprized her to much a few
mornings ck. .

“ Isabella, my brother, and Mr Thorpe, I declare!
They are coming for me, perhaps; but I shall not
go; I cannot go, indeed; for, you know, Miu Tilney
may still call.” Mr: Allen agreed toiL John Thorpe
was noon with them, and his voice war with them yet
sooner, for on the stain he was calling out toMias Mor-
lnndtohequiok. “Make haste! makehaatel” uhe
threw open the door, “pm on your hat this moment ;
there is no time to he out; we are going to Brittol.
How cl'ye do, Mrs Allen i”

\ IORTHANGER ABBEY. 75

“To Brim]! Ia not thatugreat way off? But,
however, I cannot go with you to-day, because I am en-
gaged; I expect some friends every moment.” Thia wnl
ofcouree vehemently talked down as no reason It all, Mn
Allen wan called on to second him, and the two others
walked in, to give their assistance. “ My tweetett
Catherine in not thiI delightful? We shall have a most
heavenly drive. You are to thank your brother and me
{or the nebulae: it darted into our headn-at breakfatt
time, I verily believe It the same inmnt; and we
thonld have been off two hour! ago, if it had not been
for thin detettable rain. But it doee not tignify, the
nighture moonlight, and we shall do delightfully. 0h l
I am in web extatiea at the thought: of a little country
air and quiet! no much better than gain to the Lower
Room ' We ahall drive directly to Clifton and dine
there; and an noon at dinner in over, if there it time for
it, go on to Kingrwuton.”

“ I doubt our being able to do to much,” mid Morland.

“ You creaking fellow! ” cried Thorpe, “ we ahall
be able to do ten times more. Kingsweaton ! aye, and
Blaize Cutle too, and anything else we can hear of;
but herein your eitter says the will not go."

“ Blaize Caltle ! ” cried Catherine ; “ what it
that 2”

“ The ﬁnest place in England; worth going ﬁfty
milel at any time to lee."

“ What, in it really a castle, an old cattle l ”

“ The oldest in the kingdom.”

“ But in it like what one reads of? "

“ Exnctly : the very lame.”

“ But now, really, are there towers and long gal-
leriee?"

“ By dozen."

“The: I Ihould like mace it; but I cannot! can-
not go.”

\

76 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“ Not go! my beloved creature, what do you
mean .’"

“ I cannot go, because" (looking down an she spoke,
fearful of Isabella's amile) “ I expect Miss Tilney and
her brpther to call on me to take a country walk. They
Promised to come at twelve, only it rained; but now, as
it is so ﬁne, I dare say they will be here soon."

“ Not they, indeed," cried Thorpe; “ for, no we
turned into Broad Street, I saw them. Does he not
drive a phzton with bright chestnuts .’ ”

“I do not know, indeed.”

“Yes, I know he does; I saw him. You are talk-
ing of the man you danced with last night, are not
you ? ”

u Yen.”

“ Well, I saw him at that moment turn up the Lana-
down Road, driving a smart-looking girl.”

“ Did you, indeed ? ”

“ Did, upon my soul; knew him again directly; and
he seemed to have got some very pretty cattle too.”

“ It is very odd! But I suppose they thought it
would be too dirty for a walk.”

“And well they might, for I never saw so much dirt
in my life. Walk ! you could no more walk than you
could ﬂy! It has not been to dirty the whole winter;
it in nude deep everywhere.”

Isabella corroborated it :—“ My dearest Catherine,
you cannot form an idea of the dirt; come, you must
go ; Iyou cannot refuse going now.”

“ should like to see the castle ; but may we go all
over it ? May we go up every smircue, and into every
suite of room: 2”

“Yes, yes; every hole and corner."

“ But then, if they should only be gone out for an
hour till it is drier, and call by and by? ”

“ Make yourself easy, there in no danger of that;

Noxrnrmcnn assay. 77

for I heard Tilney hallooing to a man who was just
‘ng by on horseback, that they were going as far as
ick Rocks.”

“Then I will. Shall I go, Mrs Allen? "

“ Just as you please, my dear.”

“ Mrs Allen, you must persuade her to go," was the
general cry. Mn Allen was not inattentive to it.
“ Well, my dear," said she, “ suppose you go." And
in two minutes they were oﬂ’.

Catherine’s feelings, as she got into the carriage, were
in a very unsettled state: divided between regret for the
loss of one great pleasure, and the hope of soon enjoy-
ing another, almost its equal in degree, however unlike
in kind. She could not drink the Tilneys had acted
quite well by her, in so readily giving up their engage-
ment, without sending her any message of excuse. It
was now but an hour later than the time ﬁxed on for the
beginning of their walk; and, in spite of what she had
heard of the prodigious accumulation of dirt in the
course of that hour, she could not from her own obser-
vation help drinking that they might have gone with
verylittle inconvenience. To feel herself slighted by
them was very painful. On the other hand, the delight
of explorin .an ediﬁce like Udolpho,as her fancy re-
presented B aize Castle to be, was such a counterpoise
of good, as might console her for almost any thing.

They passed briskly down Pulseney Street, and.
through Laura Plane, without the exchange of many
words. Thorpe talked to his horse, and she meditated
by turns on broken promises and broken arches, phztons
and false hangin s, Tilneys and trap-doors. As they
entered Argyle uildings, however, she was mused by
this address from her companion, “Who is that girl
who looked at you so hard as she went by 2 ”

“ Who 2 where?”

“ On the right-hand pavement : she must be almost

78 newsman anon.

out of right now.” Catherine looked round, and Iv
Min Tilney leaning on her brother’l am, walking
Ilowly down the street. She eaw them both looking
back at her. “ Sto , atop, Mr Thorpe,” the impatiently
cried, “it ll Mien ilney; it it indeed. How could
you tell me they were gone ? Stop. mp, I will get out
thin moment and go to them." But to what purpose
did the apeak? Thorpe only lashed hie hone into
a brieker trot; the Tilneys, who had coon ceaaed to
look after her, were in a moment out of light round the
corner of Laura Place, and in another moment the wax
herlelf whisked into the Market Place. Still, however,
and during the length of another street, the entmted him
to . “Pm , :1 etc , Mr Tho I cannot
our?!) will not go. (ii) ;yI mint go RCkrﬁllﬁu Tillie;g
But Mr Thorpe only laughed, smacked hie whip, en-
couraged hie hone, made odd noieee, Ind drove on;
and Catherine, angry and vexed an the wan, having no
power of getting away, was obliged to give up the point
and eubmit. Her reproachee, however, were not lpared.
" How could you deceive me so, Mr Thorpe? How
could you I: that you saw them driving up the Lane-
down Road I would not have had it happen so for
the world. They must think it to mange, no rude of
me, to go by them, too, without saying a word! You
do not know how vexed I am. I shall have no pleasure
at Clifton, nor in anything else. I had rather, ten
thousand timee rather, get out now, and walk back to
them. How could you say, you saw them driving out
in a phzton ? " Thorpe defended himself very noutly,
declared he had never seen two men so much alike in
hie life, and would hardly give up the point of in having
been Tilney hinuelf.

Their drive, even when this subject was over, was
not likely to be very agreeable. Catherine’l complaie-
ance was no longer what it had been in their former

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 79

airing. She listened reluctantly, and her replies were
short. Blaine Castle remained her only comfort;
towards that, she still looked at intervals with pleasure;
though rather than be disappointed of the promised walk,
and especially rather than be thought ill of the
Tilneys, she would willingly have given up I the
happiness which its walls could supply: the happiness
of a progress through a long suite of loﬁy rooms, ex-
hibiting the remains of magniﬁcent fumiture, though
now for many years deserted: the happiness of being
stopped in their way along narrow, winding vaults, by a.
low, grated door; or even of having their lamp, their
only lamp. extinguished by a sudden gust of wind, and
of being ltft in total darkness. In the meanwhile, they
proteeded on their journey without any mischanoe: and
were within View of the town of Keynsharn, when a
halloo from Morland, who was behind them, nude his
friend pull up, to know what was the matter. The
others then came close enough for conversation; and
Morland said, “ We had better go back, Thorpe; it is
too late to go on to-day; your sister thinks so as well
as I. We have been exactly an hour coming from
Pnlteney Street, very little more than seven miles; and,
I Inppose, we have at least eight more to go. It will
never do. We set out s gm: deal too late. We had
much better put it 05 till another day, and turn round."

“ It is all one to me," replied Thorpe, rather angrily;
and instantly turning his horse, they were on their way
back to Bath.

" If your brother had not got such a d— beast to
drive,” said he soon afterwards, “ we might have done
it very well. My horse would have trotted to Clifton
within the hour, if left to himself, and I have aim
broke my arm with pulling him in to that cursed broken-
winded jade’s pace. Morlnnd is s fool for not keeping
a horse and gig of hi: own.”

So NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“ No, he is not,” said Catherine, warmly; “for!
am sure he could not aﬁ‘ord it." .

“ And why cannot be afford it?”

“ Because he has not money enouth

“ And whose fault is that?”

“ Nobody’s that I know of." Thorpe then said
something in the loud, incoherent way to which he had
often recourse, about its being a d——— thing to be
miserl ; and that if people who rolled in money could
not a ord things, he did not know who could, which
Catherine did not even endeavour to understand. Dian
appointed of what was to have been the consolation for
her ﬁrst disappointment, she was less and less disposed
either to be agreeable herself, or to ﬁnd her companion
so; and they retumed to Pulteney Street without her
spaking twenty words.

As she entered the house, the. footman told her, that
a gentleman and lady had called and inquired for her
a few minutes after her setting off ; that, when he told
them she was gone out with Mr Thorpe, the lady had
asked whether any message had been left for her, and
on his saying no. had felt for a card, but said she had
none about her, and went away. Pondering over these
heart-reading tidings, Catherine walked slowly up-
stairs. At the head of them she was met by Mr Allen,
who, on hearing the reason of their speedy return, said,
“I am glad your brother had so much sense; I am
glad you are come back. It was a strange, wild
scheme.”

They all spent the evening together at Thorpe’s.
Catherine was disturbed and out of spirits; but Isabella
seemed to ﬁnd a pool of commerce, in the fate of which
she shared, by private partnership, with Morland, I very
good equivalent for the quiet and country air of an inn
at Clifton. Her sau'sfaction, too, in not being at the
Lower Rooms, was spoken more than once. “ How

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 8:

I pity the poor creatures that are going there! How
glad I am that I am not among“ them! I wonder
whether it will be a full ball or not! They have not
begun dancing yet. I would not be there for all the
world. It is so delightful to have an evening now and
then to one’s self. I dare say it will not be a very
ood hall. I know the Mitchell: will not be there.
Iam lure I pity everybody that is. But I dare say,
Mr Morland, you long to be at it, do not you? I am
sure you do. Well, pray do not let anybody here be a
restraint on you. I dare say we could do very well
without you, but you men think yourselves of such con-
sequence.”

Catherine could almost have accused Isabella of being
wanting in tendernetl towards herself and her IOITOVII, I0
very little did they appear to dwell on her mind, and so
very inadequate was the comfort she offered. “ Do not
he so dull, my dearest creature," she whitpered. “ You
will quite break my heart. It was amazingly shocking,
to he Iure, but the ’I‘ilneyu were entirely to blame.
Why were not they more punctual? It was dirty,
indeed, but what did that signify? I am lure John and
I should have not minded in I never mind going
through anything where a friend it concerned; that in
my disposition, and. John in the name; he has
amazing strong feeling; Good heavens! what a de-
lightful hand you have got! Kings, I vow! I never
was so happy in my lifel I would ﬁfty time. rather
you should hue them than myself.”

And now I may dismiss my heroine to the sl less
couch which it the true heroine’s portion ; to a E[zlilow
unwed with thorns and wet with mean. And luck
my the think herself, if the get another good nigh I
rent in the course of the next three months.

81 NORTHANGER ‘ABBEY.

Chapm- $33.

“ RS-ALLEN,” said Catherine, the next morn-
iiif, “ will there be any harm in my calling on
its Tilney to-day? I shall not be easy 3'“
I have explained everything.”
“ Go, b all means, my dear; only put on a white
gown. Miss Tiln always wears white.”

Catherine chee ly complied; and, being properly
equipped, was more im atient than ever to be at the
Pump-room, that she might inform herself of General
Tilney’s lodgings; for though she believed they were
in Milsom Street, she was not certain of the house, and
Mrs Allen’s wavering convictions only made it more
doubtful. To Milsom Street she was directed; and
having made herself perfect in the number, hastened
away with eager steps and a beating heart to pay her
visit, explain her conduct, and be forgiven: tripping
lightly through the churchyard, and resolutely turning
away her eyes, that she might not be obliged to see he;
beloved Isabella, and her dear family, who, she ha
reason to believe were in a shop hard by. She reached
the home without any impediment, looked at the
number, knocked at the door, and inquired for Miss
Tilney. The man believed Miss Tilney to be at home,
but was not,quite certain. Would she be pleased to
send up her name? She gave her card. In a few
- minutes the servant returned, and with a look which
did not quite conﬁrm his words, said he had been
mistaken, for that Miss Tilney had walked out. Cath-
erine, with a blush of mortiﬁcation, left the house. She
felt almost persuaded that Miss Tilney war at home,
and too much offended to admit her; and as she
retired down the street, could not withhold one glance
at the drawing-room windows, in expectation of seeing

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 83

her there, but no one appeared at them. At the
bottom of the Itreet, however, she looked back again,
and then, not at a window, but issuing from the door, she
aw Miss Tilney herself. She was followed bya gentle-
man whom Catherine believed to be her father, and
they turned up towards Edgar's Buildings. Catherine,
in dee moniﬁcation, proceeded on her way. She
could most be angry herself at such angry ineivility;
but she checked the resentful sensation, she remembered
her own ignolance. She knew not how such an offence
as hers might be classed by the laws of worldly polite-
ness, to what a degree of unforgiveness it might with
propriety lad, nor to what rigours of rudeness in return
it might justly make her amenable. Dejected and
humbled, she had even some thoughts of not going with
the others to the theatre that night; but, it mult be
confessed that they were not of Ion continuance; for
she soon recollecsed, in the ﬁrst p ace, that she was
without any excuse for staying at home; and, in the
second, that it was a play the wanted very much to see.
To the theatre accordingly they all went; no Tilneys
appeared to plague or please her; she feared that amongst
the many perfections of the family a fondness for plays
was not to be ranked, but perhaps it was because they
were habituated to the ﬁner rforrnances of the London
mge, which she knew, on aabella’s authority, rendered
everything else of the kind " quite horrid.” She was
not deceived in her own expeemtion of plasnre: the
comedy so well suspended her care, that no one observ-
ing her during the first four acts would have supposed
she had any wretchedan about her. On the beginning
of the ﬁfth, however, the sudden view of Mr Henry
Tilney and his father joining a party in the opposite box
recalled her to anxiety and distress. The stage could no
longer excite genuine merI-iment1 no longer keep her
whole attention. Every other look upon an average was

84 “common sonny.

directed towards the o posite box; and for the space
of two entire scenes did she thus watch Hen Tilney,
without being once able to catch his eye. 0 longer
could he he s of indifference for a play ; his notice
was never withdrawn from the stage during two whole
scenes. At length, however, he did look towards her,
and he bowed, but such a bow! no smile, no continued
observance attended it: his eyes were immediately re-
turned to their former direction. Catherine was rest-
lessly miserable; she could almost have run round to
the box in which he sat, and forced him to hear her ex-
planation. Feelings rather natural than heroic possessed
her. Instead of considering her own dignity injured
by this ready condemnation; instead of mudly resolv-
ing, in conscious innocence, to show her resentment
towards him who could harbour a doubt of it, to leave
to him all the trouble of seeking an explanation, and to
enlighten him on the post only by avoiding his sight, or
flirting with somebody else, she took to herself all the
shame of misconduct, or, at least, of its appearance, and
was only eager for an opportunity of explaining its cause.

The play concluded, the curtain fell; Henry Tilney
was no 'longer to be seen where he had hitherto eat, but
his father remained, and perhaps he might be now com-
ing round to their box. She was right: in a few
minutes he appeared, and making his way through the
then thinning rows, spoke with like calm politeness to
Mrs Allen and her friend. Not with such calmness
was he answered by the latter. “ Oh, Mr Tilney, I
have been uite wild to speak to‘ you, and make my
apologies. ou must have thought me so rude; but
indeed it was not my own fault. Was it, Mrs Allen 2
Did not they tell me that Mr Tilney and his sister
were gone out in s phatton together? and then what
could I do? But I had ten thousand times rather have
been with you. Now, had not I, Mrs Allen 3 ”

'lLa:‘

n-

l

I

NORTHA‘NGER new. 85
“ My dear, you tumble my gown,” was Mrs Allen's

"133- . . .

er assurance, however, standing sole as it did, was
not thrown away; it brought a more cordial, more
natural smile into his countenance, and he replied in a
tone which retained only a little affected reserve, “ We
were much obliged to you, at any rate, for wishing us a
¢easant walk after our passing you in Argyle Street.

on were so kind as to look bac on purpose."

“ But indeed, I did not wish you a p easant walk, I
never thought of such a thing; but I begged Mr Thorpe
so earnestly to stop ; I called out to him as soon as ever
I saw you. Now, Mrs Allen, did not Oh! you
were not there. But, indeed, I did; and, if Mr Thorpe
would only have stopped, I would have jumped out and
run after you.” ~

Is there a Henry in the world who could be insensible
to such adeclaration? Henry 'I'ilney, at least, was not.
With a yet sweeter smile, he said everything that need
be said of his sister’s concern, regret, and dependence
on Catherine’s honour. “Oh, do not say Miss Tilney
was not angry,” cried Catherine, “because I know she
was; for she would not see me this morning when I
called. I saw her walk out of the house the next
minute after my leaving it. I was hurt, but I was not
aﬂ'ronted. Perhaps you did not know I had been

there.”
“I was not within at the time: but I heard of it

from Eleanor, and she has been wishing ever since to
see you, to engalain the reason of such incirility; but,
perhaps, I can 0 it as well. It was nothing more than
that my father —thcy were just preparing to walk
out, and he being hurried for time, and not caring to
have it put all, made a point of her being denied. That
was all, I do assure you. She was very much vexed,
and meant so make her apology as soon as possible."

 

86 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Catherine's mind was greatly eased by thin informa-
tion, yet a Iomething of tolicitude remained, from which
sprang the following question, thoroughly ardent in itself,
though rather distressing to the gentleman : “ But, Mr
Tilney, why were you less generoue than your litter?
If the felt such conﬁdence in my good intentions, and
could suppose it to be only a mistake, why ehould‘Jou
he to ready to take oﬁence ?”

“ Me! I take oﬂ'ence! ”

“ Nay, I am sure by your look, when you came into
the box, you were angry.”

“ I an I I could have no right! "

“ Wel , nobody would have thought you had no
right who saw your face.”

He replied by atking her to make room for him and
talking of the play. He remained with them some
time, and wan only too agreeable for Catherine to be
contented when he went away. Before they parted,
however, it was agreed that the projected walk should
be taken at man at possible; and, setting aside the
misery of his quitting their box, the was, upon the
whole, left one of the happiest creaturea in the
world.

While talking to each other, the had obterved with
some sun-prize, that John Thorpe, who wan never in the
same part of the house for ten minutes together, was
engaged in conversation with General Tilney; and the
felt something more than surprize, when she thought. she
could perceive herself the object of their attention and
ditcour‘se. What could they have to may of her? She
feared General Tilney did not like her appearance. She
found it was implied in his preventing her admittance to
his daughter, rather than postpone hie own walk a few
minutes. “ How came Mr Thorpe to know your
father ? ” wan her anxious inquiry, at the ointed them
out to her companion. He knew nothing about it;

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 37

but his father, like every military man, had a very large
ac ummance.

hen the entertainment was over, Thorpe came to
ﬂirt them in getting out. Catherine wan the immediate
object of hil gallantry; and, while they waited in the
lobhy for a chair, he prevented the inquiry which had
travelled from her heart almost to the tip of her tongue,
by uking, in a comequemial manner, whether the had
seen him talking with General Tilney. “ He is a ﬁne
old fellow, upon my soul ! stout, active ; lookt as young
at l’lll Ion. I have a great regard for him, I 380m you.
A gentleman-like, good tort of fellow at ever lived.”

“ But how came on to know him 2 ”

“ Know him! here are few people much about
lawn that I do not know. I have met him for ever at
the Bedford ; and I knew his face again to-day the
moment he came into the billiard-room. One of the
belt players we have, by-the—bye; and we had a little
touch together, though I was almott afraid of him at
lint. The odds were live to four against me; and, if
I had not made one of the cleanest strokes that perhaps
ever wan made in this world—I took his ball exactly—
but I could not make you understand it without a table:
however, I it! beat him. A very ﬁne fellow; at rich
as a Jew. I should like to dine with him. I darenay
he give: famoua dinners. But what do you think we
have been talking of 3 You. Yes, by heaven! and
the General think: you the ﬁnest girl in Bath.”

“ Oh, nonnenle ! how can you nay to E ”

“ And what do you think I laid?” (lowering llll
voice). “Well done, General,” laid II “ I am quite
of ur min ”

ere Catherine, who wu much let: gratiﬁed by hi-
admiration than bﬁGeueral Tilney'l, wu not sorry to
be called away by r Allen. Thorpe, however, would
are her to her chair, and, till the entered it, continued

88 won-rumour: assay.

the same kind of delicate ﬂattery, in spite of her entreat-
ing him to have done.

That General Tilney, instead of disliking, should
admire her, was very delightful ; and she joyfully thought
that there was not one of the family whom she need now
fear to meet. The evening had done more. much more
for her than could have been expected. '

Chapter $313.

ONDAY, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Fri-
day, and Saturday, have now passed in review
before the reader; the events of each day, its

hopes and fears, mortiﬁcstions and pleasures, have been
separately stated, and the pangs of Sunday only now
remain to be described, and close the week. The
Clifton scheme had been deferred, not relinquished;
and on the aﬁemoon’s Crescent of this day it was
brought forward again. In a private consultation be-
tween Isabella and James, the former of whom had
particularly set her heart upon going, and the latter no
less noxioust placed his upon pleasing her, it was agreed
that, rovided the weather were fair, the party should
take place on the following morning; and they were to
set off very early, in order to be at home in good time.
The affair thus determined, and Thorpe’s approbation
secured, Catherine only remained to be apprized of it.
She had left them for a few minutes to speak to Miss
Tilney. In that interval the plan was completed, and
as soon as she came again, her agreement was demanded;
but instead of the gay acquiescence expected by Isabella,
Catherine looked grave, was very sorry, but could not
go. The engagement which ought to have kept her
from joining in the former attempt would make It im-

 

noumsnonn ABBEY. 89

pouihle for her to accompany them now. She had that
moment settled with Miss Trlney to take their promised
walk to-rnorrow; it was quite determined, and she
would not, upon any account, retract. But that she
mm and :bnuld retract wan instantly the eager cry of
both the Thorpe: ; they must go to Clifton to-morrow,
they would not go without her, it would be unthing to
put of a mere walk for one day longer, and they would
not hear of a refusal. Catherine was distressed, but not
subdued. “ Do not urge me, Isabella. I am engaged
to Miss Tilney. I cannot go.” This availed nothing.
The same arguments assailed her again; she must go,
she should go, and they would not hear of a refusal.
“It wouldbeaoeasytotell Mile Tilneythatyouhad
just been reminded of a prior engagemengand must
only beg to put oi? the walk till Tuesday.”

“No, it would not be easy. I could not do it.
There has been no prior engagement.” But Isabella
became only more and more urgent; calling on her in
the most affectionate manner; addressing her by the
most endearing names. She was sure her dearest,
sweetest Catherine would not seriously refune such a
triﬂing request to a friend who loved her so dearly.
She knew her beloved Catherine to have no feeling a
heart,oonweet a temper,to he so easilypersuaded b
those she loved. But all in vain; Catherine felt hene f
to be in the right,.aod though pained by such tender,
such ﬂattering mpplieation, could not allow it to inﬂuence
her. Isabella then tried another method. She re-

ched her with having more aﬂ'ection for Miss
ilne , though the had known her 00 little I while,
than for her best and oldest friends; with being grown
cold and indifferent, in abort, towards hernelf. “ I can-
not help being jealous, Catherine, when I see myself
' hted for strange"; I, who love you so excessively!
hen once my affection: are placed, it in not in the

G

9° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

power of anything to change them. But I believe my
feelings are stronger than any body's; I am sure they
uremo strong for my own peace; and to see myself
supplanted in Iyour friendship'llsy strangers does cut me
tothe quick, 0 . These ilneys seem to swallow
up everything else.”

Catherine thought this reproach equally strange and
unkind. Was it the part of a friend thus to expose her
feelings to the notice of others? Isabella appeared to
her ungenerous and selﬁsh, regardless of everything but
her own gratiﬁcation. These painful ideas crossed her
mind, though she said nothing. Isabella, in the mean-
while had applied her handkerchief to her eyes; and
Morlsnd, miserable at such a sight, could not help say-
ing, “Nay, Catherine, I think you cannot stand out
any longer now. The sacriﬁce is not much; and to
oblige such a friend, I shall think you quite unkind if
you still refuse."

This was the ﬁrst time of her brother's openly siding
against her; and anxious to avoid his displeasure, she
proposed a compromise. If they would only ut olf their
scheme till Tuesday, which they might ' y do, as it
depended only on themselves, she could go with them,
and everybody might then be satisﬁed. But “ No, no,
no I ” was the immediate answer; “that could not be,
for Tho did not know that he might not go to town
on T y." Catherine was sorry, but could do no
more ; and a short silence ensued. which was broken by
Isabella, who, in a voice of cold resentment; said,
“Very well, then there is an end of the party. If
Catherine does not go, I cannot. I cannot be the chi
woman. I would not upon any account in the world’,
do so improper a thing.”

“ Catherine, you must go,” said James.

“ But wh cannot Mr Thorpe drive one of his other
sisters? I £11 say either of them would like to go."

NORTHANGIR ABBEY. 9!

“ Thank e,” cried Thorpe; “but I did not come
to Bath to 've my sisters about and look like I fool.
No, if you do not go, d— me if I do. I only go for
the sake of driving you.”

“ That is a compliment which givesme no pleasure.”
But her words were lost on Thorpe, who had turned
abruptly away. ‘

The three others still continued together, walking in
a most uncomfortable manner to poor Catherine ; some-
times not a word was said, sometimes she was again
attacked with supplications or repmsches, and her arm
was still linked within Isabella’s, though their hearts were
at war. At one moment she was softened, at soother
irritated ; always distressed, but always steady.

“I did not think you had been so obstinate, Cath-
erine,” said James; “you were not used to be so hard
to persuade; you once were the kindest, best-tempered
of m sisters."

hope I an not less so now,” she replied, very
feelingly; “but indeed I cannot go. If I am wrong,
I am doing what I believe to be right.”

" I suspect,” mid Inbella, in a low voice, “ there is
no reat struggle.”

gather-he’s heart swelled; she drew away her- arm,
and Isabella made no opposition. Thus lsed a long
ten minutes, till they were again joined by ho , who,
coming to them with s gayer look, said, “ We , I have
settled the matter, and now we may all go to-morrow
with a safe conscience. I have been to Miss Tiluey,
and made your excuses.”

“You have not! ” cried Catherine.

“ I have, upon my soul. Left her this moment.
Told her you had sent me to say, that having just re-
collected a prior engagement of going to Clifton with us
so-morrowélyou could not have the pleasure of walking
with her ' Tuesday. She said very well, Tuesday

92 HORN-[ANGER “REY.

wasjustss convenient to her; so there is an end of all
our difﬁculties. A pretty good thought of mine,
h 2
eyIsabella's countenance was once more all smiles and
good-humour, and James too looked ha y again.
“A most heavenly thought, indee?! Now, my
sweet Catherine, all our distresse- are over; you are
honour?ny acquitted, and we shall have a most delightful

“This will not do," said Catherine ; “ I cannot
submit to this. I must run after Mine Tilney directly
and set her right.”

Isabella, however, caught hold of one hand, Thorpe
of the other; and remonstnnces poured in from all
three. Even Jamel was quite angry. When every-
thing was settled, when Miss Tilney herself said that
Tuesday would suit her as well, it was quite ridiculous,
quite absurd, to make an further objection.

“I do not care. r Thorpe had no business to
invent an such message. If I had thou ht it right to

ut it o , I could have spoken to Miss 'lgilney myself.

his is onl doing it in a ruder way; and how do I
know that r Thorpe has—; he may be mistaken again,
perhaps. He led me into one act of rudeness by his
mistake on Friday. Let me go, Mr Thorpe; Inbelln,
do not hold me.’

Thorpe told her it would be in vain to go af'ner the
Tilneys: they were turning the corner into Brock
Street, when he had overtaken them, and were at home
by this time.

“ Then I will go after them," eaid Catherine;
“wherever they are, I will go after them. It does not
signif talking. If I could not be rsuaded into doing
what thought wrong, I never w‘ be tricked into it."
And with these Words she broke awn and hurried off.
Thorpe would have darted after her, ut Morland with- '

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 93

held him. “Let her go, let her go, if'she will go.
She is as obstinate ss—”

Thorpe [i] never ﬁnished the simile, for it could
hardly have been a proper one.

Away walked Catherine in great agimion, as fast as
the crowd would permit her, fearful of being pursued,
yet determined to persevere. As she walked, she
reﬂected on what had passed. It was painful to her
to disappoint and displease them, particularly to dieplease
her brother; but she could not repent her resistance.
Setting her own inclination apart, to have failed a
second time in her engagement to Miss Tilney, to have
retncted a promise voluntarily made only ﬁve minutes
before, and on a false pretence too, must have been
wrong. She had not been withstanding them on
selﬁsh principles alone, she had not consulted merely
her own gratiﬁcation ; rlm might have been ensured in
some degree by the excursion itself, by seeing Blaize
Castle; no, she had attended to what was due to others,
and to her own character in their opinion. Her con-
viction of being right, however, was not cum: I: to restore
her composure: till she had spoken to ss Tilney,
she could not be at ease; and quickening her pace
when she got clear of the Crescent. she almost ran over
the remaining ground till she gained the top of Milsom
Street. So rapid had been her movements, that, in
spite of the Tilneys’ advantage in the outset, they were
but just turning into their lodgings as she came within
view of them; and the servant still remaining at the
open door, she used only the ceremonyof saying that
she must speak with Miss Tilney that moment, and
hurrying by him mceeded up stairs. Then, opening
the ﬁrst door re her, which ha ed to be the
right, she immediately found h in the drawing-
room with General Tilney, his son and daughter.
‘ Her explanation. defective only in being—from her

94 NORMANGER ABSEY.

irrimion of nerves sud shortness of breath—no explana-
tion at all, was instantly given. “I am come in a
great hurry,—-it was all I mistake; I never promised
toga; I wldthemfrom the ﬁrst I could not go; I
ran away in a great hurry to explain it; I did not
care what you thought of me ; I would not stay for the
servant."

The business, however, though not perfectly eluci-
dated by this speech, soon ceased to he a puzzle.
Catheﬁnetfound that John Thorpe bad given the
message; and Miss Tilney had no scruples in owning
herself greatly surprized by it. But whether her
brother had still exceeded her in resentment, Catherine,
though she inductively addressed herself as much to
one as to the other in her vindication, had no means of
knowing. Whatever might have been felt before
her arrival, her eager declarations immediately made
every look and sentence as friendly as she could
desire.

The affair thus happily settled, she was introduced l1
Miss Tilney to her father, and received by him wi
such ready, such solicizous Politeness, as recalled
Thorpe’s information to her mind, and made her think
with pleasure that he might he sometimes depended on.
To such anxious attention was the Geneml’s civility
carried, that, not aware of her extraordinary swiftuess
in entering the house, he was quite angry with the
servant whose neglect had reduced her to o the door
of the a rtment herself. “What did illiam mean
by it? e should make a point of inquiring into the
matter.” And if Catherine had not most warmly
asserted his innocence, it seemed likely that William
would lose the favour of his meter for ever, if not his
place, by her rapidity.

sittin withthems usrterofsnhour,she

NQRTHANGER ABBEY. 93

prized by General Tilney’s asking her if she would do his
daughter the honour of dining and spending the rest'of
the day with her. Miss Tilney added her own wishes.
Catherine was greatly obliged; but it wan quite out of
her power, Mr and Mrs Allen would expect her back
every moment. The General declared he could say no
more; the claims of Mr and Mrs Allen were not to be
superseded; but on some other day, he trusted, when
longer notice could be given, they would not refuse to
re her to her friend. ' “ Oh, no; Catherine was
sure they would not have the least objection, and she
should have great pleasure in coming." The General
attended her himself to the street door, saying every-
thing gallant as they went down stairs, admiring the
elasticity of her walk, which corresponded exactly with
the spirit of her dancing, and making her one of the
most graceful bows she had ever beheld when they parted.
Catherine, delighted by all that had passed, proceeded
gain to Pnlteney Street, walking, as she concluded,
with great elasticrty, though' she had never thought of it
before. She reached home without seeing anything
more of the offended party; and now that she had been
triumphant throughout, had carried her point, and was
secure of her walk, she began (as the ﬂutter of her
spirits subsided) to doubt whether she had been per-
fectly right. A sacriﬁce was always noble; and if she
had given way to their entreaties, she should have been
spared the distressing idea of: friend a brother
angry, and a scheme of great ha ineas to both destroyed,
perhaps through her means. 0 ease her mind, and
ascertain by the o inion of an unprejndiced person what
her own conduct d really been, she took occasion to
mention before Mr Allen the half-settled scheme of her
brother and the Thorpes for the following day. Mr
Allen caught at it directly. “Well,” said he, “and
doyouthinkofgoingmo?"

96 nonmnuonn ennnv.

“No; I had just engaged myoelfto walk with Miss
Tilney before they told me of it; and therefore, you
know, I could not go with them, could I P"

“ No, certainly not; and I am glad you do not think
of it. Thole schemes are not at all the thing. Young
men and women driving about the country in open
carriages! Now and then it in very well ; but going to
inc and public laces together! It is not right; and
I wonder Mn horpe Ihould allow it. I am glad you
do not think of going ; I am sure Mn Morland would
not be pleased. Mrs Allen, are not you of my way of
thinking? Do not you think there kind of projects
objectionable ? "

“ Yes, very much so, indeed. Open cu‘riagea are
nuty things. A clean gown is not ﬁve minutes’ wear
in them. You are Iplaahed getting in and getting out;
and the wind takes your hair and your bonnet in every
direction. I hate an open carriage myself.”

“I know you do ; but that ienot the question. Do
not on think it has an odd appearance, if young ladies
are hequently driven about in them by young men, to
whom they are not even related? ”

“Yes, my dear, a very odd appearance indeed. I
unnot bear to see it."

“Dear madam,” cried Catherine, “then why did
not you tell me so before? I am sure if I had known
it to be im roper I would not have gone with Mr
Thorpe at l; but I always hoped you would tell me,
if you thought I warn doing wrong.”

“ And so I should, my dear, you may depend on it;
for, as I told Mrs Morland at parting, I would alwaye
do the heat for you in my power. But one mun not
be over particular. Young pen le will be youn people,
as your good mother aye heme f. You know Wanted
you, when we ﬁm came, not to buy that qnigged muelin.
but you would. Young people do not like to be alwaye
thwarted.”

HORN-[ANGER ABBEY. 97

“ But this was something of real consequence; and
Ida notthinkyou wouldhavefonnd me hard unper-
made.”

“As far as it has gone hitherto, there is no harm
done," said Mr Allen ; “ and I would only advise
you, my dear, not to go out with Mr Thorpe any
more.”

“That is just what I was going to By,” added his
wife.

Catherine, relieved for herself, felt uneasy for Isabelle;
and after a moment's thought, asked Mr Allen whether
it would not be both proper and kind in her to write to
Miss Thorpe, and explain the indeoorum of which she
must be as Insensible as herself; for she considered that
Isabella might otherwise perhaps be going to Clifton
the next day, in spite of what had passed. Mr Allen,
however, discouraged her from doing any such thing.
“ You had better lave her alone, my dear, she is old
enough to know what she is about: and if not, has a
mother to advise her. Mrs Thorpe is too indulgent
beyond s doubt; but, however, you hsd better not
interfere. She and your brother chose to go, and you
will be only getting ill-will.” .

Catherine submitted; and though sorry to think that
Isabella should be doing wrong, felt greatly relieved by
Mr Allen’s approbation of her own conduct, and truly
re'oiced to be preserved by his advice from the danger
o falling into such an error herself. Her escape from
being one of thepnrty to Clifton was now an escape
indeed; for what would the Tilneys have thought of
her, if she had broken her promise to them in order to
do what was wrong in itself, if she had been guilty of
one breach of propriety only to enable her to be guilty
of another?

98 non-rowan ABBEY.

cbspttr 1]}7.

HE next morning was fair, and Catherine almost
expected another attack from the assembled
ny. With Mr Allen in nu port her, she felt
no dread of the event; but she woul gladl be spared
a :ontest where victory itself was painqu and was
heartily rejoiced, therefore, at neither seeing nor hearing
anything of them. The Tilneyl called for her at the
appointed time, and no new difﬁculty arising, no sudden
recollection, no unexpected summons, no impeninent
intrusion to disconoert their mum, my heroine was
most unnaturnlly able to fulﬁl her engagement, though
it was made with the hero himself. They determined
on walking round Beechen Cliﬁ', that noble hill, whose
bautiful verdure and hanging coppice render it no
striking on object from almost every opening in Bath.

“ I never look at it,” said Catherine, as they walked
along the side of the river, “ without thinking of the
south of France."

“ You have been abroad, then i” said Henry, a little
surprized.

“ 0h ! no, I only mean what I have read about.
It always um me in mind of the country that Emin
and her Father unveiled through in the ‘ Mysteries
of Udolpho.’ But you never rad novels. I due
a f"

y" Why not i " 

“ Because they are not clever enough for you;
gentlemen rad better books.”

“ The person, be it gentleman or lady, who has not
pleasure in a good novel, must be intolerably stupid. I
have md all Mrs Radclifre’s works, and most of them
with great pleasure. The ‘ Mysteries of Udolpho,’ when
I had once begun it, I could not lay down again; I re—

FORTRANGIR ABBEY. 99

member ﬁnishing it in two days, my hair standing on
end the whole time.”

“ es,” added Miss Tilney; “and I remember that

u undertook to read it aloud to me; and that when

was called away for only ﬁve minutes to answer a
note, instead of waiting for me, you took the volume
into the Hermitage Walk, and I was obliged to stay
an you had ﬁnished it."

,“Thnnk you, Eleanor; a moat honounble besti-
mony. You see, Miss Morland, the injustice of your
suspicione. Here was I, in my «genes: to get on,
reﬁning to wait only ﬁve minutes for my sister; brak-
ing the promise I had made of reading it aloud, and
keeping her in suspense at a most interesting part, by
running away with the volume, which, you are to observe,
was her own, particularly her own. I am proud when I
reﬂect on it, and I think it must establish me in your
good opinion.”

“ I amvery glad to hear it, indeed ; and now I shall
never be ashamed of liking Udolpho myself. But I
really thought before, young men despised novels
amazingly."

“ It is amazingly,- it may well nugget mast if
they do, for they read nearly as many as women. I,
mysdf, have read hundreds and hundreds. Do not
imagine that you can cope with me in a knowledge of
Julias and Louins. If we proceed to rticulars, and
engage in the never-ceasing inquiry of ‘ ve you read
this." and‘Haveyon read that.’ I shallsoon leave
you as far behind me as—what shall I say? I want an
a ropriate simile; as far as your friend Emily her-

left poor Valancoun when she went with her aunt
into Italy. Consider how many years I have had the
mofyou. Ihad altered onmymdientOxford,
whileyotlsylerengoodlittlegirl working yoursnmpler
a home . ’

IOO NORWGEB ABBEY.

“Not very I am afraid. But now, reall , do
not you think dolpho the nicest hook in the we d i "

“ The nicest; by which I suppose you mean the
neatest. That must depend upon the binding.”

“ Hen ,” said Miss Tilney, “ you are very imparti-
nent. Miss Morland, he is trmting you exactly as he
does his sister. He is for ever ﬁnding fault with me
for some incorrectness of Ian ge, and now he in taking
the same liberty with you. he word ‘ nicest,’ as you
used it, did not suit him; and you had better change it
as soon as you can, or we shall be overpowered with
Johnson and Blair all the rest of the way. ’

“ I am sure,” cried Catherine, “ I did not mean to
sa an in wron ;butiti:anicebook,nndwh
shlmldyilntl call itg so 2 " y

“ Very true,” said Henry, “and this is a very nice
day; and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are
two very nice young ladies. Oh! it is a very nice
word, indeed! it does for everything. Originally, per.
ha a, it was a lied only to express neatnese, propriety,
'de icacy, or re nement; people were nice in their dress,
in their sentiments, or their choice. But now every
commendation on every subject is comprised in that one
word.”

“ While, in fact." cried his sister, “ it ought only to
he applied to you, without any commendation at all.
You are more nice than wise. Come, Miss Morland,
let us leave him to meditate over our faults in the utmost
propriety of diction, while we praise Udolpho in what-
ever terms we like best. It is a most interesting work.
You are fond of that kind of reading ? ”

“ To say the truth, I do not much like any other.”

“ Indeed l ” .

“ That is, I can read etry and pla s, and things of
that sort, and do not di ike travels. gut history, real
eolemn hiatory, I cannot be interested in. Can you? ”

NORTEAN GER ABBEY. 10!

“ Yes, I am fond of history.”

“I wish I were too. I read it a little as aduty;
but it tells me nothing that does not either vex or
weary me. The quarrels of popes and kings, with wars
or pestilences in every page; the men all so good for
nothing, and hardlfyzzny women at all, it is very tire-
some; and yet I 0 think it odd that it should be so
dull, for a great deal of it must be invention. The

hes that are put into the heroes’ mouths, their
thoughts and designs: the chief of all this must he in-
vention, and invention is what delights me in other
books.”

“ Historians, you think,” said Miss Tilney, “ are not
happyin their ﬂights of fancy. They display imagina-
tion without raising interest. I am fond of history, and
am very well contented to take the false with the true.
In the principal facts they have sources of intelligence
in former histories and records, which may be as much
depended on I conclude as anything that does not
actually pass under one’s own observation ; and as for
the little embellishment: you speak of, they are em-
bellishments, and I like them as such. If a speech be
well drawn up, I read it with pleasure, by whomsoever
it may be made: and probablyiwith much greater, if the
production of Mr Hume or r Robertson, than if the
amine words of Csractacus, Agricola, or Alfred the

rear."

“ You are fond of history! and so are Mr Allen and
my father; and I have two brothers who do not dislike
it. So man instances within my small circle of friends
is remarkabel At this rate, I shall not pity the
writers of history any longer. If people like to read
theirbooks,itis allverywell; but to be at so much
trouble in ﬁlling great volumes, which, as I used to
think, nobody would willingly ever look into, to he
labouring only for the torment of little boys and girls,

to! NORTHANGER ABBEY.

alwa a muck meunhnrdfate; and thoth know it
in very right and necessary, I have often wondered
at the Person’s courage that could nit down on purpose
to do it.”

“That little boy: and girl: should be tormented,"
said Henry, “is what no one at all acquainted with
human nature in a civilised state can deny; but in be-
half of our most distinguished historians, I must observe,
that they might well be offended at being an aed tr.
have no higher aim; and that by their to ad and

le they are ctly well qualiﬁed to torment readers
0 the most a vanced reason and mature time of life.
I uae the verb ‘ to torment,’ an I observed to be your
own method, inatead of ‘to instruct,’ supposing them
ot be now admitted an synonimoue.”

"You think me fooliah to call instruction 2 torment ;
but if you had been as much med as myself to hear poor
little children ﬁrlt learning their letten, and then lum-
ing to spell, if you had ever seen how stupid they car.
be for a whole morning together, and how tired my
poor mother is at the end of it, an I am in the habit of
seeing almost every day of my life at home, you would
allow, that to torment and to inllmc! might sometime:
be used an cynonimoue words.”

" Very probably. But historians are not accountable
for the diﬂiculty of learning to read; and even you
yourself, who do not altogether seem particularly
friendly to very mere, very intenle application, ma
perhaps be brought to acknowledge that It is very we
worth while to be tormented for two or three year] of
one’s life, for the lake of being able to read all the nest
of it. Coneider, if reading had not been taught, Mn
Radcliffe would have written in vain, or, perhaps, might
not have written at all."

Catherine muted; and a very warm panegyric from
her on that lady’o merite cloud the tubjecr. The"

-ﬁ 7 r t

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 103

Tilneys were soon engaged in another, on which the had
nothing to say. They were viewing the country with
the eyes of persons accustomed to drawing; and de-
cided on its capability of being formed into pictures,
with all the eagerness of real taste. Here Catherine
was quite lost. She knew nothing nfdrawing—nothing
of taste; and she listened to them with an attention
which brought her little proﬁt, for they talked in phrases
which conveyed scarcely any idea to her. The little
which she could understand, however, appeared to con-
tradict the very few notions she had entertained on the
matter before. It seemed as if a good view were no
longer to be taken from the top of on high hill, and that
a clear blue sk was no lon er a proof of a ﬁne day.
She was hea ' y uhamed 0 her ignorance—a misplaced
shame. Where people wish to attach, they should
always be ignorant. To come with a well-informed
mind, is to come with an inability of administering to
the vanity of others, which a sensible person would
always wish to avoid. A woman, especially, if she
have the misfortune of knowing any thing, should con-
ceal it as well as she can.

The advantages of natural folly in a hautiful girl
have been already set forth by the capital pen of a sister
author; and to her treatment of the subject I will only
add, injustice to men, that though, to the larger and
more triﬂing part of the sex, imbecility in females is a
great enhancement of their personal charms, there is a
portion of them too reasonable, and mo well-informed
themselves, to desire anything more in woman than
ignorance. But Catherine did not know her own
advantages; did not know that a good-looking 'rl with
an affectionate heart, and a very ignorant min , cannot
fail of attracting a clever young man, unless circum-
stances are particularly untoward. In the present in-
stance, the confessed and lamented her want of know-

10‘ NORTHANGER ABBEY.
ledge; declared that she would give anything in the
world to be able to dnw; and a lecture on the pic-
turesque immediately followed, in which his instructions
were so clear that she soon to see beauty in every-
thing admired by him ; and her amnion was so earnest,
that he became perfectl satisﬁed of her having a great
deal of natural taste. lV-le talked of fore-grounds, dis-

mces, and second distances; side-screens, and penpec- .

tives; lights and shades; and Catherine was so hopeful
a scholar, that when they gained the top of Beechen
Cliﬁ, she voluntarily rejected the whole city of Bath, as
unworthy to make part of a landscape. Delighted
with her progress, and fearﬁil of waryrng her with too
much wisdom at once, Henry suffered the sub'ect to
decline, and, by an easy transition from a piece 01! rocky
fragment, and the withered oak which he had placed
near it: summit. to oaks in general—to forests, the en-
closure of them, waste lands, crown lands and govern-
ment—he shortly found himself arrived at litics; and
from litics it was an Itep to ' enCe. The
gener pause which succeeded his short dilquiliﬁon on
the state of the nation was put an end to by Catherine,
who, in rather a solemn tone of voice, uttered these
words, “ I have heard that something very shocking
indeed will soon come out in London.”

Miss Tilney, to whom this was chieﬂy addressed, was
startled, and hastily " Indeed! and of what

nature?”
“That I do not know, nor who is the author. I

have only heard that it is to he more horrible tlun my-
thing we have met with yet.”

“ Good heaven! Where could you bar of arch a
thin ?”

“EA rticular friend of mine had an account of it in
a letter London yesterday. It is to be uncommonly
dreadful. I shall expect murder and'everything of the
kind.”

*4.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 105

“ You with astonishing composure. But I
hope your 'end’s accounts have been exaggerated; and
if such a design is known beforehand, roper measures
will undoubtedly be taken by government to prevent its
coming to eﬁect."

“Government,” said Henry, endeavouring not to
smile, “ neither desires not dares to interfere in such
matters. There must be murder, and government cares
not how much.”

The ladies stared. He laughed, and added, “ Come,
shall I make you understand each other, or leave you to
puzzle out an explanation as you can? No, I will be
noble. I will prove myself a man no less by the
generosity of my soul, than the clearness of my head. I
have no patience with such of my sex as disdain to let
themselves sometimes down to the comprehension of
yours. Perhaps the abilities of women are neither
sound nor acute, neither vigorous nor keen. Perhaps
they may want observation, discernment, judgment. ﬁre,
genius, and wit." 

“Miss Morland, 'do not mind what he says; but
have the goodness to satisfy me as no thisdresdful riot.”

“ Riot !—what riot ? ”

“ My dear Eleanor, the riot is only in your own
brain. The confusion there is scandalous. Miss Mor-
iand has been talking of nothing more dreadful than a
new publication which is shortly to come out, in three
duodecimo volumes, two hundred and seventy-x pages
in each, with a fmntispiece to the ﬁrst, of two tomb-
stones and a lantern—do you understand? And you,
Miss Morland—my star id sister has mistaken all your
clearest expressions. ou talked of expected honors
in London; and instead of instantly conceiving, as any
rational creature would have done, that such words
could relate only to a circulating library. she immedi-
ately pictured to herself a mob of three thousand men

xoG nonmanosn annm.

assembling in St George’s Fields; the Bank attacked,
the Tower threatened, the meets of London ﬂowing
with blood, a detachment of the nth Light Dragoons
(the hopes of the nation) called up from Northampton
to quell the insurgents, and the gallant Captain Frederick
Tilney, in the moment of charging at the head of his
troop,.knocked elf his horse by a brick-hat from an
upper window. Forgive her stupidity. The fears of
the sister have added to the weakness of the woman;
but she is by no means a simpleton in general.”

Catherine looked grave. “ And now, Henry,” said
Miss Tilney, “that you have made us understand each
other, you may as well make Miss Morland understand
yourself, unless you mean to have her think you in-
tolerath rude to your sister, and a great brute in you
opinion of women in general. Miss Morland is not
used to your add ways.”

“I shall he most happy to make her better acquainted
with them."

“No doubt; but that is no explanation of the
present.”

“What am I to do?"

"You know what you ought to do. Clear your
character handsomely before her. Tell her that you
think very highly of the understanding of women."

“Miss Morland, I think very highly of the under-
standing of all the women in the world, especially of
those, whoever they may be, with whom I happen to
be in company."

“That is not enough. Be more serious."

“ Miss Morland, no one can think more highly of the
understanding of women than I do. In my opiniom
nature has given them so much that they never ﬁnd it
use a: use more than half."

“ We shall get nothing more serious from him now,
Miss Morland. He is not in a sober mood. But I

KORTHANGER ABBEY. [07

aseure you that he must be entirely misunderstood, if he
can ever appear to say an unjust thing of any woman at
all, or an unkind one of me.”

It was no eﬁ'ort to Catherine to believe that Henry
Tilney could never be wrong. His manner might
sometimes surprize, but his meaning must always be
just; and what she did not understand, the was almost
as ready to admire, as what she did. The whole walk was
delightful, and though it ended too soon, its conclusion
wasdelightfultoo. Her friends attended her into the
house, and Miss Tilney, before they parted, addressing
herself with respectful form, as much to Mrs Allen asto
Catherine, petitioned for the pleasure of her corn ny to
dinner on the day after the next. No difﬁcu ty was
made on Mrs Allen’s side, and the only diﬂicnlty on
Catherine’s was in concealing the excess of her leisure.

The morning had passed away so Chan-ninng us to
banish all her friendshi and natural affection; for no
thought of Isabella or ames crossed her mind during
their walk. When the Tilneys were gone, she became
amiable again, but she was amiable for some time to little
eﬁect; Mrs Allen had no intelligence to give that could
relieve her anxiety; she had heard nothing of any of
them. Towards the end of the morning, however,
Catherine having occasion for some indispensable yard
of ribbon, which must be bought without a moment’s
delay, walked out into the town, and in Bond Street
overtook the second Miss Thorpe, as she was loitering
towards Edgar‘s Buildings between two of the sweetest
girlsin the world, who had been her dear friends all the
morning. From her, she soon learned that the party
to Clifton had taken place. “The set oi? at eight
this morning," said Miss Anne, “ and em tune I do not
envy them theirdrive. I think you sod I are verywell
offs) be out of the scrape. It must he the dullest thing
in the world, for there is not a soul It Clifton at this

108 nonmanoen new.

time of the . Belle went with your brother, and
John drove aria.” -

Catherine Ipoke the pleasure she really felt on hearing
thin part of the amngernent.

“ Oh! yea,” rejoined the other, “ Maria is one.
She was quiue wild to go. She thought it won d be
something very ﬁne. I cannot say I admire her taste ;
and, for my part, I wae determined from the ﬁrst not to
go, if they pressed me ever In much."

Catherine, a little doubtful of this, could not help
answering, “ I wiahayou could have gone too. It in a
pity you could not I go.”

“Thank you : but it in quite a matter of indifference
to me. Indeed, I would not have gone on any account.
I wan saying no to Emily and Sophia when you over-
took up. ’

Catherine was still unconvinced ; but glad that Anne
should have the friendship of an Emily and 3 Sophia to
console her, the bade her adieu without much uneasi-
neu, and returned home, pleased that the party had not
been revented by her refusing to join it, and very
heartif wishing that it might be too pleaeant to allow
either amen or Isabella m resent her redatanca any

longer. ,

chapter £19.

ARLY the next day, a note from Isabella, speaking
peace and tenderness in every line, and entrean'ng
the immediate presence of her friend on a matter

of the utmost importance, hastened Catherine, in the
nap lent state of conﬁdence and curiooity, to Edgar‘e .
B ‘ dings. The two youngest Miss Thorpee were by
thennelvee in the parlour, and on Anne's quitting it to
call her deter, Catherine took the opportunity of asking

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 109

the other for tome particular: of their yesterday’s
rty.

x“Mariaderirud no grater plemrethnntoepeakofit;
and Catherine immediately learned that it had been
altogether the moat delightful scheme in theworld, that
nobod could imagine how charming it had been, and that
it had heen more delightful! than an body could conceive.
Such was the information of the rat ﬁve minutea; the
recond unfolded thus much in detail, that they had
driven directly to the York Hotel, ate some sou , and
hetpoke an early dinner, walked down to the mp-
room, tasted the water, and laid out some shillings In
punter and spare ; thence adjourned to eat ice at a pastry-
cook’s, and hurrying back to the hotel, swallowed their
dinner in haste, to prevent being in the dark, and then
had a delightful drive back, only the moon was not up,
and it rained a little, and Mr Morland’a home was no
tired he could hardly get it along.

Catherine listened with heartfelt satisfaction. It
appeared that Blaize Castle had never been thought of,
and as for all the rest, there wan nothing to regret for
half an instant. Maria's intelligence concluded with a
tender eﬁ'urion of pity for her sister Anne, whom the
represented an ineupponably cross from being excluded
the party.

“ She will never forgive me, I am sure; but, you
know, how could I help it? John would have me go,
for he vowed he would not drive her because she had
Inch thick uncles. I dare say the will notbe in good
humour again this month ; but I am determined I will
not be cross ; it is not a little matter that put: me out
of temper."

Isabella now entered the room with so eager a step,
and a look of web happy importance, an engaged all her
friend'l notice. Maria was without ceremony sent
away, and Inbelln, embrncing Catherine, thue began :—

I 10 HORN-[ANGER All“.

“Yes, my dar Catherine,it iseo, indeed; your pene-
tration has not deceived you. ' Oh, that arch eye of
yours! it sees through everything.” '

Catherine only by a look of wondering ignor-
once.

“ Nay, my beloved. friend,” eondnmgd’the
other, “compose youne . am amazing sgita as
a); relive. Let us sit down and talkYin comfort.

e , and so you guessed it the moment you had my
note? Sly creature! Oh! mydear Catherine, you
alone who know my hem can judge of my present
happiness. Your brother is the most charming of men.
Ionly with I were more worthy of him. But what
will your excellent father and mother say? Oh,
heavens! when I think of them, I am so agintedl "

Catherine’s understanding began to awake; an idea
of the truth suddenl darted into her mind; and, with
the natural blush 0 so new an emotion, she cried out,
“Good heaven! my dear Isabella, what do you
mean? Can you—can you really be in love with
James?”

This hold surmise, however, she soon learnt enm-
prehended but half the fact. The anxious nﬁ'ection
which she was accused of having continually watched in
Isabella’s every look and aetiom had, in the course of
their yesterday’s , received the delightful confes-
sion of an e ual ove. Her hurt and faith were alike
engaged to arms. Never had Catherine listened to
anything so full of interest, wonder, and joy. Her
brother and her friend en gedl New to such circum-
stances, the importance 0 it appeared umpeaknbly great,
and she contemplated it as one of those grand events
of which the ordinary course of life can hard] afford a
return. The strength of her feelings she could not ex-
press; the nature of them, however, contented her
friend. The happiness of having such a sister was their

NORTHANGIR ABBEY. l I l

lint effusion, and the fair ladies mingled in embrace.
and teen of joy.

Delighting, however, 8| Catherine sincerely did, in
the pron of the connexion, it rnuat be acknowledged
that Isa lla far surpassed her in tender anticipation;
“ You will be no inﬁnitely dwrer to me, my Catherine,
thpneitherAnneorMaria. Ifeel that I shall be to
much more attached to my dear Morland’e family than
to my own.” .

This wu a pitch of friendship beyond Catherine.

“ You are IO like your dear brother," continued Isabella,
“ that I quite domed on you the tint moment I saw you.
But no it always is with me: the ﬁrm: moment nettle:
everything. The very lint day that Morland came to
us last Christmas, the very lint moment I beheld him,
my heart was irrevocably gone. I remember I wore
my yellow gown, with my hair done up in braida; and
when I came into the drawing-room, and John intro-
duced him, I thought I never mw anybody so handsome
before.”

Here Catherine secretly acknowled ed the power of
love; for, though exceedingly fond 0 her brother, and
partial to all his endowments, the had never in her life
thought him handsome.

“ I remember, too, Mine Andrews drank tea with up
that evening, and wore her price-coloured mraenet; and
Iii: looked to heavenly, that I thought your brother
mun certainly fall in love with her; I could not nleep
a wink all night for thinking of it. Oh! Catherine,
the many Ileepleas nighu I have had on our brother’n
account 1 I would not have you ruii'er ha f what I have
done! I am grown wretchedly thin, I know; but I
will not pain you by describing my anxiety; you have
teen enough of it. I feel that I have betrayed myself
perpetually; l0 unguarded in Ipeaking of m partiality
for the church ! But my secret I was way. we
would be safe with you.”

I 12 NORTHANGER ABBEY

Catherine felt that nothing could. have been safer;
but ashamed of an ignorance little expected, the dared
no longer contest the point, nor refuse to have been as
full of arch penetration and aﬂ'ectionate sympathy as
Isabella chose to consider her. Her brother, she found,
was preparing to set 05‘ with all speed to Fullerton, to
make known his situation and ask consent; and here
was a source of some real agitation m the mind of
Isabella. Catherine endeavoured to persuade her, as
she was herself persuaded, that her father and mother
would never oppose their son’s wishes. “ It is impos-
sible,” said the, “ for parents to be more kind, or more
desirous of their children’s happiness; I have no doubt
of their consenting immediately. ’

“ Morland says exactly the same,” replied Isabella;
“and yet I dare not expect it; my fortune will be so
small ; they never can consent to it. Your brother, who
mi ht marry anybody! ”

ere Catherine again disoemed the force of love.

“ Indeed, Isabella, you are too humble. The dilfer.
ence of fortune can be nothing to signify.”

“ Oh! my sweet Catherine, in your generous heart I
know it would signify nothing, but we must not expect
such disinterestedness in many. As for myself,I am
sure I only wish our situations were reversed. Had I
the command of millions, were I mistress of the whole
world, your brother would be my only choice.”

This charming sentiment, recommended as much by
sense as novelty, gave Catherine s most pleasing remem-
brance of all the heroines of her acquaintance; and she
thought her friend never looked more lovely than in
uttering the grand ides. “ I am sure they will consent,”
was her frequent declaration; “ I am sure they will be
delighted With you."

“ For my own part,” mid Isabella, “ my wishes are
so moderate, that the smallest income in more would

HORN-[ANGER ABBEY. ! 13

be enough for me. Where people are really attached,
poverty itself in wealth: grandeur I detest: I would
not scale in London for the univene. A cottage in
some retired villa e would be excary. There are some
charming little ‘ about Richmond.”

“ Richmond ! ” cried Catherine. “ You must settle
near Fullerton. You must be near us.”

“lunsureIshallbemieei-ableifwedonot. If I
can but be near you, I shall be satisﬁed. But this is
idle talking! I will not allow myself to think of loch
things till we have your father’s anewer. Morland says
that'by sending it to-night to Salisbury, we may have it
to-rnorrow. To-morrowl I know I shall never have
courage to open the letter. I know it will be the death
of me.”

A reverie succeeded thin conviction, and when
Isabella spoke again, it was to resolve on the quality of
her wedding-gown.

Their conference was put an end to by the anxious
young lover himself, who came to breathe his parting
sigh before he set of for Wilmhire. Catherine wished
to congratulate him, but knew not what to say, and
her eloquence wae only in her eyes. From them, how-
ever, the ei ht pom of lpeech shone out most expres-
sively, and arms could combine them with ease. Im-
patient for the realization of all that he hoped at home,
his adieu: were not long. and they would have been yet
shorter had he not been frequently detained by the
urgent enueaties of his fair one that he would go.
Twice was he called almost from the door by her eager-
ness to have him gone. “Indeed, Morland, I must
drive you away. Consider how far on have to ride.
I cannot hear to see you linger so. Pyon- Heaven’s sake,
waste no more time. There, go, go—I ineist on it.”

The two friends, with heam now more united than
ever,wereimepnnbleforthe day; and in echemee of

I I4 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

sisterly happiness the hours ﬂew along. Mrs Thorpe
and her son, who were ac uninmd with everything, and
who seemed only to want r Morland’s consent to con-
n'der Isabella’s engagement as the most fortunate cir-
cumstance imaginable for their family, were allowed to
'oin their counsels, and add their quota. of signiﬁcant
oolcl and mysterious expressions, to ﬁll u the measure
of curioeit to be raised in the nnpri 'eged ounger
sisters. 0 Catherine’s sim e feelings, this ad sortof
reserve seemed neither lrin y meant, nor consistently
supported; and its unkindness she would hardly have
forborn pointing out, had its inconsistency been less
their friend; but Anne and Maria soon set her heart at
use by the sagacity of their “ I know what 3 ” and the
evening was spent in a sort of war of wit, a displa of
family ingenuity ; on one side in the mystery 0 an
affected secret, on the other of undeﬁned discovery, all
equally acute.

Catherine was with her friend again the next day,
endeavouring to support her spirits, and while away the
many tedious hours before the delivery of the letters: a
neednt exertion ; for as the time of reasonable expecta-
tion drew near, Isabella became more and more despond-
ing, and before the letter arrived, had worked herself
into a suite of ral distress. But when it did come,
where could distress be found? “ I have had no difﬁ-
culty in gaining the consent of my kind parents, and am
promised that everything in their power shall be done
to forward my happiness,” were the ﬁrst three lines, mud
in one moment all was joyful security. The brightest
glow was instantly spread over Isabella's {centres—all
care and anxiety seemed removed, her Ipiriu became
almost too high for controul, and she called herself
without scruple the happiest of mortals.

Mrs Thorpe, with tears of joy, embraced her dxu hter,
her son, her visitor, and could have embraced f the

HORTHANGER ABBEY. ! I 5

inhabitants of Bath with nu'efaetion. Her heart was
overﬂowing with tenderneu. It was “dear John,” and
“dear Catherine," at every word; “dear Anne and
dear Maria ” muat immediately be made sharere in their
felicity; and two “dents " at once before the name of
Isabella were not more than that beloved child had now
well earned. John himqu was no skulker in joy. He
not only bestowed on Mr Morland the high commenda-
n'on of being one of the ﬁnest fellow in the world, but
were off many aentencee in his raise.
The letter whence sprang ' felicity was short,
containing little more than this assurance of success ; and
every particular we deferred till James could write
again. But for niculara Isabella could well afford m
wait. The n wal com rised in Mr Morland’s
promiee: hie honour we: pl ged to make everything
easy ; and by what mean their income wan to be formed,
whether landed property wet! to be resigned, or funded
money made over, waa a matter in which her disinter-
ested spirit took no concern. She knew enough to feel
secure of an honourable and rpeedy establishment, and
her imagination took a rapid ﬂight over its intended
felicities. She saw herself, at the end of a few weeks,
the gaze and admiration of every new acquaintance at
Fullerton, the envy of every valued old friend in Putney,
with a carriage at her command, a new name on her
tickets, and a brilliant exhibition of hoop rings on her
ﬁn er.
hen the contents of the letter were entertained,
John Thorpe, who had only waited its arrival to begin
his journey to London, prepared to set off: “ Well,
Min Moi-land,” said he, on ﬁnding her alone in the
parlour, “ I am come to bid you good-by.” Catherine
wished him a good journey. Without appearing to hear
her, he walked to the window, ﬁdgetted about, hummed
a tune, and seemed wholly elf-occupied.

1 16 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

" Shall not you be late at Devizes P ” said Catherine.
He made no answer ; but. after a minute’s silence burst
out with, “ A famous good thing this marrying scheme,
Wu my soul ! A clever fancy of Morland’s and Belle’s.

hat do you think of it, Miss Morland? I say it is
no bad notion."

“ I am sure I think it a very good one."

"Do you i—that’s honest; by heavens! I am glad
you are no enemy to matrimony, however. Did you
ever hear the old song, ‘Going to one wedding brings
on another ’? I say, you will come to Belle’s wedding,
I ho .”

“ es; I have promised your sister to he with her,
if possible."

“ And then you know "—twisting himself about, and
forcing a foolish laugh—" I say, then you know, we
may the truth of this same old song.”

“ y we? but I never sing. Well, I wish you a
good journey. I dine with Miss ’I‘ilney to-day, and
must now be going home.” »

“ Nay, but there is no such confounded hurry. Who
knows when we may be together again P Not but that
I shall be down again by the end of a fortnight, and a
devilish long fortnight it will appear to me."

“Then why do you my away so long?” replied
Catherine, ﬁnding that he waited for an answer.

“That is kind of you, however; kind and good.
natured. I shall not forget it in a hurry. But you
have more good-nature, and all that, than anybody
living, I believe. A monstrous deal of good-nature,
and it is not only good-nature, but you have so much—
so much of everything; and then you have such—upon
my soul, I do not know any body like you.”

“ Oh dear! there are a great many on le like me, I
darensay, only a great deal better. (Brood morning to

you.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I I 7

“ But I nay, Miss Morland, I shall come 3nd pay
my respects at Fullerton before it in long, if not dis.
agrmhle.”

“ Pray do 3 my father and mother will be very glad
to see you."

“ And I hope-J hope, Miss Morland, you will not
be sorry to see me.”

"Oh dear! not at all. There are very few people
I am sorry to see. Company it always cheerﬁzl.’

“ That is 'nst my way of thinking. Give me but 1
little cheerfulJ company, let me only have the company of
the people I love, let me only be where I like and with
whom I like, and the devil take the rest, my I; and I
am heartily glad to hear you say the name. But I have
a notion, Miss Morland, you and I think pretty much
alike upon most mature,"

“ Perhaps we may; but it is more than I ever
thought of. And as to mart marten, to say the tnith,
there are not many that I know my own mind about.”

“By love, no more do I! It is not my way to
bother in brains with what does not concern me. My
notion olY thin in simple enough. Let me only
have the girl Igllike, any I, with a comfortable house
over my head, and what care I for all the rest? F ortuue
in nothing. I am sure of a good income of my own ;
and if the had not a pen , why no much the better.”

“Very me. I think Kite you there. If there is a
good fortune on one side, there can be no occasion for
any on the other. No mutter which has it,so that
there it enough. Ihate the idea of one great fortune
looking out {or another; and to marry for money, I think
the wickednt thing in existence. Good day. We
shall be very glad to see you at Fullerton, whenever it is
convenient.’ And awa she went. It wan not in
the power of all his [entry to detain her longer.
With such new: to communicate. and Inch 3 visit to

118 rsonmmcen sneer.

prepare for, her departure was not to be delayed by
anything in his nature to urge; and she hurried away,
leaving him to the undivided consciousness of his own
ha y address and her explicit encouragement.

he agitation which she had herself experienced on
ﬁrst learning her brother’s engagement made her e ct
to raise no inconsiderable emotion in Mr and rs
Allen, by the communication‘of the wonderful event.
How great was her disappointment! The im rtant
affair, which many words of preparation ushered us, had
been foreseen by them both ever since her brother's
arrival; and all that the felt on the occasionwas
comprehended in a wish or the young people’s happi-
ness, with a remark, on the gentleman a side, in favour
of Isabella’s beauty, and on the lady’s, of her great good
luck. It was to Catherine the most surprizing insensi-
bility. The disclosure, however, of the great secret of
James’s going to lFullerwn the day before did raise
name emotion in Mrs Allen. She could not listen to
that with perfect calmness, but re eatedly regretted the
necessity of its concealmengwishe she could have known
his intention, wished she could have seen him before he
went, as she should certainly have troubled him with
her best regards to his father and mother, and her kind
compliments to all the Skinners.

than: £17].

ATHERINE’S expectations of pleasure from her
visit in Milsom Street were so very high, that
disappointment was inevitable ; and, accordingly,

though she was most politely received by General
Tilney, and kindly welcomed by his daughter; though
Henry meat home, and no one else of the party, she
found on her mum, without spending many hours in the

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 19

examination of her feelings, that she had gone to her
sp ointment preparing for happiness which it had not

rded. Instead of ﬁnding herself improved in acquain-
tance with Miss Tilney, from the intercourse of the day,
she seemed hardl so intimate with her as before. In-
stead of seeing enry Tilney to greater advantage than
ever, in the ease of a family party, he had never said so
little nor been so little agreeable; and, in spite of their
father’s great civilities to her, in spite of his thanks, in-
vitations, and compliments, it had been a release to get
way from him. It puzzled her to account for all this.
It could not be General Tilney’s fault. That he was
perfectly agreeable and good-natured, and altogether a
very charming man, did not admit of a doubt. for he was
tall and handsome, and Henry’s father. He could not be
accounmble for his children’s want of s irits, or for her
want of enjoyment in his company. he former she
hoped at last might have been accidenml, and the latter
she could only attribute to her own stupidity. Isabella,
on hearing the ‘culars of the visit, gave a different
explanation. “ It was all pride, pride; insufferable
haughu'ness and pride! She had long suspected the
family to be very high, and this made is certain. Such
insolcnce of behaviour as Miss Tilney’s she had never
heard of in her life! Not to do the honours of her
house with common good breeding! To behave to
her guest with such supeteiliousnessl Hardly even to
speak to her! ”

“But it was not so bad as that, Isabella; there was
no In rciliousness; she was very civil.”

“ h, don’t defend her! And then the brother, he,
who had appeared so attached to you! Good heavenel
well, some people’s feelings are incomprehensible. And
so he hardly looked once at you the whole day 2 "

“Idonotsayso;buthedidnotseemingood

'Piduln

l 20 NORTHANGBR ABBEY.

“How contemptihlel Of all things in the world
inconstancy in my aversion. Let me entreut you never
to think of him again, my dear Catherine; indeed he
is unworthy of you.”

“Unworthy! I do not suppose he ever think» of
me.”

“ That is exactly what I say 5 he never thinks of you.
Such ﬁckleness! Oh, how different to your brother
and to mine! I really believe John has the moat con-
mm: heart."

‘4 But as for General Tiln , I assure you it would
be impossible for any body to have to me with greater
civility and attention; it seemed td be his only cure to
entertain and make me happy.”

“Oh! I know no harm of him; I do not suspect
him of ride. I believe he is a very gentleman-like
man. ohn thinks very well of him, and John’s judg-

ment—”

“Well, I shall lee how they behave to me this
evening; we shall meet them at the rooms.”

" And must I go?"

“Do not you intend it? ‘I thought it was all
nenled.”

“Nay, since you make Inch 3 point of it, I can
refuse you nothing. But do not insist upon my being
very agreeable, for my heart, you know, will be some
forty miles off ; and us for dancing, do not mention it,
I beg; Ibo! ll quite out of the question. Charles
Hodges will plague me to death, I dare say; but I
shall cut him very short Ten to one but he guesses
the reason, and that in exactly what I want to avoid ;
so I shall inailt on his keeping his conjecture to
himself."

Isabella’s opinion of the Tilneyt did not inﬂuence
her friend; she was sure there had been no insolence in
the manners either of brother or sister; and the did not

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 2 1

credit there being any pride in their hearts. The even-
ing rewarded her conﬁdence; she was met by one with
the same kindness, and the other with the some at-
tention as heretofore. iss Tilney took pains to be
near her, and Henry asked her to dance.

Having heard the day before in Milsom Street that
their elder brother, Captain Tilneyr. was expected
almost every hour, she was at no loss for the name of a
very fashionable-looking, handsome young man, whom
she had never seen before, and who now evidently be-
longed w their party. She looked at him with great
admiration ; and even supposed it possible, that some
people might think him handsomer than his brother,
though, in her eyes, his air was more assuming, and his
countenance less prepossessing. His taste and manners
were, beyond a doubt, decidedly inferior; for, within
her hearing, he not only protested against every thought
of dancing himself, but even laughed openly at Henry
for ﬁnding it possible. From the latter circumstance it
may be presumed, that, whatever might be our heroine’s
opinion of him, his admiration of her was not of a very
dangerous kind; not likely to produce animosities be-
tween the hrothers, nor persecutions to the lady. He
cannot be the instigator of the three villains in horse-
men’s great coats, by whom she will hereafter be forced
into a travelling chaise and four, which will drive of?
with incredible speed. Catherine, meanwhile, undis-
turbed by presentiments of such an evil, or of any evil
at all, except that of having but a short set to dance
down, enjoyed her usual happiness with Henry Tilney,
listening with sparkling eyes to everything he said; and,
in ﬁnding him irresistible, becoming so herself.

At the end of the ﬁrst dance, Captain Tilney came
towards them again, and, much to Catherine’s dissatis-
faction, pulled his brother away. They retired whis-
pering together; and, though her delicate sensibility did

I

I 2 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

not take immediate alarm, and lay it down as fact, that
Captain Tilney must have heard some malevolent mis-
representation of her, which he now hastened to com-
municate to his brother, in the hope of separating them
for ever, she could not have her parmer conveyed from
her sight without very uneasy sensations. Her suspense
was of full ﬁve minutes’ duration ; and she was beginning
to think it a very long quarter of an hour, when they
both returned ; and an explanation was given, by
Henry’s requesting to know, if the thought her friend
Miss Thorpe would have any objection to dancing, as
his brother would be most happyto he introduced to
her. Catherine, without hesitation, replied, that she
was ve sure Miss Thorpe did not mean to dance at
all. he cruel ly was passed on to the other, and
he immediately ked away.

“Your brother will not mind it, I know,” said she,
“ because I heard him say before that he hated dancing ;
but it was very good~natured in him to think of it. I
su pose he saw Isabella sitting down,‘ and fancied she
might wish for a partner; but he is quite mistaken,
for she would not dance upon any account in the
world.”

Henry smiled, and said, “ How very little trouble it
can give you to understand the motive of other people’s
actions.”

“ Why? What do you mean I”

“ With you it is not, how is such a one likely to be
inﬂuenced? What is the inducement most likely to
act upon such a erson's feelings, age, situation, and

robable habits of life considered? But, how should I
inﬂuenced; what would be my inducement in acting
so and so P”

“ I do not understand you.”

“ Then we are on very unequal terms, for I under-
stand you perfectly well.”

NORTH ANGER ABBEY. l 2 3

“ Me .’ yes; I cannot speak well enough to be unin-
telligible.”

“ Bravo! an excellent satire on modern language."

“ ut ray tell me what you mean.”

“ S I, indeed? Do you really desire it? But
you are not aware of the consequences ; it will involve
you in a very cruel embarrassment, and certainly bring
on a disagreement between us.”

“ No, no; it shall not do either; Iam not afraid."

“ Well, then, I only meant that your attﬁbudng my
brother‘s wish of dancing with Miss Thorpe to good-
nature alone, convinced me of your being superior in
good-nature yourself to all the rest of the world."

Catherine blushed and disclaimed, and the gentleman’-

redictions were veriﬁed. There was a something.
wever, in his word.- which repaid her for the pain of
confusion; and that something occupied her mind so
much, that she drew back for some time, forgetting to
k or to listen, and almost forgetting where she was;
till, roused hy the voice of Isabella, she looked up and
saw her with Captain Tilney preparing to give them
hands across.

Isabella shruged her shoulders and smiled. the only
explanation of this extraordinary change which could at
that time be given; but as it was not quite enough for
Catherine’s comprehension, she spoke her astonishment
in very plain terms to her partner.

“ I cannot think how it could happen ! Isabella was
so determined not to dance.”

. “ And did Isabella never change her mind before 2 ”

“ 0h ! but, because and your brother! After
what you told him from me, how could he think of
going to ask her i ”

“ I cannot take Iurprlte to m If on that head.
You bid me be surprized on your riend's account, and,
therefore, I am; but as for my brother, his conduct in

 

124 . NORTHANGER ABBEY.

the business, I must own, has been no more than I be.
lieved him perfectly equal to. The fairness of your
friend was an open attraction; her ﬁrmness, you know,
could only be understood by yourself.”

“ You are laughing; but, I assure you, Isabella is
very ﬁrm in general.”

“ It is as much as should be said of any one. To be
always ﬁrm must be to be often obstinate. When pro-

ly to relax is the trial of judgment; and, without re-
grrence to my brother, I really dunk Miss Thorpe has
by no means chosen ill in ﬁxing on the present hour.”

The friends were not able to get together for any
conﬁdential discourse ﬁll all the dancing was over; but
then, as they walked about the room arm in arm.
Isabella thus explained herself: “I do not wonder at
your aurprize; and I am really fatigued to death. He
is such a rattle! Amusing enough, if my mind had
 been disengaged; but I would have given the world to
sit still."

“ Then why did not you P”

“ 0h ! my dear, it would have looked so particular;
and you know how I abhor doing that. I refused him
as long as I possibly could, but he would take no denial.
You have no idea how he pressed me. I begged him
to excuse me, and get some other partner; but no, not
he; after aspiring to my hand, there was nobody else
in the room he could bear to think of ; and it was not
that he wanted merely to dance, he wanted to be with
me. Oh, such nonsense! I told him he had taken a
very unlikely way to prevail upon me; for, of all things
in the world, I hated ﬁne speeches and compliments ;-——
and so—and so then I found there would be no peace
if I did not stand up. Besides, I thought Mrs Hughes,
who introduced him, might take it ill if I did not; and
your dear brother, I am sure he would have been
miserable if I had sat down the whole evening. I

“ORTHANGER ABBEY. ' l 25

am so glad it is over! My spirits are quite jaded
with listening to his nonsense; and then, being such
a smart young fellow, I saw every eye was upon us."

“ He is very handsome, indeed."

“Handsome! Yes, I suppose he may. 'I dare
nyaﬁeople would admire him in general; but he is not
at in my style of beauty. I hate a ﬂorid complexion
and dark eyes in a man. However, he is very well.
Amazingly conceited, I am sure. I took him down
seveml times, you know, in my way.”

When the young ladies next met, they had a far
more interesting subject to discuss. James Morland’s
second letter was then received, and the kind intentions
of his father fully ex lained. A living, of which Mr
Modand was himsel patron and incumbent, of about
four hundred pounds yearly value, was to be resigned to
his son as soon as he should be old enough to take
it; no triﬂing deduction from the family income, no
niggardly assignment to one often children. An estate
of at least equal value, moreover, was assured at his
future inheritance.

James expressed himself on the occasion with be-
coming gratitude; and the necessity of waiting between
two and three years before they could marry being,
however unwelcome, no more than he had expected,
was born by him without discontent. Catherine, whose
expectations had been as unﬁxed as her ideas of her
father’s income, and whose judgment was now entirely
led by her brother, felt equally well satisﬁed, and
hurtily congratulated Isabella on having everything so
pleasantly settled.

“ It is very charming, indeed," said Isabella, with a
grave face.

“ Mr Morland has behaved vastly handsome, indeed,”
laid the gentle Mrs Tho , looking anxiously at her
daughter. “I only wish lreould do as much. One

no NORTHANGER sunny.

could not expect more from him, you know. If he
ﬁnds he ms do more, by-snd-bye, I dare say he will;
for I am sure he must be an excellent, good-hearted
nun. Four hundred is but a small income to begin
on, indeed; but your wishes, my dear Isabella, are so
moderate, you do not consider how little you ever want,
my dear."

“It is not on my own account I wish for more;
but I cannot hear to be the means of injuring my dear
Morland, making him sit down upon an income hardly
en ugh to ﬁnd one in the common necemries of life.
Fo myself, it is nothing; I never think of myself.”

“I know you never do, my dear; and you will
always ﬁnd your reward in the affection it makes every-
body feel for you. There never was a young woman
so beloved as you are I: everybody that knows you;
and I dare say when r Morlsnd sees you, my dear
child—but do not let us distress our dear Catherine by
talking of such things. Mr Morland has behaved so
very handsome, you know. I always heard he was a
mostexcellent man; and you know, my dear, we are
not to suppose but what, if you had had a suitable
fortune, he would have come down with something
more; for I am sure he must be a most liberal-minded
man.”

“ Nobodycnn think better of Mr Morland than I do,
I am sure. But everybody has their failing, you know;
and everybody has a right to do what they like with
their own money."

Catherine was hurt by these insinuations. “I am
very sure,” said she, “thst my father has promised to
do as much as he can aﬂord.”

Inbells recollected herself. “ As to that, my sweet
Catherine, there cannot be a doubt, and you know me
well enough to be sure that a much smaller income
would satisfy me. It is not the want of more money

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 2 7

that makes me just at present a little out of spirits. I
hate money; and if our union could take place now
upon only ﬁfty pounds a m, I should not have a wish
unsatisﬁed. Ah! my atherine, you have found me
on There’s the sting. The long, long, endless two
years and a half that are to pass before your brother can
hold the living.”

“ Yes, yes, my darling Isabella,” said Mrs Thorpe,
“ we perfectly see into your heart. You have no dis-
guise. We rfectl understand the present vexation;
and eve y must ove you the better for such a noble,
honest affection.”

Catherine’s uncomfortable feelings began to lessen.
She endeavoured to believe that the delay of the
marriage was the only source of Isabella’s regret; and
when she saw her at their next interview as cheerful
and amiable as ever, endeavoured to forget that she had
for a minute thought otherwise. James soon followed
his letter, and was received with the moat gratifying
kindness.

Chapter 5173].

HE Aliens had now entered on the sixth week of
their stay in Bath; and whether it should be
the last, was for some time a question, to which

Catherine listened with a beating heart. To have her
acquaintance with the Tilneys end so soon, was an evil
which nothing could counterbalance. Her whole
happiness seemed at stake, while the affair was in

use, and eve thing secured when it was deter-
mined that the lo gings should be taken for another
fortnight. What this additional fortnight was to pro
duce to her beyond the pleasure of sometimes seeing
Henry Tilney, made but a small part of Catherine’s

r 28 NORTHANGER sassy.

speculation. Once or twice, indeed, since James’s en-
gagement had taught her what mold be done, she had
got so far as to indulge in a secret “perhaps,” but in
general the felicity of being with him for the present
bounded her views : the present wns now comprised in
another three weeks, and her happiness being eemin for
that period, the rest of her life was at such s distance is
to excite but little interest. In the course of the mom-
ing which saw this business arranged, she visited Miss
Tilney, and poured forth her jo ful feelings. It was
doomed to he a day of trial. 0 sooner had she ex-
pressed her delight in Mr Allen’s lengthened stay, than
Miss Tilney told her of her father’ s having deter-
mined upon quining Bath by the end of another week.
Here was a blow ! The past suspense of the morning
had been ease and quiet to the present disappoint-
ment. Catherine’s countenance fell; and in a voice of
most sincere concern she echoed Miss Tilney’s con-
cluding words, “ By the end of another week! "

“ Yes; my father can seldom be prevailed on to give
the waters what I think a fair trial. He has been dis-
appointed of some friends’ arrival whom he expected to
meet here, and as he is now pretty well, is in s hurry to
get home.”

“ I am very sorry for it,” said Catherine, dejectcdly;
“ if I had known this before ”

“ Perhaps,” said Miss Tilney in an embarrassed
manner, “you would be so good—it would make me
veq‘ happy if ”

he entrance of her father put a stop to the civility
which Catherine was beginning to hope might introduce
a desire of their corresponding. After addressing her
with his usual politeness, he turned to his daughter,
and said, “ Well, Eleanor, may I congratulate you
on being successful in your application to your fair
friend .’ ”

 

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 29

“I was just beginning to make the request, sir,as
you came in.”

" Well, proceed I) all means. I know how much
your been Is in it. y daughter, Miss Morland,” he
continued without leaving his daughter time to s alt,
“ has been forming a very bold wish. We leave Earth,
as she has perhaps told you, on Saturday se’nnig’ht. A
letter from my steward tells me that my presence is
wanted at home; and being disappointed in m hope of
seeing the Marquis of Longtown and General ourteney
here, some of my very old friends, there is nothing to
detain me longer in Bath. And could we csrryour
selﬁsh point with you, we'should leave it without a
single regret. Can you, in short, be prevailed on to

uit this scene of public triumph, and oblige your friend

leaner with your company in Gloucestershire? I am
almost ashamed to make the request, though its pre-
sumption would certainly appear greater to Hwy crea—
ture in Bath than yourself. Modesty such as your’s—
but not for the world would I pain it by open praise.
If u can be induced to honour us with a visit, you
willyhmke us happy beyond expression. ’Tis true, we
can nKer you nothing like the gaieties of this livel place;
we can tern t you neither by amusement nor splyendour,
for our m e of living, as you see, is plain and unpre-
nending, at no endeavours shall be wanting on our side
to make onhanger Abbey not wholly disagreeable."

Northanger Abbey! These were thrilling words,
and wound up Catherine’s feelings to the highest
points of extasy. Her grateful and gratiﬁed heart
could hardly restrain its expressions within the language
of tolerable calmness. To receive so ﬂattering an in-
vitationl To have her company so warmly solicited!
Everything honourable and soothing, every present en-
joyment and every future hope was containe in it, and
he: acceptance, with only the saving clause of papa and

13° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

mamma’s approbation, was eagerly given. “ I will write
home direct y,” said she, “ and if they do not object,
as I dare sa they will not— "

General ilney was not less sanguine, having already
waited on her excellent friends in Pulteney Street, and
obtained their sanction of his wishes. ‘ “ Since they can
consent to part with you," said he, “we may expect
philosophy from all the worl. "

Miss T ilney was earnest, though gentle, in her
secondary civilities, and the affair became in a few
minutes as nearly settled as this necessary reference to
Fullerton would allow.

The circumstances of the morning had led Cathe-
rine’s feelings through the varieties of suspense, security,
and disappointment: but they were now safely lodged
in perfect bliss; and with s irits elated to rapture, with
Henry at her heart, and orthanger Abbey on her
1i she hurried home to write her letter. Mr and
Ni: Morland, relying on the discretion of the friends!»
whom they had already entrusted their daughter, felt no
doubt of the propriety of an acquaintance which had
been formed under their eye, and sent, therefore, by
return of post, their ready consent to her visit in Glou-
cestershire. This indulgence, though not more than
Catherine had hoped for, completed her conviction of
being favoured beyond every other human creature, in
friends and, fortune, circumstance and chance. Every-
thing seemed taco-operate for her advantage. By the
kindness of her ﬁrst friends, the Allens, she had been
introduced into scenes where pleasures of every kind had
met her. Her feelings, her preferences had each known
the happiness of a return. Wherever the felt attach-
ment, she had been able to create it. The alfecn'on of
Isabella was to be secured to her in a sister. The
Tilneys, they by whom above all she desired to be
favourably thought of, outstripped even her wishes in the

c¢4

NORTHANGE'R ABBEY. I 3 I

ﬂattering measures by which their intimac was to be
continued. She was to be their chosen visitor, she was
to be for weeks under the same roof with the person
whose society she mostly prized; and, in addiuon to
all the rent, this roof was to be the roof of an abbey!
Her passion for ancient ediﬁces was next in degree to
her passion for Henry Tilney, and castles sod sbhiea
mode usually the charm of those reveries which his
image did not ﬁll. To see and explore either the
ramparts and keep of the one, or the Cloisters of the
other, had been for many weeks a darling wish, though
to be more than the visitor of an hour had seemed loo
nearly impossible for desire; and yet this was to happen.
With all the chances against her of house, hall, place,
park, court, and cottage, Northanger turned u an
abbey, sud she was to be its inhabitant Its ong,
damp passages, its narrow cells and ruined chapel.
were to be within her daily reach, and she could
not entirely subdue the hope of some traditional
legends, some awful morials of an injured and ill-
fsted nun.

It was wonderful that her friends should seem so
little elated by the possession of such a home; that the
consciousness of it should be so meek] born. The
power of early habit only could account or it. A die-
tinction to which they had been born gave no pride.
Their superiority of abode was no more to them than
their superiority of person.

Man were the inquiries she was eager to make or
Miss 'lzilney; but so active were her thoughts, thst
when these inquiries were lowered, she was hardly
more assured than before of Northanger Abbey having
been s richly endowed convent at the time of the Re-
formation, of its having fallen into the hands of an
ancestor of the Tilneys on its dissolution, of a large
portion of the ancient building still making a part of the

r 32 V NORTHANGER ABBEY.

resent dwelling although the rest was decayed, or of
its standing low in a valle , sheltered from the north
andeastby rising woodso oak.

 

chapter i933].

IT}! a mind thus full of happiness, Catherine
was hardly aware that two or three days had
passed away, without her seeing Isabella for

more than a few minutes together. She began ﬁrst to
be sensible of this, and to sigh for her conversation, as
the walked along the Pump-room one morning, by Mrs
Allen’s side, without anything to say or to hear; and
scarcely had she felt a five minutes’ longing of friend-
ship, before the object of it appeared, and inviting her to
a secret conference, led the way to a sear. " This is
my favourite place," said she, [as] they sat down on a
bench between the doors, which commanded a tolerable
view of everybody entering at either, “it is so out of
the way.”

Catherine, observing that Isabella’s eyes were con-
tinually bent towards one door or the other, as in eager
expectation, and remembering how often she had been
falsely accused of being arch, thought the present a ﬁne

rtunity for being really so, and therefore gaily said,
“ 0 not be uneasy, Isabella. James will soon be
here."

“Psha! my dear creature,” she replied, “ do not
think me such a simpleton as to be always wanting to
conﬁne him to my elbow. It would be hideous to be
always together; we should be the jest of the place.
And so you are going to Northanger ! I am amazingly
glad of it. It is one of the ﬁnest old places in England,
I undemand. I shall depend upon a most particular
description of it."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 1'33

“ You shall certainly have the best in my power to
give. But who are you looking for? Are your sisten
coming ? ”

“ I am not looking for anybody. One’s eyes must
be somewhere, and you know what a foolish trick I
have of ﬁxing mine, when my thoughts are an hundred
miles 011'. I am amazingly abunt; I believe I am the
most absent creature in the worid. Tilney says it is
always the case with minds of a certain stamp.”

“ But I thought1 Isabella, you had something in
particular to tell me P ”

“ Oh, yes! and so I have. But here is a proof of
what I was saying. My poor head! I had quite
forgot it. Well, the thing is this: I have just had a
letter from John. You can guess the contents.”

“ No, indeed, I cannot.”

“ My sweet love, do not be so abominany aﬁected.
What can he write about but yourself? You know he
is over head and ears in love with you.”

“ With me, dear Isabella ? ”

“ Na , my sweetest Catherine, this is being quite ab-
surd. odesty, and all that, is very well in its way,
but really a little common honesty is sometimes quite as
becoming. I have no idea of being so overstmined.
It is ﬁshing for compliments. His attentions were such
as a child must have noticed, and it was but half an
hour before he left Bath that you gave him the most
positive encouragement. He says so in this letter;
says that he as good as made you an oEer, and that you
received his advances in the kindest way, and now he
wants me to urge his suit, and say all manner of pretty
things to you. So it is in vain no aﬂ'ect ignorance."

Catherine, with all the earnestness of truth, expressed
her astonishment at such a charge, protesting her inno-
cence of every thought of Mr Thorpe's being in love
with her, and the consequent impossibility of her having

! 34 NORTEANGER ABBEY.

ever intended to encournge him. “A: to any atten-
tions on his side, I do declare, upon my honour, I
never was aenaible of them for a moment, except just
hie asking me to dance the lint day of his coming; and
as to making me an offer, or any thing like it, there
must be some unaccountable mistake. I could not
have mieundemood a thing of that kind, you know;
and, u I ever wish to be believed, I solemnly protest
that no syllable of such a nature ever panned between us.
The last half hour before he went away! It must be
all and completely a mistake, for I did not see him
once that whole morning.”

" But [bat ou certainly did, for you spent the whole
morning in gdgar's Buildings. It was the day your
father's consent came, and I am pretty sure that you
and John were alone in the parlour some time before
you left the house."

“Are you? Well, if you say it, it was so, I dare
say; but for the life of me, I cannot recollect it. I do
remember now being with you, and aeeing him an well
an the rest; but that we were ever alone for ﬁve min-
utes—. However, it is not worth arguing about, for
whatever might pass on his side, you must be convinced,
by my havin g no recollection of it. that‘I never thought,
nor expected, nor wished for anything of the kind from
him. I am excessively concerned that he should have
any regard for me, but indeed it has been quite unin-
tentional on my side; I never had the smallest idea of
it. Pray undeceive him as soon as youran, and tell him
I beg his pardon; that is-—-I do not know what I ought
to say—but make him understand what I mean in the
groperest way. I would not speak diarespectfully of a

rather of ours, Isabella, I am sure, but you know very
well that I could think of one man more than another,
It: is not the person.” Isabella was silent. “ My dear
friend, you must not be angry with me. I cannot sup-

“W

NORTHANGER linear. 135

pose your brother cares so very much about me; and,
you know, we shall still be sisters.”

“Yes, yes ” Silith a blush), “there are more ways
than one of our ‘ng sisters. But where am I wander-
ingto? Well, my dear Catherine, the case seems to
be.) that you are determined against poor John, is not it
so.

“ I certainly cannot return his aﬂ‘ecﬁ'on, and as
certainly never meant to encourage it.”

“Since that is the case, I am sure I shall not tease
you any further. John desired me to speak to you on
the subject, and therefore I have. But I confess, as
soon as I read this letter, I thought it a very foolish,

t imprudent business, and not likely to promote the good

of either; for what were you to live upon, supposing
you came together? You have both of you something,
to be sure, but it is not a triﬂe that will support a family
now-a-dnys; and after all that romancers may say,
there is no doing without money. I only wonder John
could think of it; he could not have received my last."

“You do acquit me then of anything wrong? You

i are convinced that I never meant to deceive your

brother, never suspected him of liking me till this
moment?"

“ 0h ! as to that," answered Isabella, laughingly, “ I
do not pretend to determine what your thoughts and
designs in time past may have been. All that is best
known to yourself. A little harmless ﬂirtation or so
will occur, and one is often drawn on to give more
encouragement than one wishes to stand by. But you
may be assured that I am the lust n in the world
to judge you severely. All those things should be
allowed for in youth and high spiriu. What one
mans one day, you know, one may not mean the next.
Circumstances change, opinions alter."

" But my opinion of your brother never did alter; it

l 36 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

was always the same. You are describing what never
happened.” '

“ My dearest Catherine," continued the other without
at all listening to her, “ I would not for all the world
be the means of hurrying you into an engagement before
you knew what you were about. I do not think an ing
would justify me in wishing you to sacriﬁce al your
happiness merely to oblige my brother, because he is my
brother, and who, perhaps, after all, you know, might
be just as happy wrthout you; for people seldom know
what they would be at, young men espeda‘l’ly, they are
so amazingly changeable and inconstant. hat I say
is, why should a brother’s happiness be dearer to me
than a friend’s? You know I carry my notions of
friendship pretty high. But, above all things, my dear
Catherine, do not be in a hurry. Take my word for
it, that if you are in too great a hurry, you will certainly
live to repent it. Tilney says, there is nothing people
are so often deceived in as the state of their own affec-
tions; and I believe he is very right. Ah! here he
comes; never mind, he will not see us, I am sure.’ ’

Catherine, looking up, perceived Captain Tilney; and
Isabella, earnestly ﬁxing her eye on him as she spoke,
soon caught his notice. He approached immediately,

’ and took the seat to which her movements invited him.
His ﬁrst addrem made Catherine start Though spoken
low, she could distinguish, “ What! always to be
watched, in person or by proxy! ”

“Psha, nonsense!” was Isabella’s answer, in the
same half whisper. “ Why do you put such things into
my head? If I could believe it l—my spirit you know,
is pretty independent.”

“ I wish your heart were independent. That would
be enough for me.”

“My heart, indeed! What can you have to do
with hearts? You men have none of you any hearts.”

NORTHANGER assay. :37

“If we have not hearts, we have eyes; and they
give us torment enough.”

“Do they? I am sorry for it; I am sorry they
ﬁnd an ' g so disagreeable in me. I will look another
way. hope this pleases you ” (turning her back on
him) ; “ I hope your eyes are not tormented now.”

“ Never more so: foi- the edge of a blooming cheek
is still in view—at once too much and too little.”

Catherine heard all this, and, quite out of counten-
ance, could listen no longer. Amazed that Isabella
could endure it, and jealous for her brother, she rose up,
and saying she should join Mrs Allen, proposed their
walking. But for this Isabella showed no inclination.
She was so amazingly tired, and it was so odious to
parade about the Pump-room; and if she moved from
her seat, she should miss her sisters: she was expecting
her sisters every moment, so that her dearest Catherine
must excuse her, and must sit quietly down again. But
Catherine could be stubborn too; and Mrs Allen just
then coming up to propose their returning home, she
joined her and walked out of the Pump-room, leaving
Isabella still sitting with Captain Tilney. With much
uneasiness did she thus leave them. It seemed to her
that Captain Tilney was falling in love with Isabella,
and Isabella unconsciously encouraging him; uncon-
sciously it must be, for Isabella’s attachment to James
was as certain and well acknowledged as her engage-
ment. To doubt her truth or good intentions was im-
possible; and yet, during the whole of their conversa-
tion, her manner had been odd. She wished Isabella
had talked more like her usual self, and not so much
about mone ; and had not looked so well pleased at
the light 0 Captain Tilney. How strange that sh:
should not perCeive his admiration! Catherine longed
to give her a hint of it, to put her on her guard, and
prevent Ill the pain which her too lively behaviour

K

r 38 nonmnuozn ABBEY.

might othenvise create both for him and her
brother.

The corn liment of John Thorpe’l aEection did not
make amen for thin thoughtlemeu in his sister. She
was almoat as far from believing as from wishing it to
be aincere; for the had not forgotten that he could
minalte; and his assertion of the offer, and of her
encouragement, convinced her that his mistaken could
mmetirnee be very egregious. In vanity, therefore, the
gained but little: her chief proﬁt was in wonder. That
he should think it worth his while to fancy himaelf in
love with her war a matter of lively anoniahment.
Irabella talked of hit attendant; :6: had never been
eenlible of any ; but Iaabelln had said many things which
the hoped had been spoken in hate, and would never
be laid again; and upon this the was glad to rest alw-
gether for present ease and comfort.

Cbtnm *3 ﬂ.

FEW days panned away, and Catherine, though
not allowing herself to Inspect her friend, could

not help watching her closely. The result of
her obeervan'one was not agreeable. Isabella seemed
an altered creature. When the raw her indeed sur-
rounded only by their immediate friend. in Edgar’a
Buildings or Pulteney Street, her change of manners
was to triﬂing that, had it gone no farther, it might
have passed unnoticed. A something of languid in-
difference, or of that boasted absence of mind which
Catherine had never heard of before, would coca-ion-
ally come acrou her ; but had nothing worse appeared,
Ibo: might only have spread a new grace and inrpired
a warmer interest. But when Catherine saw her in

 

nonmanonn ABBEY. r39

public, admitting Captain Tilney’s attentions as readily
as they were oEered, and allowing him almost an equal
share with James in her notice and smiles, the alteration
became too positive to be past over. What could be
meant by such unsteady conducrtwhat her friend could
be at, was beyond her. comprehendon. Isabella could
not be aware of the pain she was inﬂicting ; but it was
a degree of wilful thoughtlessness which Catherine could
not but resent. James was the suﬂ'erer. She saw him
grave and uneasy; and however careless of his present
comfort the woman might be who had given him her
heart, to Iver it was always an object. For poor Cap-
tain Tilney too she was greatly concerned. Though
his looks did not please her, his name was a passport to
her goodwill, and she thought with sincere companion
of his approaching disappointment ; for, in 'te of
what she had believed herself to overhear in thengump-
room, his behaviour was so incompao'bh with a know-
ledge of Isabella’s engagement, that she could not, upon
reﬂection, imagine him aware of it. He might be
jealous of her brother as a rival, but if more had seemed
unplied, the fault must have been in her misapprehen-
sion. She wished, by a gentle remonatranCe, to re-
mind Isabella of her situation, and make her aware of
this double unkindness; but for remonmnce, either
o rtunity or comprehension was alwa against her.

able to suggeat a hint, Isabella coul never under-
und it. In this distress, the intended do rture of the
Tilney family became her chief conso ation; their
journey into Gloucestenhire was to take place within a
few days, and Captain Tilney’s removal would at lean
restore peace to every heart but his own. But Captain
Tilney had at present no intention of removing; he
was not to be of the rtyto Nonhanger, he was to
continue at Bath. hen Catherine knew this, her
resolution was directly made. She spoke to Henry

14° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Till-:1 on the subject, regretting his brother’s evident
ﬂ ' 'ty for Miss Thorpe, and entreating him to make
own her prior engagement.

“ My brother does know it,” was Henry’s answer.

" Does he i then why does he stay here i "

He made no reply, and was beginning to talk of
oomething else; but she eagerly continued, “ Why do
I not you persuade him to go away ? The longer he
stays, the worse it will be for him at last. Pray advise
him for his own take, and for everybody’s sake, toleave
Bath directly. Absence will in time make him com-
fortable again ; but he can have no hope here, and it is
only at: 'ng to be miserable.” Henry smiled, and
said, “ am sure my brother would not wish to do
that."

“ Then you will penuade him to go away."

“ Persuadion in not at command; but pardon me, if I
cannot even endeavour to persuade him. I have my-
self told him that Miss Thorpe is engaged. He knows
what he in about, and must be his own master."

“ No, he does not know what he in about,” cried
Catherine ; “ he does not know the pain he is giving my
brother. Not that James has ever told me so, but I am
sure he is very uncomfortable.”

“ And are you sure it is my brother’l doing 2 ”

“ Yes, very sure.”

" Is it my brother’s attentiom to Miss Thorpe, or
Mica? :rhorpe’s admission of them, that gives the

in ’

Pa “ It not it the same thing? ”

“ I think Mr Morland would acknowledge a differ-
ence. No man in offended by another man’a admira-
tion of the woman he loves; it in the woman only who
can make it n torment.”

Catherine blushed for her friend, and raid, “ Isabella
in wrong. But I am sure she cannot mean to torment,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 141

for she is very much attached to my brother. She has
been in love with him ever since they ﬁrst met, and
while m father’s consent was uncertain she fretted
herself most into a fever. You know she must be
attached to him." .

“ I understand ; she is in love with James, and ﬂirts
with Frederick,”

“ Oh no, not ﬂirts! A woman in love with one
man cannot ﬂirt with another. ”

“ It is probable that she will neither love no well,nor
ﬂirt so well, as she might do either singly. ' The gende-
men must each give up a little."

After a short pause, Catherine resumed with —-
“Then you do not believe Isabella so very much at-
uched to my brother.”

“ I can have no opinion on that subject.”

“But what can your brother mean? If he knows
her engagement, what can he mean by his behsvionr s "

“ You are a very close uestioner.’

“ Am I? Ionly askw tI wantto be told."

. “PBut do you only ask what I can be expected to
tell ”

“ Yes, I think so; for you must know your brother’s
heart."

‘ “ My brothei’s heart, as you term it on the present
occasion, I assure you I can only guess at."
. “Well?”

“Well! Nay, if it is to be guess-work, let us all
guest for ourselves. To be guided by second-hand
conjecture is pitiful. The premises are before you.
My brother is a lively, and perhaps sometimes a thought-
less, young man ; he has had about a week's acquaint-
ance with your friend, and he has known her engage-
ment slmost u long as he has known her.”

“Well,” said Catherine, sﬁer some momentl' con-
ideration,“yssmaybesblemguess at your brother’s

I42 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

inteno’nnl from all thin; but I am me I cannot. But
in not or father uncomfortable about it? Does not he
want aptain Tilney to go away? Sure, if your father
were to speak to him he would go.”

“My dear Min Morland,” laid Henry, “in thin
amiable nolicitude for your brother’s comfort, may you
not be a little mistaken? Are you not carried a little
too far? Would he thank you, either on his own
account or Miu Thorpe’n, for supposing that her affec-
tion, or at least her good behaviour, is only to be
secured by her aeeing nothing of Captain 'l‘ilney? II he
safe only in solitude? or, in her heart constant to him
only when nntolicited by any one else! He cannot
think this, and on my be sure that he would not have
you think it. will not say, ‘Do not be on ,’ be-
cause I know that you are so, at this moment; t be
an little uneasy at you can. You have no doubt of the
mutual attachment of your brother and your friend;
depend upon it, therefore, that real jealouly never can
exist between them; depend upon it that no disagree-
ment between them can be of any duration. Their
hearts are open to each other, at neither heart can be to

on: they know exactly what in required and what can
home; and you may be certain, that one will never
tune the other beyond what in known to be extant.”

Perceiving her Itill to look doubtful an grave, he
added, “Though Frederick doe: not leave Bath with us
he will probably remain but a very short time, perha I only
a few days behind us. His leave of aboence ' soon
ex ' ,und he mutt return to his regiment. And what

' then be their acquaintanCe.’ The nuns-room will
drink Inbella Thorpe for a fortnight, and ahe will
laugh with your brother over poor Tilney'e pan-ion for
a month.” '

Catherine would contend no longer againn comfortI
She had resisted itl approacheo during the whole length

NORTHANGER A BBEY. I 43

of a speech, but it now carried her captive. Henry
Tilney must know best. She blamed herself for the
extent of her fears, and resolved never to think so
seriously on the subject again.

Her resolution was suppon by Isabella’s behaviour
in their parﬁnéinterview. The horpes spent the last
evening of tben'ne’s stay in Pulteney Street, and
nothing passed between the lovers to excite her uneasi-
ness, or make her nit them in up rehension. James
was in excellent sprrits, and Isabe most engagineg
placid. Her tenderness for her friend seemed rather
the ﬁrst feeling of her heart, but that at such a moment
vus allowable; and once she gave her lover a ﬂat
contradiction, and once she drew back her hand, but
Catherine remembered Henry’s instructions, and placed
it all to judicious affection. The embraces, tears, and
promises of the parting fair ones maybe fancied.

Charm 5%.

R and Mrs Allen were sorry to lose their oung
friend, whose good humour and chee ness
had made her a valuable companion, and in the

promotion of whose enjoyment their own had been
gently increased. Her happiness in going with Miss
Tilney, however, prevented their wishing it otherwise;
and, as they were to remain only one more week in
Bath themselves, her quining them now would not long
be felt. Mr Allen attended her to Milsom Street,
where she was to breakfast, and saw her seated with the
kindest welcome among her new friends; but so great
was her agitation in ﬁnding herself as one of the family,
and so fearful was she of not doing exactly what was
right1 and of not being able to preserve their good

X 44 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

opinion, that, in the embarrassment of the ﬁrst live
minutes, she could almost have wished to return with
him to Pulteney Street.

Miss Tilney’s manners, and Henry’s smile, soon did
away some of her unplasant feelings : but still she was
far from being at ease; nor could the incessant atten-
tions of the General himself entirely re-assnre her.
Nay, perverse as it seemed, she doubted whether she
might not have felt less, had she been less attended to.
His anxiety for her comfort, his continual solicitations
that she would est, and his often-expressed fears of her
seeing nothing to' her taste, though never in her life
before had she beheld half such variety on a break-
fast-table, made it impossible for her to forget for a
moment that she was a visitor. She felt utterly un-
worthy of such respect, and knew not how to reply to
it. Her tranquillity was not im roved by the General’s
impatience for the appearance ofP his eldest son, nor by
the displeasure he expressed at his laziness when Captain
Tilney at last came down. She was quite pained by
the severity of his father’s reproof, which seemed dis-
proportionatc to the offence; and much was her con-
cern increased, when she found herself the principal
cause of the lecture ; and that his tardiness was chieﬂy
resented from being disrespectful to her. This was
placing her in a very uncomfortable situation, and she
felt great com ssion for Ca tain Tilney, without being
able to hope or his good wi 1.

He listened to his father in silence, and attempted
not any defence, which conﬁrmed her in fearing that
the inquietude of his mind, on Isabella’s account, might,
by keeping him long sleepless, have been the real cause
of his rising late. It was the ﬁrst time of her being
decided] in his company, and she had hoped to be now
able to arm her opinion of him : but she scarcely heard
his voice while his father remained in the room; and

xmr'rmrtosk ABBEY. r45

even afterwards, so much were his spirits affected, she
could distinguish nothing but these words, in a whisper
to E,lesnor, “ How glad I shall be when you are all
or?! ’

The bustle of going was not pleasant. The clock
struck ten while the trunks were carrying down, and
the General hsd ﬁxed to be out of Milsom Street by
that hour. His great coat, instead of being brought for
him to put on directly, was spread out in the curricle in
which he was to accompany his son. The middle seat
of the chaise was not drawn out, though there were
three people to go in it, and his daughter’s maid had
so crowded it with parcels, that Miss Morland would
not have room to sit; and so much was he inﬂuenced
by this apprehension when he handed her in, that she
had some difﬁculty in saving her own new writingodeslt
from being thrown out into the street. At last, how-
ever, the door was closed upon the three females, and
they set of at the sober pace in which the handsome,
highly-fed four horses of a gentleman usually perform a
ioumey of thirty miles: such was the‘distance of Nor-
thanger from Bath, to be now divided into two equal
stages. Catherine’s spirits revived as they drove from
the door; for with Miss Tilney she felt no restraint;
and with the interest of a road entirely new to her, of
an abbey before, and a curricle behind, she caught the
last view of Bath without any regret, and met with
every milestone before she expected it. The tedious-
ness of a two hours’ bait at Petty France, in which
there was nothing to be done but to eat without being
hungry, and loiter about without anything to see, next
followed; and her admiration of the style in which
they travelled, of the fashionable chaise and four, pos-
tillions handsomely liveried, rising so regularly in their
stirrups, and numerous outriders, properly mounted,
sunk s little under this consequent inconvenience.

146 NORTHAN‘GER sassy.

their :3: been perfectly agreeable, the delay would
have nothing; but Geneml Tilney, though so
charming a man, seemed always a check upon his
children’s spirits, and scarcely anything was said but by
himself; the observation of which, with his discontent
at whatever the inn afforded, and his angry impatience
at the waiters, made Catherine grow every moment
more in awe of him, and appeared to lengthen the two
hours into four. At last, however, the order of release
was given ; and much was Catherine then snrprized by
the General’s proposal of her taking his place in his
son’s cnrricle for the rest of the journey: " The day
was ﬁne, and he was anxious for her seeing as much of
the country as possible."

The remembrance of Mr Allen’s opinion, respecting
young men’s open carriages, made her blush at the
mention of such a plan, and her ﬁrst thought was to
decline it: but her second was of greater deference for
General Tilney’s judgment : he could not propose any-
thing improper for her; and, in the course of a few
minutes, she found herself with Hen in the curricle,
as happy I being as ever existed. very short trial
convinced her that a curricle was the rettiest equipage
in the world; the chaise and four whee ed off with some
grandeur, to be sure, but it was a heavy and troublesome
business, and she could not easily forget its having
stopped two hours at Petty France. Half the time
wo d have been enough for the curricle; and so
nimny were the light horses disposed to move, that, had
not the General chosen to have his own carriage lead
the way, they could have passed it with ease in half a
minute. But the merit of the curricle did not all
belong to the horses: Henry drove so well, so uietly,
without making any disturbance, without para ‘ng to
her, or swearing at them; so different from the only
gentleman-coaehman whom it was in her power to

NORTHANGER scan. :47

compare him with ! And then his hat sat so well, and
the innumerable capes of his great coat looked so be-
comineg important! To be driven by him, next to
being dancing with him, was certainly the greatest
ha iness in the world. In addition to every other
de ight, she had now that of listening to her own praise;
of being thanked at least, on his sister’s account, for
her kindness in thus becoming her visitor; of heating it
ranked as real friendship, and described as creating real
gratimde. His sister, he said, was uncomfortably cir-
cumstanced; she had no female companion, and In the
frequent absence of her father, was sometimes without
any companion at all.

“ But how can that be? ” said Catherine; “ are not
you with her? ”

“Northanger is not more than half my home; I
have an establishment at my own house in Woodston,
which is nearly twenty miles from my father’s, and
some of my time is necessarily spent there.”

“ How sorry you must be for that! ”

“ I am always sorry to lave Eleanor.”

“ Yes; but besides your affection for her, you must
be so fond of the abbey! After being used to such a
home as the abbey, an ordinary parsonage-house mustbe
ve disagreeable. ’

e smiled and said, “ You have formed a very
favourable idea of the abbey.”

“To be sure I have. It not it a ﬁne old place, jun
like what one reads about? "

“ And are you prepared to encounter all the horrors
that a building such as ‘what one reads about’ may
produce? Have you s stout heart? Nerves ﬁt for
slidin panels and tapestry E ”

“(ghl yes, I do not think I should be easily fright-
ened, because there would be so many people in the
home; and besides, it has never been uninhabited and

r 45 Nonrrrarioiéiz Asset.

left deserted for years, and then the family come back
to it unawares, without giving any notice, as generally
happens.” 7

“No, certainly. We shall not have to explore our
way into a hall dimly lighted by the expiring embers of
a wood lire, nor be obliged to spread our beds on the
floor of a room without windows, doors or furniture.
But you must be aware that when a young lady is (by
whatever means) introduced into a dwelling of this
kind, she is always lodged apart from the rest of the
family. While they snugly repair to their own end of
the house, she is formally conducted by Dorothy, the
ancient housekeeper, up a different staircase, and along
many gloomy passages, into an apartment never used
since some cousin or kin died in it about twenty rs
before. Can you stand such a ceremony as this! ill
not your mind misgive you, when you ﬁnd yourself in
this gloomy chamber, too lofty and extensive for you,
with only the feeble rays of a single lamp to take in its
size. its walls hung wrth ta ry exhibiting ﬁgures as
large as life, and the bed 0 dark green stuff or pu le
velvet, presenting even a funeral appearance. ill
not your heart sink within you ? ”

“ Oh! but this will not happen to me I am sure.”

“ How fearfully will you examine the furniture of
your apartment! And what will you discern? Not
tables, toilettes, wardrobes, or drawers, but on one side
perhaps the remains of a broken lute, on the other a
ponderous chest which no efforts can open, and over
the lire-place the permit of some handsome warrior,
whose features will so incomprehensiny strike you, that

on will not be able to withdraw your eyes from it.
orothy, meanwhile, no less struck by your appearance,
gazes on you in great agitation, and drops a few unintel-
ligible hints. To raise your spirits, moreover, she gives
you reason to suppose that the partaf the abbey you

A .e.,..ame

Non'rmuczn 1mm, r49

inhabit it undoubted] haunted, and informe you that you
will not have a ting e domestic within call. With tbie
parting cordial, the cumeyl of: you listen to the
lound of her recedin footsteps as long an the lm echo
can reach on: an when, with fainting spirits, you
attempt to listen your door, you discover, with increased
alarm, that it has no lock."

“ Oh I Mr Tilney, how frightful. This ll iuet like
a book! But it cannot really ha pen to me. I m
lure your housekeeper in not real y Dorothy. Well,
what then i”

“ Nothing further to alarm, perhaps, may occur the
(int night. After amounting your manqueer horror
of the bed, you will retire to rest, and get a few hourl’
unqur'et slumber. But on the second, or at farthest the
third night after our arrival, you will probably have a
violent Itorm. als of thunder so loud as to teen: to
shake the ediﬁce to its foundation will roll round the
neighbouring mountaint; and durin the frightful guns
of wind which accompany it, you wi lprobably think you
diacem (for your lamp in not extinguished) one part of
the hanging more violently agitated than the rest. Un-
nble of course to repress your curiosity in lo favourable
a moment for indulging it, you will instantly arile, and,
throwing your dreuing-gown around you, proceed to
examine this mystery. After a very abort eenrch, you
will discover a division in the tapestry to artfully
constructed at to defy the minumt inspection, and
on opening it, a. door will immediately appm, which
door being only eecured by matey burn an a padlock,
you will, after a few eﬁ'oru, succeed in opening, and,
with your lamp in your hand, will pass through it into a
email vaulted room.”

“ No, indeed; I IllDIlld be too much frightened to do
my Iuch thing.”

“ What! not when Dorothy bu given you to under-

I SO NORTH-[ANGER ABBEY.

stand that there is a secret subterranean communication
between your a rtment and the chapel of St Anthony,
scarcely two ' es of. Could you shrink from so simple
an adventure ? No, no ; you will proceed into this small
vaulted room, and through this into several others, with-
out perceiving anything very remarkable in either. In
one, perhaps, there may he a dagger, in another a few drops
of blood, and in a third the remains of some instrument
of torture; but there being nothing in all this out of the
common way, and your lamp being nearly exhausted,
you will return towards your own apartment. In re.
passing through the small vaulted room, however, your
eyes will be attracted towards a large, old-fashioned
cabinet of ebony and gold, which, though narrowly ex-
amining the furniture before, you had passed unnoticed.
Impelled by an in'esisu'ble preacntiment, you will eagerly
advance to it, unlock It: folding doors, and search into
every drawer; but (or oometime without discovering
ﬁg of importance : perha nothing but a consider-

bonrd of diamonds. At st, however, by touching
a secret spring, an inner compartment will open,a roll of
paper appears, you seize it—it contains many obeets of
manuscript; you hasten with the precious treasure into
your own chamber, hut scarcely have you been able to
decipher, ‘ Oh thou, whomsoever thou mayst be, into
whose hands these memoirs of the wretched Matilda
may fall,’ when your lamp suddenly expires in the
socket, and leaves you in total darkness."

“ Oh no, no! do not say so. Well, go on.”

But Henry was too much amused by the interest he
had raised to be able to carry it farther: he could no
longer command solemnity either of subject or voice, and
was obliged to entreat her to use her own fancy in the
perusal of Matilda’s woes. Catherine, recollecting her-
self, grew ashamed of her eagerness, and began earnestly
to assure him that her attention had been ﬁxed without

NORTHANGER ABBEY. Is I

the smallest ap rehension of really meeting with what
be related. “ iss Tilney, she was sure, would never
put her into such a chamber as he had described. She
was not at all afmi ”

As th drew near the end of their journey, her im-
patience ra sight of the abbey, for some time suspended
by his conversation on subjects very different, returned
in full force, and every bend in the road was expected,
with solemn sum, to alford a glimpse of its massy walls
of grey stone, rising amidst a grove of ancient oaks, with
the last beams of the sun playing in beautiful splendour
on its high Gothic windows. But so low did the
building stand, that she found herself passing through
the great gates of the lodge, into the very grounds of
Northanger, without having discerned even an antique
chimney.

She knew not that she had any right to be surprized,
but there was something in this mode of approach which
she certainly had not expected. To pass between
lodges of a modern appearance, to ﬁnd herself with such
case in the very precrncts of the abbey, and driven so
rapidly along a smooth, level road of line gravel, without
obstacle, alarm, or solemnity of any kind, struck her as
odd and inconsistent. She was not long at leisure,
however, for such considerations. A sudden scud of
rain driving full in her face, made it impossible for her to
observe anything further, and ﬁxed all her thoughts on
the welfare of her new straw bonnet: and she was
actually under the abbey walls, was springing, with
Henry’s assistance, from the carriage, was beneath the
shelter of the old porch, and had even passed on to the
hall, where her friend and the General were waiting to
welcome her, without feeling one aweful foreboding of
future to herself, or one moment’s suspicion of
any past scenes of horror being used within the solemn
ediﬁce. The breeze had not seemed to waft the sighs

X 52 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

of the murdered to her; it had wafted nothing worse
than a thick mizzling rain, and having given a good
shake to her habit, she was ready to be shown into the
common drawing-room, and capable of considering
where she was.

An abbey! Yes, it was delightful to be really in an
abbey! But she doubted, as she looked round the
room, whether anything within her observation would
have given her the consciousness. The furniture was in
all the profusion and elegance of modern taste. The
ﬁre-place, where she had expected the ample width and
pémdemue carving of former times, was contracted to a

urnford, with slabs of plain, though handsome, marble,
and [ornaments] over it of the prettiest English china.
The windows, to which she looked with peculiar
dependence, from having heard the General talk of his
preserving them in their Gothic form with reverential
care, were yet less what her fancy had portra ed.
To be sure the pointed arch was preserved, the arm
of them was Gothic, they might be even easements,
but every pane was so large, so clear, so light! To an
imagination which had hoped for the smallest divisions
and the heaviest stone work, for painted glass, dirt, and
cobwebs, the difference was very distressing.

The General, rceiving how her eye was employed,
began to talk 0 the smallness of the room and sim-
plicity of the furniture, where everything being for
daily use, pretended only to comfort, &c., ﬂattering
himself, however, that there [were] some apartments
in the abbey not unworthy her notice, and was pro-
ceeding to mention the costly gilding of one in particu-
lar, when, taking out his watch, he stopped short, to
pronounce it, with surprize, within twenty minutes of
live! This seemed the word of separation, and
Catherine found herself hurried away by Miss Tilney,
in such a manner as convinced her that the strictest

 

 

21.

my

 

 

 

NORTHme nanny. r 5 3

ﬁnctuality to the family hours would be expected at
orthanger.

Returning through the large and lofty hall, they
amended a broad m 'of shining oak, which, after
many ﬂighta and many landing-places, brought them
upon a long wide gallery. On one side it had a image
of doore, and it waa lighted on the other by windows,
which Catherine had only time to discover looked into
a quadrangle, before Miss Tilney led the way into a
chamber, and, ocarcely staying to hope the would ﬁnd
it comfortable. left her with an anxioun entreaty that
the would make no little alteration an posible In her
dreu.

china: 5%}.

MOMENT’S glance wan enough to satisfy

Catherine that her apartment was very unlike

the one which Henry had endeavoured to
alarm her by the description of. It war by no means
unreasonably large, and contained neither tapestry nor
velvet The walla were papered, the ﬂoor was car-
peted, the windows were neither lees perfect nor more
dim than than of the drawing-room below; the furni-
ture, though not of the latest fashion, waa handsome
and comfortable, and the air of the room altogether far
from uncheerful. Her heart instantaneously at case on
this point, the resolved to lose no time in particular
examination of anything, a she greatly dreaded die-
obliging the General by an dela . Her habit there-
Rzre waa thrown off with al pouible hate, and the wan
preparing to unpin the linen package, which the chaire-
aeat had conveyed for her immediate accommodation,
when her eye uddenly fell on a large high cheat, stand-
ing back in a deep receu on one side of the ﬁre-place.

L

I 54 NORTHANGER ABBEY-

The n‘ghtofit made her start; “dforgetﬁng every
thing elne, she stood gazing on it in motionless wonder,
while these thoughts crossed her :—

“This is strange, indeedl I did not expect such
a sight as this! An immenae beuvy chest! What
can it hold? Why should it be placed here? Pushed
back, too, as if meantto be out of sight! I will look
into it; coat mewhat it nut ,Iwill lookinto it,and
directly too—by daylight. I my till evening my
candle may go out ’ She advanced and examined it
closely; it wan of cedar, curiously inlaid with some
darker wood, and raised about a foot from the ground
on acarved mudofthe same. The lockwas silver,
though tarnished from age; at each end were the im-
perfect remains of handles also of silver, hmken perhaps
prematuer by some strange violence; and on the
oentre of the lid, was a mysterious cipher in the same
metal. Catherine bent over it intently, him without
being able to anything with certain . She
could not, in whatever direction she took it, be eye the
laetletterto be aT; and yctthatit shouldbeany-
thing else in that house was a circumstance to raise no
common degree of astonishment. ‘If not originally
theirs, by what strange events could it have fallen into
the Tilney family?

Her fearful curiosity was every moment growing
greater; and seizing wrth trembling bands, the harp of
the lock. the resolved, at all hazards, to satisfy herself
at last as to its contents. With difﬁculty, for some-
thing seemed to resist her efforts, she raised the lid a
Few inches; but at that moment a sudden knocking at
the door of the room made her, starting, quit her hold,
and the lid closed with alarming violence. This ill-
timed intruder was Mist Tilney’l maid, sent by her
mimess to be of use to Miss Morland; and though
Catherine immediately dismissed her, it recalled her to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 155

the sense of what she ought to he doing, and famed
her, in spite of her anxious desire to penetrate this
mystery, to proceed in her dressing without further
delay. Her progress was not quick, for her thou hts
and her eyes were still bent on the object so well c cu-
lnted to interest and alarm; and though she dsred not
waste a moment upon a seoond attempt, she could not
remasn' many‘Eaces From the chest At length, how-
ever, having pped one arm into her gown, her toilet
seemed so nearly ﬁnished, that the impatience of her
curiosity mi t safely be indulged. One moment
surely might spared; and so desperate should be the
exertion of her strength, that unless secured by super-
natural means, the lid in one moment should be thrown
back. With this spirit she sprang forward, and her
conﬁdence did not decu've her. Her resolute effort
threw back the lid, and gave to her astonished eyes the
view of a white cotton counterpane, properly folded,
reposing at one end of the chest. in undisputed
possession!

She was gazing on it with the ﬁrst blush of su rize,
when Miss Tilney, anxious for her friend’s '
ready, entered the room, and to the rising shame of
having harboured for some minutes an absurd expecm-
tion, was then added the shame of being caught in so
idle I search. “That is a curious old chest, is not
it?” said Miss Tilney, as Catherine hastily closed it
and turned away to the glass. “ It is impossible to say
how many generations it has been here. How it came
to be ﬁrst put in this room I know not, but I have not
had it moved, because I thought it might sometimes be
of use in holding hats and bonuets. The worst of it
is. that its weight makes it difﬁcult to open. In that
corner, however, it is at least out of the way."

Catherine had no leisure for speech, being at once
blushing. tying her gown, and forming vise resolutions

156 uon'rxmozk sunny.

with the most violent dispatch. Miss Til tl
‘ hinted her fear of being late; and in half a
no down stairs together, in an alarm not wholly un-
founded, {or General Tilney wss pacing the drawing-
room, his watch in his hand, and having, on the very
instant of their entering, pulled the hell with violence,
ordered, " Dinner to be on table rim-lb / "

Catherine trembled at the emphasis with which he
spoke, and at pale and breathless, in s most humble
mood, concerned for his children, and detecting old
chests; and the General recovering his politeness as he
looked at her, spent the rest of his time in scolding his
daughter, for so foolishly hurrying her fair friend, who
was absolutely out of breath from haste, when there was
not the least occasion for h in the world; but
Catherine could not at all get over the double distress of
having involved her friend in a lecture and been a great
simplewn herself, till they were happily seated at the
dinner-table, when the Geneml’s complacent smiles, and
a good appetite of her own, restored her to peace. The
dining-parlour we a noble room, suitable in its dimen—
donsto a much larger drawing-room than the one in
common use, and lined up in a style of luxury and ex-

se which was almost lost on the unpmctised eye of
Catherine, who saw little more than its aciousness and
the number of their attendants. 0f e former, she
spoke al0ud her admiration; sud the General, with a
very gracious countenance, acknowledged that it was by
no meme an ill-sized room; and further confessed, that,
though as careless on such subjects as most people, he
did look upon n tolerably large eating-room as one of
the neeemries of life; he sup , however, “that
she must have been used to much better sized apart-
ments at Mr Allen's ? ”

“No, indeed,” was Catherine’s honest assurance;
“ Mr Allen’s dining-parlour was not more than half as

NORTHANGIR ABBEY. 1 5 7

large ; " and she had never seen so large a room as this
in her life. The Geneml’s good-humour increased.
Why, as he bad such rooms, he thought it would be
simple not to make use of them; but, upon his honour,
he believed there might be more comfort in rooms of
only half their size. Mr Allen’s house, he was sure,
must be exactly of the true size for rational happiness.

The evening passed without any further disturbance,
and. in the occasional absence of General Tilney, with
much siu've cheerfulness. 'It was only in his pre-
sence t Catherine felt the smallest fatigue from her
journey; and even then, even in moments of languor or
mint, a sense of general happiness preponderated, and
she could think of her friends in Bath without one wish
of being with them.

The night was stormy; the wind had been rising at
intervals the whole afternoon ; and by the time the party
broke up, it blew and rained violently. Catherine, as
she crossed the hall, listened to the tempest with sensa-
tions of awe; and when she heard it rage round a
corner of the ancient building, nnd close with sudden
in s distant door, felt for the ﬁrst time that she was

y in an abbey. Yes, these were characteristic
sounds: they brought to her recollection a countless
variety of dreadful situations and horrid scenes, which
such buildings had witnessed, and such storms ushered
in ; and most heartily did she rejoice in the happier cir-
cumstances attending her entrance within walls so
solemn! Sb: had nothing to dread from midnight
assassins or dnmken gsllsnts. Henry had certainly
been only in jest in what he had told her that morning.
In a house so ﬁxrnished, and so guarded, she could have
nothing to explore or to suﬁ‘er, and might go to her
bed-mom as securely as ifit had been her own chamber
at Fullerton. Thus wisely fortifying her mind, Is she
proceeded upstairs, she was enabled, especially on per-

158 nonmmczx ABBEY.

ceiving that Min Tilney Ilept only two doon Eon: her,
to emu-her room with a tolerath mt heart; and her
apiriu were immediately added by the cheerﬁil blaze
of a wood ﬁre. “How much bewer is thin,” said the,
unhewalkedtothefender;“howmuchbettertoﬁnd
aﬁremd ligthan to have towait shivering in the
cold,till [the familynreinbed,ulo'manypoorgirle
have been obliged to do, and then to have a faithful old
servant frightening one by coming in with a at!
HowgladI anathat Northanger iswbat it in! fit
had been like tomeotherplacel, I donotknowthagin
Inch 3 night a thin, I could have towered for my
courage; butnaw,tohemle,theleilnothingtoalmn
one.”

She looked round the room. The window culmine
teemed in motion. It could be nothing but the violence
ofthewindpenetntingthron tbedivinionl ofthe
chum; and the Kept boldly maid, atelme hum—
ming a tune, to wire her-elf of it: being no, peeped
oomgeoutly behind each cumin, law nothing on either
low window-neat to were her, and on placing a hand
against the Ilium, felt the strongest conviction of the
wind’i force. A glance at the old chat, on Ille turned
away from thin examination, was not without in use;
ahe scorned the cauteleu fears of an idle fancy, and be-
gan with a most ha]: y indifference to prepare henelf
forbed. “Shelli dtakeher time; she should not
hurry henelf; uhedidnotcueifnbewmtbelut

up in the home. But Ihe would not make up

or ﬁre: that would leern cowlrdly,u if Ihe winked
for the protection of light after the were in bed." The
lire, therefore, died tway; and Cathaine. having lpent
thebeatprtofan hour in her amngemenmvm hh
ginning to think of stepping into bed, when, on giving
tparﬁngglucemndtbemmthewumk bythe
appearance of I old-faultion black cabinet, which,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. :59

though in a situation conspicuous enough, had never
c‘anght her notice before. Henry’s words, the
tion of the ebony cabinet which was to escaye her
observation at ﬁm, immediately rushed across her; and
though there could be nothing really in it, there was
something whimsical, it was certainly a very remarkable
coincidence! She took her candle and looked closely
at the cabinet. It was not absolutely ebony and gold;
but it was Japan, black and yellow Japan of the hand-
somest kind; and as she held her candle, the yellow
had very much the eﬂ'ect of gold.

The key was in the door, and she hsds strange fancy
to look into it; not,’however, with the smallest expec-
tation of ﬁnding anything, but it was so very odd, after
what Henry had said. In short she could not sleep till
shehadexaminedir. Smpladngthecandlewith
greatcautiononachair,sheaeized the keywitha
verytrernulons hand, and tried to turn it; hutitrcsisted
her utmost strength. Alarmed, but not discouraged,
she tried it another way; a bolt ﬂew, and she believed
herself successful; but how strangely mysterious! the
door was still immovable. She paused a moment in
breathless wonder. The wind roared down the chimney,
the rain beat in torrents against the windows, and every-
thing seemed to speak the awfulness of her situation.
To retire to bed, however, unsatisﬁed on such a point,
would be vain, since sleep must be imposn'hle with the
consciousness of s mbiner so mysteriously closed in her
immediate Again, therefore, she applied her-
selfto the key, sud after moving it in e possible way,
for some insunts, with the determined ce erity of hnpe’s
last eEomlhedoor suddenly to her hand: her
but leaped with admin at such a victory, and hav-
ing thrown open each folding door, the second being
secured only bolts of less wonderful conmwﬁon
thanthelock, ughinthathcreye could notdiscern

16° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

anything unusual, a double range of small drawers ap-

in View, with some larger drawers above and
below them, and in the centre, a all door, closed also
with lock and key, Iecurcd in all probability a cavity of
importance.

Catherine’a heart beat quick, but her courage did not
fail her. With a cheek ﬂushed by hope, and an eye
mining with curiosity, her ﬁngers grasped the handle
of a drawer and drew it forth. It was entirely empty.
With lets alarm and grater eagerneu nhe seized a.
second, a third, 3 fourth—each was equally empty.
Not one was left unaearehed, and in not one was any-
thing found. Well read in the art of concealing a
trearure, the possibility of false linings to the drawers
did not escape her, and she felt round each with
anxious acuteness in vein. The place in the middle
alone remained now unexplored; and though she had
“ never from the lint had the smallest idea of ﬁnding
anythingin any part of the cabinet, and wan not in the
least disappointed at her ill success thin far, it would be
' foolish not to examine it thoroughly while she was
about it" It was some dine, however, before she
could unfam the door, the same difﬁculty occurring in
the management of this inner lock an of the outer; but
at length it did open; and not win,” hitherto, was her
search; her quick eyes directly fell on a roll of paper
pushed back into the further part of the cavity, appar-
ently for concealment, and her feelings at that moment
were indescribable. Her heart ﬂuttered, her knees
trembled, and her cheeks grew pale. She seized, with an
unsteady hand, the precious manuscript, for half a glance
audited to ascertain written characters; and while «he
acknowledged with awful sensations this striking ur-
empliﬁcntion of what Henry had foretold, reenlved
instantly to peruse every line before she attempted on
M.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 16:

The dimness of the light her candle emitted made
herturnwitwith alarm; but therewas nodanger of
itssudden extinction,it had yetsome hours to burn;
and due she might not have any greater difficulty in
distinguishing the writing than what its ancient date
might oecaion, she hastily snufed it. Alas! it was
snuffed and extinguished in one. A lam could not
have expired with more awful effect. for a
few moments, was motionless with honor. It was done
completely; not a remnant of light in the wick could
give hope to the rekindling brmth. Darkness im-
penetrable and immovable ﬁlled the room. A violent
gust of wind, rising with sudden fury, added fresh
honor to the moment. Catherine trembled from head
to four. In the pause which succeeded, a sound like
receding foam; and the closing of a distant door
struck on her a 'gbted ear. Human‘namre could sup-
port no more. A cold sweat stood on her forehead,
the manuscript fell from her hand, and groping her way
to the bed, she jumped hastily in, and sought some aus-

nsion of sgony by creeping far underneath the clothes.
Ego close her eyes in sleep that night she felt must be
entirely out of the question. With a curiosity so justly.
awakened, and feelings in every way so agitated, repose
must be absolutely impossible. The storm, too, abroad
sodreadful! Shehadnotbeenusedtofeelslamﬁ'om
wind, but now every blast seemed fraught with awful
intelligence. The manuscript so wonderfully found, so
wonderfully accomplishing the morning’s prediction,
how was it to be accounted for? What could it con-
tain? to whom could it relate? by what means could
it have been so long concealed? and how singularly
strange that it should fall to her In: to discover itl
Till she had made herself mistress of its contents, how-
ever, she could have neither repose nor comfort; and
withtbesun's ﬁrst nysshe was determined to peruse

162 NORTEANGER am.

it. But many were the tedious hour-I which must
intervene. She nhuddered, toe-ed about in her bed, and
envied everyquietlleeper. The stormm‘llnged,and
urious were the mica, more terriﬁc even than the
wind, which struck at intervals on her mrtled mr.
Theveryeuminsof herbedeeemed atonenmmeutin
motion, and at another the lock of her door we: agi-
tated, an if by the attempt of somebody to enter.
Hollow murmur: leaned to creep along the gallery, and
morethan once her bloodwuchilledhytbetoundof
dimnt mount. Hour after hour passed away, and the
wearied Catherine had heard three proclaimed by all
the cloch in the house, before the tempelt mbdded,
or the unknowingly fell fast asleep.

Cblﬂttr 5533.

HE honeemaid’l folding back her window-
ehutxen at eight o’clock the next day wan the
connd which lint roused Catherine; and she

opened her eyes, wonderin that they could ever have
been closed, on object: o cheerfulneoe; her ﬁre was
already burning, and I bright morning had succeeded the
tempest of the night. Inmntnneouely with the con-
sciouan of existence, returned her recollection of the
mmript; and lpringiug from the bed in the very
moment of the maid’a going away, the eagerly col-
lected scattered sheet which had bunt ﬁ-om the
rollon in ' gtotheground,andﬂewbacktoenjoy
the luxury of their perusal on her pillow. She now
plainly saw that the mun not expect a manuscript of
equal length with the generality of what Ihe had thud-
dered over in boob; for the roll, seeming to con-it:
entirely of Imall diujointed sheets, was altogether but of

nonmncn um. :63

triﬂing size, and much less than she had mpponed it
to it; at ﬂat 8] Fun S
ergreedyeye uncedn' over: ge. he
waned at in import. Could it bey poteibleftarr did not
her lenie- play her false? An inventory of linen, in
coanennd modern WWI“ thatwae be-
fore her! If the evidence of night might be trotted,
nheheld awaahing-bill in her hand. She eeized an-
other Iheet, and nw the same articlee with little varia-
tion; a third, a fourth, and a ﬁfth, yreeented nothing
new. Shim, stocking, cnvutl, and wainmats, ﬁned
herin each. Two others, penned by the name hand,
marked an expenditure scarcely more r'ntereating, in
lettero, hair-powdery choc-suing, and hreechee-hall;
and the larger Iheet, which had selected the rest,
mdby it: lint cramp line, “To poultice cheetnut
mare," a farrier’a hill! Such was the collection of
papers (left, rhnpl, u che could then nppoce, by the
negligence or: Iervnnt, in the place whence she had
taken them) which had ﬁlled her with expectation
and alarm, and robbed her of half her night’s renl
She felt humbled to the dun. Could not the adventure
of the cheat have might her wisdom? A corner of it
catching her eye ac Ihe lay, neemed to rice in judg-
mt uguimt her. Nothing could now be carer than
theabmrdityofherrecentfanciel. Tocu that:
manucript of my generation back murmve re-
mained undiecoveredinamorn mchuthagnouwdern,
nohahinhlel orthatlheshould be thelim to pose-
thenkillofunlocking n cabinegtbekeyofwhichwu
open to 111., ~
Howcoulddiehaveuoimpocdonhenelf? Heaven
forbid that Henry'l‘ilneylhouldever knowherfolly!
Anditwu in a gmtmeuurehis owdoingforhd
notthecahinetnppenrednoexactlytoagreewithhia
delcription of her adventures, the should never have felt

 

I 64 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

,-
the smallest curiosity about it. This was the only
comfort that occurred. Impatient to get rid of those
hateful evidences of her folly, those detestable papers
then scattered over the bed, she rose directly; and
foldin them up as nearly as possible in the same shape
as re, returned them to the same spot within the
cabinet, with a very hearty wish that no untoward
accident might ever bring them forward sgain, to dis-
grace her even with herself.

Why the locks should have been so difficult to open,
however, was still something remarkable, for she could
now manage them with perfect ease. In this there was
surely something mysterious, and she indulged in the
ﬂattering suggestion for half a minute, till the possibility
of the door’s having been at ﬁrst unlocked, and of
being herself its fastener, darted into her head and cost
her another blush.

She got away as soon as she could from a room in
which her conduct produced such unpleasant reﬂections,
and found her way with all speed to the breakfast-

lour, as it had been pointed out to her by Miss

ilney the evening before. Henry was alone in it;
and his immediate hope of her having been undisturbed
by the tempest, with an arch reference to the character
of the building they inhabited, was rather distressing.
For the world would she not have her weakness
suspected; and yet, unequal to an absolute falsehood.
was constrained to acknowledge that the wind had keyt
her awake a little. “ But we have a charming morning
after it,” she added. desiring to get rid of the subject;
“and storms and sleeplessness are nothing when they
are over. What beautiful hyacinths! I have
learnt [0 love a hyacinth.”

" And how might you learn? By accident or
argument P” ‘

“Your sister taught me : I cannot tell how. Mrs

«on-matron ABBEY. 165

Allen used to take pains, ear after year, to make me
likethem; hutInevercoul'dmillIsawthemtheother
day in Milsom Street; I am naturally indiﬁ'erent about
ﬂowers."

“ But now you love a hyadnth. So much the better.
You have gained a new source of enjoyment, and it is
well to have as man holds upon as possible.
Besides, a taste for owen is always desirable in your
sex, as a means of getting you out of doors, and tempt-
ing you to more frequent exercise than you would
otherwise take : and though the love of s hyacinth may
he rather domem'c, who can tell, the senu'ment once
raised, but you may in time come to love a rose ? "

“ But I do not want on such pursuit to get me out
of doors» The pleasure 0 walking and breathing fresh
air is enough for me, and in line weather I am out
more than half my time. Mamma says I am never
within.”

“ At any rate, however, I am pleased that on have
learnt to love ahyacimh. The mere habit ofy learning
to love is the thing; and a tesehableness of disposition

.in a young lady is a great blessing. Has my sista
a pleasant mode of instruction?”

Catherine was saved the embarrassment of attempting
an answer by the entrance of the General, whose smiling
compliments announced a hapny mte of mind, but
whose gentle hint of sympathetic early rising did not
advance her composure.

The elegance of the breakfast-set forced itself on
Catherine’s noﬁoe when they were seated at table;
and, luckily, it had been the General’s choke. “He
was enchanted by her approbation of his tale, confemed
it to be neat and simple, thought it right to encourage
themanuﬁcmreofhiscounttyaandforhispart,to
his uncritical , the tea was as well ﬂavoured from
theclayof taffordshireasfromthatofDmdenor

Ill

:66 NORTKANGER annoy.

She. But this was uite an old setpurchased two
year-ago. The man cture was much improved since
that time: he had seen some beaun'ful specimens when
last in town, and had he not been perfectly without
vanity of that kind, might have been tempted to order a
new set. He trucked, however, that an opportunity
might ere long occur of selecting one, though not for
himtdf.” Catherine was probably the only one of the
party who did not understand him.

Shortly after breakfaet Henry left them for Wood-
ston, where business required and would keep him two
orthreedays. Theysllsttendedinthehallrosee
him mount llll hone, and immediately on ire-entering
the breakfast-mom, Catherine walked to a window in
the hope of catching another glimpse of hit ﬁgure.
“This is a somewhat heavy call upon your brother's
fortitu ” observed the General to Elmor. “Wood-
ston will make but a oombre appemnce to-day.”

“ In it a prerxy place?” asked Catherine.

“What say you, Eleanor? S k your opinion;
for ladies can beat tell theraste 0 ladies in regardto

laces as well as men. I think it would heacknow-
redged by the most impartial eye to have many recom-
mendationl. The house mods among ﬁne meadows
facing the south-east, with an excellent kitchen-garden
in the same aspect; the walls surrounding which I built
and stacked myself about ten years ago, for the beneﬁt
of my son. It is a family living, Miss Morland; and,
the property in the place being chieﬂy my own, you
mayheheve I takecazethat it shallnotbeabadone.
Did Henry’s income depend solely on this living, he
would not be ill provided for. Perhaps it may seem
odd, that with only two younger children, I should
think any profession for him; and certainly
there are moments when we could all with him dis-
engaged from every tie of business. But though I may

Noumea; ABBEY. 167

notexactl make converts of ou youn ladiee,I am
sure yourlisther, Mis- Morland, wouldgagtree with me
in thinking it expedient to give every young man some
employment. The money in nothing, it in not an object;
but employment is the thing. Even Frederick, my
eldeet run, you lee, who will perhaps inherit an eon-
eiderable a landed propertyae anyprivate man in the
county, has his profs-ion}

Theimpol'ngeﬂ'ectofthis Ian argumentwuequal
to his wiahel. The Iilence of the lady proved it to he
menble.

Something hadheen laid the evening before of her
being ahewn over the house, and he now olfered him-
self us her conductor; and though Catherine had hoped
to explore it accompanied only by his dau hter, it wan
aproponloftoomuch 'eesini ,underany
dmmmncegnottohe yaeoepted;forshehad
been already eighteen hours in the abbey, and had seen
only a few of ins rooms. Thenetting-box just leiam'ely
dnwn forth, wu closed with joyful haste, and she was
ready to attmd him in a moment. “ And when they
had gone over the home, he promised himself, more.
over, the leuure of accompanying her into the climb-
heriel an garden.” She cumied her acquiescence.
“But puhapu it might be more agreeable to her to
make those her ﬁrst object. The weather was at pre-
sent favourable, and at thin time of year the uncertainty
was very great of its continuing to. Which would she
prefer? He was equally at her service. Which did
hie daughter think would most accord with her fair
friend’a wiehel? But he thought he could discern.
Yes. he certainly red in Misc Morlaud’s eyes, a
judicioua deeire of making ule of the present smiling
weather. But when did she jud amine? The
would he Ilny ﬁfe and dry. e yielded implicitly,
and would fetch hil hat-and attend them in a moment.”

168 NORTHANGER soon.

He left the room, and Catherine, with a
anxious face, began to speak of her unwillingness that
he should be taking them out of doors against his own
inclination, under a mistaken idea of pleasing her; but
she was stop: by Miss Tilney’s saying, with a little
confrmion,“Ibelieveitwillbewrsestto takethe
morning while it is soﬁne; and do not be uneasy on
my father’s account: he always walks out at thin time
of day.’

Catherine did not exactly know how this was to be
understood. Why was Miss Tilney embarrassed?
Could there be any unwillingness on the General’s
side to show her over the abbey? The pro was
his own. And was it not odd that he she dalwa]:
take his walk so early? Neither her father nor Mr
Allen did so. It was certainly very provoking. She
was all impatience to see the house, and had smeely
any curiosity about the grounds. If Henry had been
with them, indeed! but now she should not know what
was picturesque when she saw it. Such were her
thoughts; but she kept them to herself, and put on her
bonnet in patient discontent

She was struck, however, beyond her expectaion, by
the grandeur of the abbey, as she saw it for the ﬁrst
time from the lawn. The whole building enclosed a
large court; and two sides of the quadrangle, rich in
Gothic ornaments, stood forward for admiration. The
remainder was shut off by knolls of old trees, or luxu-
riant plantations, and the steep woody hills rising behind
to give it shelter were beautiﬁil even in the leaﬂess
month of March. Catherine had seen nothing to com-
pare with it ; and her feelings of delight were so strong.
that without waiting for any better authority, she boldly
bum ford: in wonder and praise. The General lis-
tened with assentin gratitude, and it seemed as if his
own estimation of ordlanger had waited unﬁxed ﬁll
that hour.

Nonlinear ABBEY. 169

The kitchen-garden wan to be next admired, and he
ledtbewaytoitacmuamnllportionofthepark.
The number of acnea contained in this garden wao
such as Catherine could not listen no without dismay,
being more than double the extent of all Mr Allen’s,
an well [as] her father’s, including churchyard and
orchard. The walla accrued countless in number, end-
less in length; a village of hot-home: seemed to arile
among them, and a whole pariah to be at work within
the enclosure. The Geneml was ﬂamered by her look:
ofou rile, which told him almottaeplainly, a: he soon
for: her to tell him in words, that the had neverseen
anygardensat all equal to them before; andhe then
modestly owned that, “without any ambition of that
sort himself, without any oolicitude about it, he did
believe them to be unrivalled in the kingdom. If he
had a hobby-horse, it wan «La. He loved a garden.
Though carele- enough in most mattenyof eating, he
loved good fruit; or ifhe did not, hit friendaand
children did. There were great vexau'onu, however,
attending ouch agardenalhin. Theutmost careeould
not always secure the moot valuable ﬁnitl. The
had yielded only one hundred in the lat year. :2-
Allen, he to , must feel these inconveniences as
well an himoel . ’
“No, notatalL MrAllendid not can aboutthe
garden, and never went inn: it.”
With a triumphant smile of nelf-aatiafaction, the
‘Genenl winked he could do the lame, for he never
entered his without being vexed in some way or other,
by its falling Ihort of his nlan.
" How were Mr Allen a succession-home! worked?”
deacrihing the nature of hi- own an they entered them.
" Mr Allen had only one mall hot-home, which
Mn Allen had the use offor her planta in winter, and
there wan a ﬁre in it now and then.”

I70 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“He is a happy man!” said the General,with a
look of very happy contempt

Having taken her into every division, and led her
under every wall, till she was heartily weary of seeing
a and wondering, he suffered the girls at last to seize the
advantage of an outer door, and then expressing his
wish to examine the effect of some recent alterations
about the tea-house, p it as no unpleasant exten-
sion of their walk, If Miss Morland were not tired.
“ But where are you going, Eleanor? Why do you
chose that cold, damp path to it? Miss Morland will

wet. Our best way is across the par ”

“This is so favourite a walk of mine,” said Miss
Tilney, “that I always think it the best and nearest
way. But perhaps it may he damp.”

t was a narrow winding path through a thick grove
of old Scotch ﬁrs ; and Catherine, struck by its gloomy
aspect, and eager to enter it, could not, even by the
General’s disapprobation, be kept from stepping forward.
He perceived her inclination, and having again urged
the plea of health in vain, was too polite to make
further opposition. He excused himself, however, from
attending in : “ The rays of the sun were not too
cheerful for him, and he would meet them by another
course.” He turned away; and Catherine was shocked
to ﬁnd how much her spirits were relieved by the separ-
ation. The shock, however, being less real than the
relief, oﬁ'ered it no injury; and she began to talk with
easy gainy of the delightful melancholy which such a
grove inspired.

“ I am particularly fond of this ” said her com-
panion, with a sigh. “It was my mother’s favourite
walk.”

Catherine had never heard Mrs Tilney mentioned in
the family before; and the interest excited by this
tender remembrance shewed itself directly in her altered

A.‘

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 7 l

countenance, and in the attentive pause with which the
waited for something more.

“ I used to walk here so often with her,” added
Eleanor; “ though I never loved it then an I have
loved it Iince. A: that time, indeed, I need no
wonder at her choice. But her memory endean it
now.”

“ And ought it not,” reﬂected Catherine, “ to endear
it to her husband? Yet the General would not enter
it." Miss Tilney continuing silent, the ventured to
lay, “Her death must have been a great aﬂliction.”

“ A great and increasing one,” replied the other, in
a low voice. “ I was only thirteen when it happened;
and, though I felt rn loan perhaps at etrongly as one so
young could feel it, did not, I could not then know
what a lost it wan.” She stopped fora momeng and
then added with great ﬁrmness: “ I have no sister, you
know; and though Henry—though my brother: are
very aﬂ'ectionate, and Henry it a great deal here, which
I am most thankful for,it in impouible for me nottobe
often solitary.”

“ To he sure, you rnuu min him very much.”

“A mother would have been always preoent ; a
mother would have been a constant friend ; her inﬂuence
would have been beyond all other.”

“Was she a very charming woman 2 War Ill: hand-
Iome? Wu there any picture of her in the abbey?
Andwhyhadcheheeulo rtialtothat grove? Wu
it from dejection of irita? ’ were questions now eagerly

forth. The rat three received I ready afﬁrma-
tive, the two other: were by; and Catherine'r
interen in the deceued n Tilney augmented with
every question, whether annered or not. Of her un-
happiness in marriage the felt persuaded; The General
certainly had been an unkind hudmrd. He did not
love her walk; could he, therefore,have loved her?

I 72 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

And besides, handsome as he was, there was a some-
thing in the turn of his fame: which spoke his not
having behaved well to her.

“ Her picture, I suppose,” blushing at .the consum-
mate art of her own question, “hangs in your father’s
room ? ”

“No; it was intended for the drawing-room; but
my father was dissatisﬁed with the painting, and for
some time it had no place. Soon after her death I
obtained it for my own, and hung it in my bedchamber,
where I shall be happy to shew it you: it is very
like.” Here was another roof. A portrait, very like,
of a departed wife, not ued by her husband. He
must have been dreadfully cmel to her.

Catherine attem ted no longer to hide horn herself
the nature of the ings which, in spite of all his atten-
tions, he had previously excited; and what had been
terror and dislike before, was now absolute aversion.
Yes, aversion ! His cruelt to such a charming woman
made him odious to her. he had often read of such
characters; characters, which Mr Allen had been used
to call unnatural and overdnwn; but here was proof
positive of the contrary.

She had settled this point, when the end of the
path brought them directly upon the General; and in
spite of all her virtuous indignation, she found herself
again obliged to walk with him,'listen to him, and even
to smile when he smiled. Being no longer able, how-
ever, to receive pleasure from the surrounding objects,
the soon began to walk with lassitude: the General
perceived it, and with a concern for her health, which
seemed so reproach her for her opinion of him, was
most urgent for returning with his daughverto the house.
He would follow them in a quarter of an hour. Again
they parted; but Eleanor was called backin half:
minute to receive a strict charge against taking her friend

HORN-{ANGER ABBEY. i7;

round the Abbey till his return. This second instance
‘of his anxiety to delay what she so much wished for,
~ struck Catherine as very remarkable.

emu: it‘ll.

N hour passed away before the General came in, .
t, on the part of his young guest, in no very
vounhle consideration of his character. “ This
lengthened absence, these soliury rambles, did not sped:
a mind at ease, or a conscience void of reproach.” At
length he appeared; and whatever might have been the
mm of his meditations, he could still smile with 15m.

' Tilney, understanding, in Part, her friend’s curi-
osityw seethe house, soon revwed the subject; and
her father being, contrary to Catherine’s expectations,
unprovided with any pretence for further delay, beyond
that of stopping ﬁve minutes to order refreshments to be
intheroombytheirretum,wasat last rendyto escort
them.

They set forward; and, with a grandeur of air, a
digniﬁed step, which caught the eye, but could not shake
the doubts of the well-read Catherine, he led the way
across the hall, through the common drawing-room
and one useless ante-chamber, into a room magniﬁcent
both in size and furniture, the real drawing-room,
used only with company of consequence. It was
very noble, very grand, very charming, was all
that Catherine had to say, for her indiscriminsn'ng
eye scarcely discerned the colour of the min; and
:1 minuteness of guise, all praise that had much
meaning, was mpphed by the General: the costli-
nen or elegance of any room’nﬁtting up could be
nothiugtqher; she cared lor no furniture of: more

l 74 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

modern date than the'ﬁfnemth century. When the
Generalhadntisﬁedhilown curiosity,inaclose
examination of every well-known ornament, they pru-
oeeded to the library, an apartment,in it: way, ofequal
magniﬁcence, exhibsu'ng a collection of books, on which
an humble man might have looked with Cather-
ine heard, admired, and wondered with more genuine
feeling than belbre, gathered all that she could from this
storehouse of knowledge, by running over the titles of
half: shelf, andwas ready to proceed. But suites of
apartments did not spring up with her wishes. Large
as was the building, she had already visited the

part; though, on being told that, with the addition of
thekitehen,thesixorseven room she had now seat
surrounded three sides of the court, she could scarcely
believe it, or overcome the suspicion of there being many
chambers secreted. It was some relief, however, that
they were to return to the rooms in common use, by
passing through a few of less importance, looking him
the court, which, with occasional passages, not wholly
unintricate, connected the diﬂ'erent sides; and she was
furtber soothed in her progress by being told that she
was treading what had once been a Cloister, having
traces of cells pointed out, and observing several doors
that were neither opened nor explained to her; by ﬁnd-
ing herself successively in a billiard-room and in the
General’s private apartment, without comprehending their
connexion, or being able to turn aright when she left
them; and lastly by passing through a dark little room,
owning Henry’s authority, and screwed with his litter of
books, guns, and great-coats.

From the dining-room, of which, though already
seen, and always to be seen at ﬁve o’clock, the General
could not forego the pleasure of pacin out the length,
for the more certain information of ﬁllies Morland, as
towhat she neither doubted nor cared for, they pro-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 75

ceeded by quick communication to the kitchen—the
ancient kitchen of the convent, rich in the many walls
and emoke of former da and in the stoves and hot
cloaete of the present. he Genenl’e improving hand
had not laitered here ; every modern invention to
facilitate the labour of the cooks had been

within thin their spacious theatre; and, when the geniua
of other: had failed, hil own had often produced the
perfection wanted. Hie endowment: of this spot alone
might at any time have placed him high among the
benefactor: of the convent.

With the walls of the kitchen ended all the antiquity
of the Abbey; the fourth side of thequadrangle having,
on account of its decaying state, been removed by the
General’s father, and the present erected in its place.
All that was venerable ceased here. The new building
was not only new, but declared itself to be no; intended
only for ofﬁces, and enclosed behind by stable-yards, no
uniformity of architecture had been thought neoeenry.
Catherine could have raved at the hand which had swept
away what must have been beyond the value of all the
rest, for the purpoeea of mere domestic economy; and
would willingly have been spared the mortiﬁcation of a
walk through Ioenee no fallen, had the General allowed
it : but if he had a vanity, it was in the arrangement of
hie oﬂiceo; and as he wae convinced, that. to a mind
like Mica Morland’e, a view of the accommodations and
comforts by which the labourl of her inferiorl were
softened, must alwayl be sanitizing, he ahould make no
apology for leading her on. hey took a slight eurvey
of all; and Catherine was impressed, beyond her ex-

ctation, by their multiplicity and their convenience.

he purponea for which a few thapelen pantries, and a
comfortleu Icullery, were deemed sufﬁcient at Fullerton,
were here carried on in appropriate diviaionl, commodi-
oua and roomy. The number of eervantl continually

r76 NORTBANGER Asm.

appwing, did not strike her lest than the number of
their oﬁcec. Wherever they went, some panned girl
Itoppedtocunsey,or eoruefootmanindinhahille
mkedoﬂ'. YetthiewasanAbhey! Howinexprec-
rihly diﬁ‘ereut in these domestic arrangement: from such
asehehadreadabnrnt:frnmabbe andcastlee,in
which, though certainly larger than orthauger, all the
dirtyworkofthehousewastobedone bytwo ' of
femalelnnds at theutruoet. Howthey co dget
through it all,had often amazed Mrs Allen; and, when
Catherine saw what was necessary here, she began to
be amazed herself.

They returned to the hall, that the chief ctain‘aae
might be ascended, and the beauty of its wood and
omamenta of rich carving might be pointed out: having
gained the top, they turned in an opposite direction {mm
the gallery in which her room lay, and shortly entered
one on the lame plan, but superior in length and
bradth. She was here shewn eucceasively into three
large bed-chambers, with their dressing-rooms, most
completely and handsomely ﬁtted up: everything that
money and taste could do, to give comfort and elegance
to apartments, had been bestowed on these; and,
being furnished within the last ﬁve years, they were
perfect in all that would be generally pleasing, and
wanting in all that could give pleamre to Catherine.
As they were Iurveying the last, the General, after
slightly naming a few of the distinguished characters by
whom they had at times been honoured, turned with a
smiling countenance to Catherine, and ventured to hope
that henceforward some of the earliest tenants might be
“ our friende ﬁ'om Fullerton.” She felt the trout ted
compliment, and deeply regretted the imposibilil; of
thinking well of a man so kindly di towards her-
self, and so hall of civility to all her amily.

The gallery was terminated by folding doors, which

NORTH"le ABBEY. 1 77

MislTilney,sdvsncing,hadthrown ,andpassed
through,andseemedonthepointofd:i:; thenmeby
the ﬁrst door to the left, in another longreach ofgallery,
when the General, coming forwards, called her hanily,
and, as Catherine thought, rather angrily hack, demand-
ing whither she were going? And what was there
more to he seen? Had not Miss Morlnnd already
seen all that could be worth her notice? And did she
not up her friend might be glad of some refresh-
rnent r so much exercise? Miss Tilney drew hack
directly, and the heavy doors were closed upon the
mortiﬁed Catherine, who, having seen, in a momentary
glance beyond them, a narrower passage, more numer-
ous openings, and symptoms of a windin staircase,
believed herself at last within the reach 0 something
worth her notice; and felt, as she unwillingly paced
hack the gallery, that she would rather he allowed to
examine that end of the house than see all the ﬁnery of
all the rest. The Genenl's evident desire of revent-
ing such an examination was an additional stimulant.
Something was certainly to be concealed : her fancy,
though it had trespassed lately once or twice, could not
mislead her here ; and what that something was, a short
sentence of Miss Tilney’s, as they followed the General
at some distance down stairs, seemed to point out :—“ I
was going to mire you into what was my mother's room,
the room in which she died—" were all her words;
but few as they were, they conveyed pages of intelli-
gence to Catherine. It was no wonder that the General
should shrink from the sight of such object: a that
room must contain—a room, in all ymlnbility, never
enrered by him since the dreadful scene had
which releacd his suﬁ'ering wife, and left him to the
stings of conscience.

She venmred, when next alone with Eleanor, to ex-
press her wishofheing permitted to seek,” wellasall

178 IORTHANGRR ABBEY.

therestofthatsideofdiehoue;and Eleanorpro—
mieedtoattendherthere,whenemtheyehonldhzvea
convenient hour. Catherine unde her : the Geo-
enl munbewamhedﬁomhombeforethatmcm
oouldbeenlered. “Itrernainsaitwu, Isuppoeei”
said she, in a tone of feeling.

“ Yes, entirely."

“And how long ago mayit be that your mother
died P ”

“Shehasbeendmd these nine years." And nine
years, Catherine knew, was a triﬂe of time, compared
with what generally elapsed aﬁer the death of an in-
jured wiﬁ, before her room was put to rights.

“You were with her, I suppose, to the last?”

“No,” said Miss Tilney, sighing; “I was unfor-
tunately from home. Her illness was sudden and short;
and before I arrived, it was all over.”

Catherine’s blood ran cold with the horrid suggestions
which naturally sprang from these words. Could it be
possible? Could Henry’s lithe—2 And yet how
many were the examples to justify even the blackest

'cions l And when she aw him in the evening, while
she worked with her friend, slowly pacing the drawing-
room for an hour together in silent thoughtfulness, with
downcast eyes and contracted brow, she felt secure from
all possibilit of wrongisg him. It was the air and atti-
tude of a Nlontoni! hat could more plainly speak
the gloomy workings of a mind not wholly dead to
every sense of humanity, in its fearful review of
scenes of guilt? Unhappy man ! And the anxious-
nesa of her vpirits directed her eyes towards his ﬁgure
so repeatedly, as to catch Miss Tilney’s notice. “ My
father," she whispered, " often walks about the room in
this way; it is nothing unusual."

“ So much the worse! " thought Catherine: such
ill-timed exercise was of a piece with the strange un-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 79

mmbleness of his morning walla, and boded nothing
Aﬁer an curing, the little variety and teeming
length of which made her peculiarly Ierm'ble of Henry’s
impomnoe among them-he was henrtily ladto be
dismissed; though it was a look from the (general not
designed for her observation which sent his daughter to
the bell. When the butler would have lit his master's
andle, however, he was forbidded. The latter was not
going to retire. ' “I hnve many pamphlets to ﬁninh,"
aid he to Catherine, “ before I can close my eyes; and
perhaps may be poring over the affairs of the nan‘on for
hours afar ouare asleep. Can either of us be more
meetly oyed? My eyes will be blinding for the
goodof others; andywnpreparingby rest for them
mischief.”

But neither the business alleged, nor the magniﬁcent
compliment, could win Catherine from thinking that
some very diﬁ'erent object must occasion so serious a
delay of roper repose. To be up forhours, after
the ﬁm’y were in bed, by rtupi pamphlm, we not
very likely. There must be some deeper came : nome-
thing was to be done which could be done only while
the household slept ; and the probability that Mn Til-
ney yet lived, shut up for causes unknown, and receiving
from the pitiless hands of her husband a nightly supply
of coarse food, was the conclusion which necessarily
followed. Shocking as was the idea, it war at least
hemrthanadeath nufairlyhastened, a: in the natural
course of things, she must ere long be released. The
suddenneu of her reputed illness, the sboence of her
daughter, and probably of her other children, at the
time, all favoured the supposition of her imprisonment.
Its origin—jealorg, perhaps, or wanton cruelty—win
yet to be unravell

in revolving these matters while sheundreued, it

 

i
x
1'

18° NORTHANGER um.

suddenly muck her as not unlikely, that the might
that morning have passed near the very [pot of
thin unfortunate woman’s conﬁnement; might have
heenwithinafewpaceaofthe cell in which the lan-
guishedout herdaye; forwhatpartoflheAbheyeould
be more ﬁtted for the purpose than that which yet bore
the trace! of monastic division? In the high-arched
pause, paved with stone, which already the had trod-
den with peculiar awe, the well remembered the door:
of which the General had given no account. To what
might not these door! lead? In support of the plausi-
bility of this conjecture, it further occurred to her, that
the forbidden gallery, in which lay the apartments of
the unfortunate Mn Tilney, must he, an certainly at her
memory could guide her, exactly over thin W
rangeofcelle; and the Itaircane bythe tide 0 those
apartment! of which the had caught a trantient glimpse,
communicating by name secret mean- with those cells,
might well have favoured the barbaroue proceedings of
her husband. Down that staircase the had perhaps
been conveyed in a state of well-prepared

Catherine oometimee started at the boldness of her
own aurmiael, and eometimee hoped or feared that she
had gone too far; but they were lupported by such
appearances as nude their dismissal im '

The tide of the quadrangle, in which the tuppoeed
the guilty scene to be acting, being, accordingto her he.
lief, opposite her own, it struck her that, if judi-
cioualy watched, some lay: of light from the Geneml’a
lamp might glimmer through the lower windows, II he
pasted to the prieon of his wife; and, twice before she
stepped into bed, she stole gently ﬁom her room to the
correlponding window in the gallery, to see if it
appeared, but all abroad was dark, and it most yet he
too early. The varioua ascending noises convinced her
that the tenants mun m'll be up. Till midnight, the

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 8 l

mppoaeditwouldbeinvaintowntch; butthen,when
the clock had struck twelve, and all was quiet, she
would, if not quite appalled by darkness, nee! out and
look once more. The clock struck twelve, and Cath-
erine had been half an hour asleep.

they": ﬁﬁl‘ﬁ‘.

HE next day afforded no opportunity for the pro-
poeed examination of the mysterious apartment.

It VIII Sunday, and the whole time between
morning and afternoon ocrvice was required by the
General in exerciae abroad or eating cold meat at home;
and great as was Catherine’s curiosity, her courage was
not equnl to a wish of exploring them after dinner,
either by the fading light of the sky between six and
eeven o clock, or by the yet more partial though stronger
illumination of a treacherous lamp. The day no un-
marked, therefore, by anything to interest her imagina-
tion beyond the sight of a very elegant monument to
the memory of Mrs Tilney, which immediate] froan
the family pew. By that her eye was inmn y caught
and long retained ; and the perusal of the highly-strained
epitaph, in which every virtue was ascribed to herby
the inconsolable husband, who must have been in come
W: or other her destroyer, affected her even to tears.

hat the General, having erected such a monument,
ahould be lble to face it, was not perhaps very range,
and yet that he could lit to boldly collected within it:
view, maintain I0 elevated an air, look no fearlme
around, nay, that he Ihould even enter the church,
Ieerned wonderful to Catherine. Not, however, that
nnny inmnoee of being: equally hardened in guilt
might not be produced. She could remember dozen-

182 NORTHAMGER ABBEY.

who hadpersevered ineverypossiblevice,going onfrom
crime to crime, murdering whomsoever they chose,
without any feeling of humanity or remorse, till a violent
death or s religions retirement closed their black career.
The erection of the monument imelf could not in the
smallest de affect her doubts of Mrs Tiluey’s acmal
deoease. ere she even to descend into the family
vault where her ashes were supposed to slumber, were
she to behold the collin in which they were said to be
melosed, what could it avail in such a case? Cathe-
rine had read too much not to be perfectly aware of
the ease with which a warren ﬁgure might be introduced,
and a supposititious funeral carried on.

The succeeding mnming promised something better.
The General’s early walk, ill-timed as it was in every
other view, was favourable here; and when she knew
him to be out of the house, she directly proposed
to Miss Tilney the accomplishment of her promise.
Eleanorwas ready to oblige her; and Catherine remind-
ing her as they went of another promise, their ﬁrst visit
in consequence was to the rtrait in her bed-chamber.
It represented a very lav y woman, with a mild and
pensive cormtenance, justifying so far, the expectations
of its new observer; but they were not in every respect
answered, for Catherine had depended upon meeting
with feamres,‘air, complexion, that should he the very
counterpart, the very image, if not of Henry’s, of
Eleanor’s; the only maits of which she had been in
the habit of thinking, 'ng always an equal resemblance
of mother and child. A face once taken was taken for
generations. But here ‘she was obliged to look, and
consider, and study for a likeness. She contemplated
it, however, in 'te of this drawback, with much emo-
tion; and,l1ut r s yet stronger interest, would have
left it unwillingly.

Her agitation, as they entered the grat gallery, was

NORTHANGER ABBEY. :83

too great liar any endeavour at diuccume; she could
only look at her companion. Eleanor-’9 countenance
wudejected, yet-edate; audit: compouureepoke her
ennred to all the gloomy objects to which they were
advancing. Again the passed through the folding-doors,
again her hand was titan the important lock, and Cath-
erine, hardly able to reathe, wan turning to close the
former with fearnt caution, when the ﬁgure, the dreaded
ﬁgure of the General himself, at the further end of the
gallery, stood before her! The name of “Elmoor”
at the me moment, in llll loudest tone, resounded
through the building, giving to his daughter the Era in-
timation of his presence, and to Catherine tenor upon
tenor. An attempt at concealment had been her we
inlinctive movement on perceiving him, yet the could
namely hope to have escaped his eye; and when her
friend, who with an apologizing look darted hastily by
her, had joined and disappeared with him, she ran for
to her own room, md,loching herself in, believed
that she should never have courage to go down again.
She remained there at least an hour, in the
agitation, deeply cornmiaerating the rule of her poor
friend, and expecn'ng a summon: herself from the angry
General, to attend him in hit own apartment. No
Immune, however, arrived; and at In, on seeing a
carriage drive up to the Abbey,ahe wan emboldened to
descend and meet him under the protection of viliton
The hreakfart-mom was gay with compan ; and the
wunamedtothembytheGeneraluthe giendof his
daughter, in a complimentary Ityle, which to well con-
oealedhia relentfnl ire,” to make her feel secure at
lea; of life for the preterit. And Eleanor, with a
command of ootmtenance which did honour to her con-
cern for hie character, taking an early occau'on of raying
to her, “ My father only wanted me to anrwer a note,"
ahebegan whope that Ihehad either been uneeenhy

184 NORTEANGER ABBEY.

the General, or that from some consideration of glicy
she should be allowed to suppose herself so. pon
this trust she dared still to remain in his presence after
the company left them, and nothing occurred to disturb
it.

In the course of this moming’s reﬂections, she came
so a resolution of making her next attempt on the for-
bidden door alone. It would be much better in every
respect that Eleanor should know nothing of the matter.
To involve her in the danger of a second detection, to
court her into an apartment which must wring her hurt,
could not be the oﬁice of a friend. The Geneml’s
utmost anger could not be to herself what it might be to
a daughter, and besides, she. thought the examination
itself would be more satisfactory if made without any
companion. It would be impouible to explain to
Eleanor the suspicious, from which the other had, in all
likelihood, been hitherto happily exempt ; nor could she
therefore, in bar resence, search ﬁir those proofs of
the General’s cme ty, which, however they might yet
have esca discovery, she felt conﬁdent of somewhere
drawing orrh, in the shape of some fragmented journal,
continued to the last gasp. Of the way to the apart-
nrent she was now perfectly mistress, and as she wished
to get it over before Henry’s return, who was ex
on the morrow, there was no time so be lost. The day
was bright, her courage high; at forn- o’cloclt the sun
was now two hours abovs the horizon, and it would be
only her retiring to dress half an hour arlier than
usual.

It was done; and Catherine found herself alone in
the gallery before the clocks had ceased to strike. It
was no time for thought: she hurried on, slipped with
the least possible noise through the folding doors, and
without stopping to look or breathe, rushed forward to
the one in question. The look yielded to her hand, and

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 18 5

luckin with no sullen sound that could alarm a human
being. 0n tiptoe the entered: the room was before
her: but it was some minutes before she could advance
another step. She beheld what ﬁxed her to the spot.
and agitated every fture. She saw a large, well-pro-
portioned apartment, an handsome dimity bed, arranged
as unoccupied, with an housemaid’t care, a bright Bath
stove, mahogany wardrobe: and neatly-painted chain, on
which the warm beams of a western sun gaily poured
through two sath windows. Catherine had expected to
have her feelings worked, and worked they were.
Annithment and doubt first teiled them, and a thortly
mooeeding ray of common sense added some bitter
emotions of shame. She could not be mistaken as to
the room; but how grossly mistaken in everything else,
in Miss Tilney’s meaning, in her own calculation !
This apartment, to which the had given a date so
ancient. a ' ion so awful, proved to be one end of
what the eral’s father had built. There were two
other doors in the chamber, leading pmhablyinto dress-
ing-clooeu, but the had no inclination to open either.
Would the veil in which Mrs Tilney had last walked,
or the volume in which the had int read, remain to tell
what nothing else was allowed to whisper? No; what-
ever might have been the General's crimes, he had
certainly too much wit to let them sue for detection.
She was sick of exploring, and desired but to be safe in
her own room, with her own heart only privy to its
folly, and the was on the point of retreau'ng as softly as
she had entered, when the sound of footsteps, she could
hardly tell where, made her pause and tremble. To be
found there, even by a servant, would he unpleasant, but
by the General (and he seemed always at hand when
leut wanted) much worse. She listened, the sound
had ceased, and resolving not to lose a moment the
pt-ed through and closed the door. At that inmnt a

186 FORTRANGER ABBEY.

door underneath wu hastily opened, lame one seemed
withlwift mmendtheuhyhytheheadof
which-he yet to pan before the could gain the
gallery. She had no power to move. With a feeling
ofmornotverydeﬁnableahe ﬁxed her eyes on the
uairoue, and in a few moments it gave Henry to her
view. “ Mr Tilney! ” nhe exclaimed, in a voice of
more than common mnilhmem. He looked almniibed
too. “ Good God! " the conﬁnued, not attending to
his address, “ how came you here! How came you up
that mircaoe ?”

“ How came I up that mireaoe?” he replied, greatly
mrprized. “ Became it in my neared: way from the
table-yard to my own chamber; and why should I not
come up it ? "

Catherine reocllemd henelf, hluahed deeply, and
could lay no more. Hemmed to be looking in her
countenance for that explanation which her lip. did not
afford. She moved on towards the gallery. “ And
may I not, in my turn,” laid he, at he puehed hack the
folding doors, “Ink how you came here? This pauage
i- at leut an extraordinary I road from the breakfast-
porlour to your apartment, at that staircase can be from
the cable: to mine.”

“I have been," raid Catherine, looking down, “to
lee your mother’s room.”

“ My mother's room! In there anything extraor-
dina to he teen there?"

“ 0, nothing at all. I thought you did not mean I
to come back till to-mormw.”

“ I did not expect to be able to return sooner, when I
I went away; but three hours ago I had the pleamre ’
of ﬁnding nothing to detain me. You look pale. I an r
afraidIalarmedyoubyrunninglofatup rho-9min. 3
Perhaps you did not know—you were not aware ofrheir
leading from the oﬁiceu in common nae 2 " l

“ I

NORTHANGER ABBEY: 187

“No, I vrunot. You have had I veryﬁne day for
your ri ”

“Very; and does Elmnor leave you to ﬁnd your
way into all the moon in the house by yourself? ”

“ Oh, no! ahe ehewed me over the greatest part on
Saturday, and we were coming here to these rooms, but
only," (dropping her voice.) “ your father wan with us.”

“And that prevented you,” said Henry, earnestly
regarding her. “Have you looked into all the room
in that page ? ”

“No; I only wanted to see— Is not it very late?
I must go and dresa.”

“ It is only a quarter past four,” (shewing his watch ;)
“and you are not now In Bath. No thatre, no room:
to prepare for. Halfan hour at Nonhanger must be
enough.”

She could not contradict it, and therefore suﬂ'ered
herself to be detained, though her dread of ﬂirther
questions made her, for the ﬁrst time in their acquain-
tance, WlIlJ to leave him. They walked slowly up the
gallery. “ Have you had any letter from Bath since I
saw on 2”

“ o, and I am much riled. Isabella ro-
mined no faithfully mm: my." P

“Prurniaed so faithfully! A faithful romiael That

Llea me. I have heard of a faithfu performance;

a faithful promise—the ﬁdelity of promising! It in
a power little worth knowing, however, ince it can de-
Ceive and you. My mother’s room is very com.
modioul, in it not? Large and cheerful looking, and
the dressing-close“ l0 well disposed. It always mikes
me u the most comfortable apartment in the house; and
I rather wonder that Eleanor should not take it for her
own. She lent you to look at it, I uppoae?”

“ No."

“ It ha been your own doing entirely?” Catherine

188 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

said nothing. After a short silence, during which he
had closely oheerved her, he added : “ As there is
nothing in the room in itself to raise curiosity, this must
have proceeded from a sentiment of respect for my
mother's character, as described by Eleanor, which does
honour to her memory. The world, I believe, never
saw a better woman. But it it not often that virtue can
boast an interest such as this. The domestic, unpre-
tending merits of a person never known, do not often
create that kind of fervent, venerating tenderness which
would prompt a visit like yours. Eleanor, I mppose,
has talked ofher agreatdesl 2”

“ Yes, a great deal. That is—no, not much, but
what she did my, was veg interesting. Her dying so
suddenly,” (slowly, and wrth hesitation it was spoken,)
“ and you—none of you being at home ; and your father,
I thought, perhaps, had not been very fond of her.”

“ And rom these circumstances," he replied, (his
quick eye ﬁxed on hers.) “ you infer, , the pro-
bability of some negligence—some—” invo untarily the
shook her head , “ or it may he, of something still less
pardooahle." he raised her eyes towards him more
fully than the had ever done before “My mother’s
illness,” he continued, “the seizure which ended in her
death, ova: sudden. The malady itself one from which
the had often suffered: a hilious fever: its cause there-
fore constitutional. 0n the third day, in short, as soon
as she could be prevailed on, a physician attended her ;
a very respectable man, and one in whom she had
alwa I placed great conﬁdence. Upon his opinion of
her changer, two others were called in the next day, and
remained in almost constant attendance for {our-and-
twenty hours. On the ﬁfth day she died. During the
progress of her disorder, Frederick and I (we were
both at home) saw her repeatedly; and from our own
observation can bear witnesa to her having received

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 189

every possible attention which could spring from the
aEection of those about her, or which her situation in
life could command. Poor Eleanor um absent. and at
ruchadiat'anceanto return onlytn nee her motherin
her cofﬁn."

“ But your father,” said Catherine, “ wan be
aﬂlicted .’ ’

“ For a time, greatly so. You have erred in sup-
posing him not attached to her. He loved her, I am

waded, as well an it w possible for him to

e have not all, you know, the name tenderness of
disposition; and I will not pretend to say that while
the lived, the might not often have had much to bear ;
hut though his tern r injured her, hie judgment never
did Hie value her was incere; and, if not per-
manently, he was truly afﬂicted by her dmth."

“I am very glad of it," said Catherine; “it would
have been Ihoching— "

“If I no errand you rightly, you had formed I
surmise of lunch honor I. I have hardly word. to—
Dear Mi- Morlaud, consider the dreadful nature of
the mpiciona on have enumined. What have you
beenjudging fi‘om? Remember the country and the
agein which we live. Remember that we are Eng-
ﬁll]: that we are Christians. Conault your own under-
mding, your own Ienee of the probable, ur own
oboemtion of what in panning around you. on our
education prepare ul for euch atrocities? Do our laws
connive at them! Could they be perpetrated without
being known in a country like this, where social and
literary intercoune in on ouch a footing; where every
man in surrounded by a neighbourhoodhof voluntary
lplel; and where made and n n e thin
open: new m. Morlanwgt rad. £33. ,3
been admim'ng 9 "

Tbayhadmchedtheend ofthegallery; Indwith
lean shame the no of? to her own room.

 

19° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

than": tiff.

HE visions of romance were over. Catherine
was completely awakened. Henry’s address,
short as it had been, had more thoroughly

opened her eyes to the extravagance of her late fancies
than all their several disappointments had done. Most
grievoust was she humbled. Most bitterly did the
cry. It was not onl with herself that shewas sunk,
but with Henry. er folly, which now seemed even
criminal. was all exposed to him. and he must despise
her for ever. The liberty which her imagination had
dared to take with the character of his father, could he
ever forgive it? The absurdity of her curiosity and
her fears, could they ever be forgotten? She hated
herself more than she could express. He had, in
thought he had, once or twice before this fatal morn-
ing, shevm something like affection for her. But now
—in short, she made herself as miserable as ‘ e for
about half an hour, went down, when the c ock muck
ﬁve, with a broken heart, and could scarcely give an
intelligible answer to Elanor‘s in uiry if she was Well.
The formidable Hen soon fo owed her into the
room, and the only di erence in his behaviour to her
was, that he paid her rather more attention than usual.
Catherine had never wanted comfort more, and he
looked as if he was aware of it.

The evening wore away with no abatement of this
soothing politeness ; and her spirits were gradually raised
to a modest tranquillity. She did not learn either to
forget or defend the past; but she learned to hope that
it would never transpire farther, and that it might not
cost her Henry's entire regard. Her thouth being
still chieﬂy ﬁxed on what she had with such nameless
terror felt and done, nothing could shortly be clearer,

—....a. ..e ...d V

NORTEANGIR A331!“ 19!

than that it had been all a volurmry, self-created de-
luaian, each triﬂing circumstance receiving importance
from an imagination relolved an alarm, and everything
forced to bend to one p1: one by a mind which, before
she entered the abbey, been craving to be frightened.
She remembered with what feelings she had prepared
for a knowledge of Northanger. She aaw that the
infatuation had been created, the mischief aettled, long
before her quitting Bath, and it seemed an if the whole
might be traced to the inﬂuence of that can of reading
which the had there indulged.

Charming at were all Mr: Radcliﬂ'e’e worh, and
charming even u were the works of all her imitaton, it
wan not In them perhapr that human nature, at least in
the midlaud countie- of England, wan to be looked for.
Of the Alps and Pyreneeu, with their pine forests and
their vioea, they might give a faithful delineation ; and
Ital , Switzerland, and the South of France, might be
an 'tful in horron as they were there reprelented.
Catherine dared not doubt beyond her own country,
and even ofthagifhard preued,would haveyielded
the northern and wetter-u utremin'ee. But in the
centralpart of Englandthere was Intel meaecurity
for the existence even of a wife not loved, in the
lawn of the land, and the mannen of the age. Murder
wu not wanted, eervantl were not slaves, and neither

' nor 'ng but to be procured, like rhubarb,
iron: every denerggilthmong the Alp. and Pyrenees,
perhapgtherewereno mixedcharactera. Thereﬂuch
u were not an ell an an angel, might have the

' " sofa end. BntinEnglandrtwalnotlo;
among the Engliah, the believed, in their ham and
labile, there was a general though unequal mixnrre of
good and bad. Upon thin conviction, the would not
be Irrprized if even in Henry and Eleanor Til come
alight imperfection might hereafter appear; um

- 192 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

this conviction she need not fear to acknowledge some
actual specks in the character of their father, who, though
cleared from the grossly injurious suspicions which the
must ever blush to have entertained, she did believe,
upon serious consideration, to be not perfectly amiable.

Her mind made on these sevenl poinu, and her
resolution formed, i)? always judging and acting in
future with the greatest good sense, she had nothing to
do but to forgive herself and be hip ier than ever; and
the lenient hand of time did much or her by innensible
gradations in the course of another day. Henry’s
astonishing generosity and nobleness of conduct, in never
alluding in the slightest way to what had passed, was of
the greatest assistance to her; and sooner than she
could have supposed it possible, in the beginning of her
distress, her spirits became absolutely comfortable, and
capable, as heretofore, of continual improvement by
anything he said. There were still some subjects,
indeed, under which she believed they must always
tremble; the mention of a chest or a cabinet, for
instance, and she did not love the sight of japan in any .
shape: but even :5: could allow that an oculional
memento of past folly, howeVer painful;might not be
without use.

The anxieties of common life began soon to summed
to the alarms of romance. Her desire of hearing from
label]; grew every day greater. She was quite im-
patient tn know how the Bath world went on, and how
the Rooms were amended; and especially was she
anxious to be assured of Isabella’s having matched some
ﬁne netting cotton, on which she had left her intent;
and of her continuing on the best terms with James.
Her only dependence for information of any kind was
on Isabella. James had rotested against writing to
her till his return to Oxf ; and Mn Allen hadgtven
hernolmpcsofalettertilllhehadgotbackto

,.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 193

Fullerton. But Isabella had promised and promised
again; andwhenshepromisedathing she wuso
scrupulous in performing it; this made it so particularly
strange!

For nine succest mornings Catherine wondered
over the repetition of s disappoinﬂnent which each
morning became more severe; but on the tenth, when
she entered the breakfast—room, her ﬁrst object was s
letter, held out by Henry’s willing hand. She thanked
him as heartin as if he had written it himself. “ 'Tis
only from James, however,” n she looked at the direc-
tion. She opened it: it was from Oxford; and so this

purpose :—

“Dns Currants—Though, God knows, with
little inclination for writing, I think it my duty to sell
you, that everything is st an end between Miss Thorpe
and me. I left her and Bath yenrday, never so see
either again. I shall not enter into particulars, they
would only pain you more. You will soon hear enough
from another naner on know where lies the blame;
and I hope w‘ l acquit your brother of everything but
the folly of too essily thinking his affection returned.
Thank God! I am undeceived in time! But it is a
he: blow! After my father’s consent had been so
kin y Hen—but no more of this. She has made me
misera e for ever! Let me soon hear from you, dear
Catherine; you are my only friend; per love I do
build upon. I wish your visit It Northanger may be
over before Captain Tilney makes his engagement
known, or you will be uncomfortably circumstanced.
Poor Tho is in town : I dread the sight of him;
his honest ear! would feel so much. I have written
to him and my father. Her duplicity hum me more
than all; tilltheveryllstﬁfl reasoned with her,she
declared herself as much attached to me as ever, and

194 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

laughed at my fears. I am aahamcd to think how long
Iborewithit; but ifeverman hadreason to believe
himself loved, I was that man. I mnnnt understand,
even now, what she would be at, for there could he no
need of my being played at? no make her secure of
Tilney. We parted at last by mutual consent. Happy
for me had we never met! I can never expect to
know such another woman I Dearest Catherine, beware
how you give your hem—Believe me, etc.”

Catherine had not read three liner before her sudden
change of countenance, and short exclamations of
sorrowing wonder, declared her to be receiving un-
pleasant news; and Henry, earnestly watching her
through the whole letter, uw plainly that it ended no
better than it began. He was prevented, however,
from even looking his mrprize, by his father’s entrance
They went to breakfast directly; but Catherine could
hardly eat anything. Tean ﬁlled her and even
Ian down her cheeks as she eat. The etter waaone
momentinher hand, then in her lap, and then in her
pocket; and she looked as if she knew not whatshe
did. The General, between his cocoa and his news-
paper, had luckily no leisure for noticing her; but to
the other two her dim-es: wan equally visible AI soon
as she dared leave the table, she hun-ied away to her
own room ; but the hounemaids were buy in it, and the
war obliged to come down again. She turned into the
drawing-room for privacy, but Henry and Eleanor had
likewise retreated thither, and were at that mnent
d in consultation about her. She drew back, trying
to g their pardon, but was, with gentle violence,
forced to return ; and the othen withdrew, after Eleanor
had affectionately expreued a with of being of me or
comfort. to her.

After half an hour’- free indulgence of grief and

NORWGIR um. :95

reﬂecu'on, Catherine felt equal to encountering her
friends; but whether Ihe Ihonld make her dimers
known to them was another consideration. Perhaps,
if neaﬁoned, the might ju ‘ve an idea-—
just dimntly hint at it—but not more. ngo expole a
friend, auch a friend as Isabella hadbeento her; and
then their own brother .0 doaely concerned in it!
She believed the mun wave the subject altogether.
Henry and Eleanor were by them-elves in the break-
fast room; and each, II she entered it, looked at her
enxioualy. Catherine took her place at the table, and,
after a short silence, Eleanor said, “ No had new from
Fullerton, I hope? Mr and Mrs Morland, your
brother: and intern, I hope they are none of them ill 2 "

“ No, I thank you,” Iighing n Ihe e; “th
are all very well. My le(tzer was from Ekbrgther 3
Oxford.”

Nothing ﬁntherwuraidforafewminutel; and then,
rakingthrwghherteamaheadded,“ldonot think

Ihall everwieh foraletteragainl”

“ I am sorry,” d Henry, cloning the hook he had
just opened; “if I had the letter of contain-
ing anything Imwelcome, should have given it with'
very different feelingl."

“ It contained something worn: than anybody could
mppoae! Poor James in no unhappy! You Will noon
know why.’ ’

“To have no kind-halted, no nﬂ'ectionate a liner,"
replied Henry, warmly, umust be a comfort to him
under any distress.” -

“I have one favour to beg,” aid Catherine, shortly
afterwards, in an agitated manner, “ that, if your brother
rhouldbecoming here,youwill give me notice of it,
that I ma go away."

“Our rotherl Frederick! "

“Yea; I am we I ahould beverytorrytoleaveyou

:96 NORTHANGER new.

so soon, but something has happened that would make
itverydreadful for me to be in the lame housewith
Ca in Tilney.”

leanor’s work was suspended while she gazed with
increasing astonishment; but Henry began to mepect the
tnith, and something in which Min Thorpe’e name was
included, passed his lipe.

“ How uick you are! ” cried Catherine; “ you
have guessed it, I declare! And yet, when we talked
about it in Bath. you little thought of in ending so.
Isabella—no wonder new I have not heard from her—
Isabelln hav deserted my brother, and is to marry yours!
Could you have believed there had been such incon-
suncy, and ﬁckleneet, and everything that is bw in the
world P ”

“ I hope, to far an concerns my brother, you are mis-
informed. I hope he he not had any material share in
hrin ing on Mr Morland'a disa intment. His marry-
ing ﬁllies Thorpe in not probab e. I think you must be
deceived so far. I am very sorry for Mr Morland:
uorry that any one you love should be unhappy; but
my rurpn'ze would be greater at Frederick’s marrying
her, than at any other part of the story.”

“It is very true, however; you nhall read Jaimie
letter yourself. Stay, there is one pam—” recollecting,
with a bluuh, the last line. ‘

“ Will you take the trouble of reading to us the
passages which concern my brother?”

“ No, read it yourself," cried Catherine, whose
second thoughts were cleaner. “ I do not know what I
wan thinking 0 ," (blushing again that she had blushed
before). “James only means to give me good advice.”

He gladly received the letter; and, having read it
through with close attention, returned it, nying, “Well,
ifitistnbesoJcm onlyeaythat 1 am enrryfor it.
Frederickwillnothe the ﬁn man who bu choeen a

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 197

wifewidllesoenaednnhiehmilyexpecred. Ido
not envy hie duration, either an a lover or a son.”

Mia: Tilney, at Catherine’s invitation, now read the
letter likewise; and, having expressed also her concern
and airprize, began to inquire into Min Thorpe'a con-
nexion- and fortune.

“Her mother is a very good tort of woman,” wn
Catherine’s anuwer.

“ What was her father ? ”

“ A lawyer, I believe. They live at Putney.”

“ Are they a wealthy family 2 "

“No, not very. I do not believe Irabella hat any
fortune at all; but that will not signify in your family.
Your father ll no very liberal! He told me the other
day, that he only valued money as it allowed him to
promote the of hit children.” The brother
and airter looked at each other. “ But,” raid Eleanor,
after a abort pauae, “would it be to Promote hi5 happi-
nen to enable him to marry Inch 3 girl! She mutt be
an unprincipled one, or the could not have need your
brother In. And how mange an infatuation on
Frederick’l ride! A who, before his eyes, il
violating an engagement voluntarily entered into with
another man! Is not it inconceivable, Henry 2
Frederick, too, who always wore his heart no mudlyl
who found no womn good enough to be In ”

“That in the meet unpmmiﬁng circumstance, the
mange-t presumption againet him. When I think of
hi: pan declarationa, I give him up. Moreover, I have
too good an opinion of Mill Thorpe’e prudence, to
mppone that the would part with one gentleman before
the other wu secured. It it all over with Frederick,
indeed! He in I deceased man; defunct in under-
standing. Prepare for your tilter-in-law, Eleanor; and
such I liner-in-Iaw u yon mutt delight in. Open,
candid, mien, guilelen, with affections strong, but

:98 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

simple, forming no pretensions, and knowing no dis-
guise-n

“Such a sister-in-law, Henry, I should delight in,”
said Eleanor, with a smile.

“But, perhaps,” observed Catherine, “though she
has behaved so ill by our family, she may behave better
by yours. Now she has really got the man she likes,
she may be constant.”

“ Indeed, I am afraid she will," replied Henry; “ I
am afraid she will be very constant, unless a bamnet
should come in her way ; that is Frederick’s only chance.
I will get the Bath paper, and look over the arrivals.”

“ You think it is all for ambition, then? And upon
my word, there are some things that seem very like it.
I cannot forget that, when she ﬁrst knew what my
father would do for them, she seemed quite disappointed
that. it was not more. I never was so deceived in any
one’s character in my life before."

“Among all the great variety that you have known
and studied."

“ My own disappointment and loss in her is very
get; but, as for poor James, I suppose he will hardly
ever recover it.”

“Your brother is certainly very much to be pitied at
present; but we must not, in our concern for his suffer-
ings, nude ue yours. You feel, I suppose, that, in
losing I la, you lose half yourself: you feel a void
in your heart which nothing else can occupy. Society
is becoming irksome; and as for the amusements in
which you were wont to share at Bath, the very idea of
them without her is abhorrent. You would not, for
instance, now go to a ball for the world. You feel that
you have no longer any friend to whom you can speak
with unreserve; on whose regard you can place depend-
ence; or whose counsel, in any difﬁculty, you could
rely on. You feel all this? "

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 199

“No,” said Catherine, after a few momenu’ reﬂec-
tion, “I donut: ought I? To By the truth, though
I am hurt and grieved that I cannot will love her, that
I am never to hear from her, perhaps never to see her
again, I do not feel so very, very much afﬂicted 3: one
would have thought.”

“You feel, as you always do, wl'm is most to the
credit of human nature. Such feelings ought to he in-
veetigated, that they may know themselves.”

Catherine, by some chance or other, found her apirita
so very much relieved by thin Convemtion, that she
could not regret her being led on, though IO unac-
counuhly, to mention the circumstance which had
produced it.

chum £5173.

ROM this time the subject was frequently canvassed
by the three young people; and Catherine found,
with tome surprize, that her two young friends

were perfectly agreed in considering Itahella’l want of
consequence and fortune as likely to throw great diﬂi-
culu'es in the way of her marrying theirbrother. Their
persuaon that the General would, upon this ground
alone, independent of the objection that might be raised
against her character, oppose the connexion, turned her
feeling; moreover with some alarm towards herself. She
was at insigniﬁcant, and perha II portionleu as In-
hella; and if the heir of the gilney property had not
grandeur and wealth enough in himself, at what point
of interest were the demands of his younger brother to
rest? The very reﬂections to which this thought
led, could only he by a dependence on the
effect of that pnrti partiality. which, an the wae
given to under-rand by his words as well as his acu'ona,

200 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

she had from the ﬁrst been l0 fortunate as to excite in
the General; and by a recollection of some most gener-
ous and disinterested sentiments on the subject of money,
which she had more than once heard him utter, and
which tempted her to think his disposition in such
matters misunderstood by his children.

They were so fully convinced, however, that their
brother would not have the courage to 1 ply in person
{or his father‘s consent, and so repea assured her
that be had never in his life been less liker to come to
Northanger than at the present time, that she sutfered her
mind to be at ease as to the necessity of any sudden
removal of her own. But as it was not to be supposed
that Captain Tilney, whenever he made his application,
would give his father any idea of Inbella's conduct,
it occurred to her as highly expedient that Henry should
lay the whole business before him as it really was, en-
abling the General by that means to form a cool and
impartial opinion, and p his objections on a fairer
ground than inequality 0 situations. She proposed it
to him accordingly; but he did not catch at the measure
so eagerly as she had expected. “ No,” said he; “my
father’s hands need not be strengthened, and Frederick’s
confession of folly need not be forestalled. He must
tell his own story."

“ But he will tell only halfof it.”

“A quarter would be enough."

A day or two passed away and brought no tidings of
Captain Tilney. His brother and sister knew not what
to think. Sometimes it appeared to them as if his
silence would be the natural result of the suspected en-
gagement, and at others that it was wholly incom bible
with it. The General, mean while, though 0 ded
every morning by Frederick’s remilsneu in writing, was
free from any real anxiety about him ; and had no more
pressing solicimde than that of making Miss Morland’s

,.-‘. .w. .Jqéﬂ

 

NORTHANGIR ABBEY. 201

time at Northan er pleasantl . Heoftenex reused
hie uneasineu ongthixphnad, “fearzd the sameness 0|!" every
day's society and employment: would disgust her with
the place, wished the Lady Frauen had been in the
country, talked every now and then of having a large
party to dinner, and once or twice began even to cal-
culate the number of young dancing people in the neigh-
bourhood. But then it was such a dead time of year,
no wild-fowl, no game, and the Lady Frauen were not
in the country.” Anditallended, atlalt, in hie telling
Henry, one morning, that when he next went. to Wood-
man, they would take him by nut-prize there some day
or other, and eat their mutton with him. Henry wan
greatly honoured and very happy, and Catherine wan
quite delighted with the scheme. “And when do you
think, air, I may look forward to this pleasure? I mun
be at Woodman on Monday to attend the meet-
ig, and nhall probably be obliged to my two or three

¥".Well, well, we will take our chance some one ofthoee
daya. Thereienoneedto ﬁx. You are not to put
younelf at all out of your way. Wlntever may
happen to have in the house ' be enough. {think I
can answer for the young ladies making allowance for a
bachelor’s table. Let me nee; Monday will be a busy
day with you; we will not come on Monday; and
Tuesday will be 1 buy one with me. I expect my
lurveyor from Brockham with his report in the mom-
ing; and afterwards I cannot, in decency, fail attending
the club. I really could not face my acquaintance if I
mid awny now; for, an I am known to be in the
country, it would be taken exceedingly amine; and it is
1 rule with me, Miu Morland, never to give offence to
any of my neighbour. if a amall sacriﬁce of time and
attention can prevent it. They are a net of very worthy
men. They have half a buck from Northanger twice a

o

202 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

year; and I dine with them whenever I can. Tuesday,
therefore, we my my, is out of the question. But on
Wednesday, I think, Henry, you may expect us; and
we shall be with you early, that we may have ﬁrm to look
about us. Two hours and three-quarters will carryus to
Woodman, I suppose; we shall be in the carriage by
ten ; so, about a quarter before one on Wednesday, you
may look for us.”

A ball itself could not have been more welcome to
Catherine than this little excursion, so strong was her
desire to be ac usinted with Woodman; and her heart
was still bonn ' g with joy, when Henry, about an
hour afterwards, came booted and great-coated into the
morn where she and Eleanor were situ'ng, and said, “I
am come, young ladies, in a very moralizing strain, to
observe that our pleasures in this world are always to
be paid for, and that we often purchase them at a great
disadvantage, giving ready-monied, actual ha "new for
a draft on the future that may not be honou Wit-
ness myself at this present hour. Because I am to
hope for the satisfaction of seeing you at Woodman on
Wednesday, which bad weather, or twenty other causes
may prevent, I must go away directly, two days before
I intended it.”

“Go awn ,” said Catherine, with a very long face,
“ and why ? ’

“ Why! How can you ask the question? Because
no ﬁme is to be lost in frightening my old housekeeper
out of her wits : because I must go and prepare a
dinner for you, to be sure.”

“0h! not seriously!"

“ Ay, and sadly too; for I had much rather stay.”

“ But how can you think of such a thing after what
the General said ? When he so articulnrly desired
you not to give yourself any tronb e, because myrbing
would do." '

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 203

Henry only smiled. “I am sure it is quite un-
ncCessary upon your sister‘s account, and mine. You
must know it to be so; and the General made such a
point of your providing nothing extraordinary; besides,
if he had not said half so much as he did, he has always
mh an excellent dinner at home, that sitting down to
a middling one for one day could not signify. ’ I

“I wish I could reason like you, for his sake and
my own. Good-bye. As to-morrow is Sunday,
Eleanor, I shall not return.”

He went; and, it being at any time a much simpler

ration to Catherine to doubt her own judgment than

enry’s, she was very soon obliged to give him credit
for being right, however disagreeable to her his going.
But the inexplicability of the General’s conduct dwelt
much on her thoughts. That he was very particular in
his eating, she had, by her own unassisted observation,
already discovered; but why he should so one thing
no positively, and mean another all the w ' e, was most
unaccountable! How were people, at that rate, to be
understood? Who but Henry could have been aware
of what his father was at?

From Saturday to Wednesday, however, th were
now to be without Hen . This was the sad nale of
every reﬂection ; and sprain Tilney’s letter would
certainly come in his absence, and Wednesday, she
was verysure,would beweL The st, present,and
future, were sll equally in gloom. er brother so un-
happy, and her loss in Isabella so ; and Eleanor's
spirits always affected by Henry a absence! What
was there to interest or amuse her? She was tired of
the woods and the shrubberies, always so smooth and
so dry; and the abbey in itself was no more to her now
than any other house. The painful remembrance of
the folly it had helped to nourish and perfect was the
only emotion which could spring from s consideration

204 ' NORTHANGER ABBEY.

of the building. What a revolution in her ideas!
She, who had so longed to he in In abbey. Now,
there was nothing so charming to her imagination as
the unpretending comfort of a well-connected parson-
age, something like Fullerton, but better. Fullerton
had its faults, hut Woodston probably had none. If
Wednmday should ever come!

It did come, and exactly when it might be reason-
ath looked for. It came; it was ﬁne, and Catherine
trod on air. B ten o’clock the chaise-and-ibur con-

edthetwo mthea ,and,afteran e
drive of almost twenty mdpégthey entered WMoodston,
a large and populous village, in I situation not un-
pleasant Catherine was ashamed to say how pretty
shethoughtigatheGeneralseernedwthinkan
apoloy necessary for the ﬂameas of the country, and
the size of thevillage; but‘ in her heartshe preferred
itto anypGCe she had ever beeoagand looked with
great admiration at every neat house above the rank of
a cottage, and at all the little Chandler’s shops which
they Embed. At the further end of the village, and
wlera ly disengaged from the rest of it, stood the
parsonage, a new-built substantial stone house, with its
semi-circular my and green gates; and, as they
drove up to the oor, Henry, with the friends of his
solitude, a large Newfoundland uppy and two or three
ten-iers, was ready to receive andJ make much of them.

Catherine’s mind was too full, as the entered the
house, for her either to observe or to lay a great deal;
and, till called on by the General for her opinion of it,
she had very little idea of the room in which the was
ﬁning. Upon looking round it then, she perceived in
a moment that it was the most comfortable room in the
world; but she was too guarded to say no, and the
coldness of her praise disappointed him.

"We are not calling it a good home," uid he.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 205

“We are not comparing it with Fullerton and North-
anger. We are considering it as a mere parsonage,
small and conﬁned we allow, but deoent perhaps and
habitable; and altogether not inferior to the generality;
or, in other words, I hdieve there are few country par-
sonages in England half so good. It may admit of
improvement, however. Far be it from me to say
otherwise; and anything in reason—s how thrown out,
perhaps; though, between ourselves, if there is one
thing 'rnore than another my aversion, it is a patched-on
bow.’ '

Catherine did not hear enough of this speech us
understand or he by it; and other subjects
being studiously brought forward and supported by
Henry, at the same time that a my full of refresh-
mentswas introduced byhis servant, the General was
shortly restored to his complacency, and Catherine to
all her usual ease of spirits.

The room in question was of s commodious, well-
proportioned size, and handsomely ﬁtted up as a dining
par our; and on their quitting it to walk round the
grounds, she was sbewn, ﬁrst into a smaller apartment
belonging peculiarly to the master of the house, and
made unusually tidy on the occasion; and afterwards
into win: was to be the drawing-room, with the
upparanoe of which, though unfurnished. Catherine
was delighted enough even to satisfy the GenenL It
was s prettily-sha room, the windows reaching to
the ground,snd e view from them pleannt, though
only over green meadows; and she expressed her ad-
miration at the moment with all the honest
with which she felt it. “Oh! why do not you lit up
this room, Mr Tilney? What I pitynot to haven
ﬁttedupl Itisthepretdestroornleversswﬁtisthe
prettiest room in the world! "

“I trust," said the General, with s most satisﬁed

206 non-ransom ABBEY.

Imile, “thatitwillvuyqreedilybeﬁxminhcd: itwaitl
only for a lade taste.’

“ Well, if it wan my honae, I should never it any-
where else. Oh what a rweet little cottage there in
among the trees; apple tree: too! It in the prettiest
mu it

“You like it : you approve it as an object : it ll
enough. Henry, remember that Robinson is vpoken to
about it. The cottage remain."

Such a compliment recalledall Catherine’l conaeioue-
neu, and lilenced her directly; and, though pointedly
applied to by the Gem] for her choic: of the prevail-
ing colour of the paper and hangings, nothing like an
opinion on the rubjeet could be drawn from her. The
inﬂuence of fresh object: and freah air, however, w of
great we in dissipating these embamuing association”
and, having reached the amamental part of the premiaee,
consisting of a walk round two Iidee of a dow, on
which Henry’s geniue had begun to act about half a
year ago, she was mﬂiciendy recovered to think it
prettier than any pleasure-ground she had ever been in
before, though there was not a shrub in it higher than
the green bench in the corner.

A winter into other meadows, and through part of
the village, with a visit to the rubles to examine some
improvements, and a charming game of play with a litter
of puppies able to roll about. brought them to four
o’clock, when Catherine scarcely thought it would be
three. At four they were to dine, and at tix to set or?
on their return. Never had any day patted so quickly!

She could not but observe that the abundance of the
dinner did not teem to create the smallest anoniihmen:
in the General; nay, that he was even looking at the
ride—table for cold meat which wac not there. His son
and daughter'r obaervationt were of a different kind.
They had seldom Ieen him eat no heartin at any able

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 07

but hie own; and never before known him so little dian
concerted by the melted butter’a being oiled.

At six o’clock, the General having taken his coffee,
the carriage again received them; and so gratifying had
been the tenor of hie conduct throughout the whole
visit, to well natured wan her mind on the subject of his
expectationa, that, could the have felt equally confident
of the withee of hi- Ion, Catherine would have quitted
Woodston with little anxiety at to the How or the

When the might return to it.

 

Chapter swag.

HE next morning brought the following very un-
expected letter fmm Isabella :—
“ Bath, April 

“ Mir Duns-r Caruunuz—I received your two
kind letters with the greatest delight, and have a thou-
sand a logic: to make for not answering them sooner.
I ml y am quite ashamed of my idleness; but in this
horrid place one can ﬁnd time for nothing. I have had
my pen in my hand to begin a letter toyou almort every
day aince you left Bath, but have always been prevented
by name silly triﬂer or other. Pray write to me soon,
and direct to my own home. Thank God! we leave
this vile plate to-monow. Since you went away I
have had no pleasure in it ; the dust is beyond any-
thing; and everybody one cam for it gone. I believe
if I could lee you I ahould not mind the rest, for you
are dearer to me than anybody can conceive. I ani

uite unealy about your dear brother, not having hard
ram him since he went to Oxford ; and am fearful of
tome mitundenunding. Your kind oﬁioa will set all

908 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

right: heinthe onlyman I everdid orcmrldlove,and
I m you will convince him of it. The Ipring
Wu! are partlyi‘lowu, and thehauthemort frightﬁrl
unimagine.‘ ' ho ourpeud urtimepleuantl ,
gram afraid ywmupethink ofmey.o I will not nyayll
diatInmrldofthefamilyyouarewith,becameI
would not be ungenerous, or let you against thoee you
man; botitinverydiﬂicnll mknowwhorn memo,
and young men never know their mind: two days Izo-
gether. I rejoice to lay, that the young mu whom, of
all othen, I particularly abhor, has left Bath. You will
know, from thin deucription, I must mean tain Til-
ney, who,» on may remember,waumazin ydiqzoled
to an tease me, before you went away. After-
ward: he got were, and became quite my shadow.
Many girls might have been taken in, for never were
such attention; but I knew the ﬁckle sex we welL
He went away in bi: regiment two days ago,and I tron.
I Ihall never be plagued with him again. He in the
grumooxeomb I ever aw, and amazingly disagree-
able. The last two dayl he was alwayl by the tide of
Charlotte Davie: I pitied hi! mate, but took no notice
ofhirn. Theluttimewernetwaain Bath Swami
I turned directly into a shop that he might not speak to
me : I would not even look at him. He went into the
P room afterwardl, but I would not have followed
him all the world. Such acontrant between him and
our brother! Pray nend me name new: of the latter;
am quite unhappy about him; he seemed so uncom-
fortable when he went away, with a cold, or somethin
dntaﬁ'ectedhie upiriu. Iwouldwrltetohim ,
huthavernitlaidhildirectio‘n; and... I hintedabove,
am afraid he took something in my conduct amino.
Pray explain everything to hi- nﬁnfaclioru; or,ifhe Itill
harbom any doubt, I line from himoelf to me, or a all
at Pumey when next in town, might set all m righu.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 309

I have not been to the Room: this age, nor to the Play,
«a; going in last night with the Hodgel'l, fora frolic,
at -pri :theytealedmeintoit;and1wuderer-
mined they Ahould not my I shut mylelf lacunae
Tilneywu gone. We hppened no it by heugﬁcchelln,
and they pretended to be quite turprized to nee
meant. I knew the'r unite: at one am theych
notbecivilmme, butnowtheyareall friendship; but
Iamnot euchafool to he mken in hythem. You
know I have a pretty good spirit of in own. Anne
Mitchell had tried to put on a turban ike mine, an I
wore it the week befbre at the Concert, but made
wretched work ofit. It happened to become my odd
ﬂee, I believe, at lean Tilney told me no ntthe time,
and-aide" eyevmnpon me;bmheitthelantmn
whole world]; would take. I wear nothing but purple
now: I know I look hideous in it, but no matter; it in
your dear brother’s favourite colour. Lose no time, my
dearest, ,rweeteit Catherine, in writing to him and to
nae—Who ever am, am."

Such a main of thallow nniﬁce could not
even Catherine. Iuincnnlictencies, contradictions,
and Iehood, muck her from the very ﬁrst. She wan
ashamed of Inbella, and uhamed of having ever loved
her. Her profeuion: of attachment were now an die-

Iting as her excutes were empty, and her demandl
imprudent. “Write to James on her behalf! No!
Jame- should never hear Iubella’l name mentioned by
her again."

On H ’I :rrivnl from Woodmn Ihe made known
to him and leanor their brother’s ufety, ooognmlating
them with Iincerity on it, and reading aloud the most
material pamgu of her letterwith mug indignation.
When the had ﬁninhed it :—-“ So much for Isabella,"
dieaied,“andforlllourindmyl She munrhink

2 l O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

me an idiot, or the could not have written so; but per-
haps this has served no make her character better known
to me than mine in to her. I ace what she has been
about. She is a vain coqnette, and her tricks have not
anawered. I do not believe she had ever any regard
either for James or for me, and I wish I had never
known her.”

“It will soon be u if you never had,” said

Henay.

“ here in but one thing that I cannot understand.
I see that Ill: ha: had design: on Capuin Tilney which
have not succeeded; but I do not understand what
Captain Tilney ha. been about all this time. Why
should he pay her such attention: at to make her quarrel
with my brother, and then ﬂy oﬁ'himaelf .’ ”

“I have very little to nay for Frederick’s motives,
Inch an I believe them to have been. He has his
vanitiee ande as Mina Thorpe, and the chief differ-
ence is, that having a stronger head they have not yet
injured himoelﬁ If the {ﬂeet of his behaviour 'does not
justify him with you, we had better not seek after the
muse.”

“Then you do not suppose he ever really cared
about her ? ” .

“ I am pertuaded that he never did.”

“And only made believe to do so for mischief’u
lake 3 "

Henry bowed hip auenL

“ Well, then, I mun say that I do not like him at
all. Though it ha. turned out to well for In, I do
not like him at all. As it happens, there is no great
harm done, because I do not think Isabella has any
heart to loot. But aupyooe he had made her very
much in love with him i ’

“ But we must ﬁrst Inppoae Isabella to have had a
heart no lone, consequently to have been a very diﬂ‘erent

MA.¢6 ,e4-J

 

 

 

is:

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2! I

creature; and, in that cue,shewould have met with
very different numeric.” ‘

“It in very right that you nhould and by your
brother." -

“ And if you would mud by you’r, you would not
be much dinreased by the disappointment of Min
Tho . But mind itwarped by an innate rin-
cipler‘iaef generalyqrhdlegﬁty. and, therefore, not accullihle
to the cool mooning: of family partiality, or a desire of
revenge." ‘

Catherine was limented out of further hitter-
neas Frederick d not be un nath guilty
while Henry made hirmelf so agree e. She resolved
on not answering Inbella’t letter, and tried to think no
more of it.

Chum H1713}.

OON 2M this, the General found himself obliged
to go to London for n week; and he left
Nonhanger, earneetly regretting that any neces-

Iity Ihould rob him, even fbr an hour, of Mill Mor-
laud’e company, and anxiotu recommending the study
of her comfart and amutement to his children, a their
chief object in his absence. Hie departure gave Cathe-
rine the lint experimental conviction that a loss may be
nometimel a gun. The happiness with which their
time now panned, every employment voluntary, every
laugh indulged, every meal a reene of eaae and good-
humour, walking where they liked and when they liked,
their hours, pleasures, and Fatigue: at their own com.
mand, made her Ihomughly nemihle of the rennin:
which the General’s presence had impooed, and most
thankfully feel their preterit releaee from it. Such ease
and such delights made her love the place and the

2 I 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

peoplemoreandmoreeveryday; and had itnoe been
for a dread of in non becoming expedient to leave the
one, and an apprehension of not being equally beloved
by the other, the would at each moment of each (hay
have been perfectly happy; but the wax now in the
fourth week of her visit; before the General came
home, the fourth week would be turned. and perhaps it
might teem an intrusion if she Italdmuch longer. Thin
was a painful consideration whenever it occurred; and
eager to get rid of ouch a weight on her mind, the very
soon resolved to rpeak no Eleanor about it at once,
propoae going away, and be guided in her conduct by
the manner- in which her proposal might be taken.

Aware that if the gem herself much time, the might
heel it diﬁicult to bring forward so unpleasant a subject,
she took the lint rtunity of being suddenly alone
with Eleanor, and Eleanor’l being in the middle of
a speech about something verydiﬁerengto start forth
her obligation of going away very soon. Eleanor
looked and declared herself much concerned. She had
“ hoped for the pleamre of her company for a much
longer time—had been milled (perhaps by her wishes)
to mppose that a much longer visit had been promiaed,
and could not but think that if Mr and Mrs Morland
were aware of the pleasure itwal to have her there,
they would be too genermra to hanen her return.”
Catherine explained. “ Oh! an to that, papa and
mamma were in no hurry at all. As long an the wan
hap , they would alwayl be aatisﬁ ”

“ hen why, might she ask, in such a hurry heroelf
to leave them . ”

“ Oh! because the had been there so long.”

“Nay,ifyoucanuae such aword,I an urge you
no farther. If you think it long—"

“Oh no! I. do not, indeed. For my own leaaure,
I could stay with you as long again." And it wan

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 13

directly teﬂled that, till the had, her letving them wee
notevenmhethou htof. Inhavingthiemureofun-
urine: to plearan yrernoved,the force ofthe other
was likewile weakened. The kindnen, the earnestness
of Eleanor’r manner in predng her to my, and
Henry’s gratiﬁed look on being told that her my was
determined, were such tweet proof: of her imporunoe
with them, u left her only just so much eolicitude u
the human mind can never do comfortably without.
She did, almost always, believe that Henry loved her,
and quite alwaye that hit father and litter loved and
even winked herto belong to them; and believing to
far, her doubt and mxieu'el were merely eponive
irritation

Henry wu not able to oheyhit father't injunction of
remaining wholly at Northanger, in attendance on the
ladiee, during hi] nhoence in London; the engagement:
of hit cunteat Woodmn ohliging him to leave them
onSamrdayforaooupleof nights. Hi: lot: war not
now what it had been while the General was at home;
it launched their gaiety, but did not min their comfort;
and the two girls, agreeing in occupation, and improving
in intimacy, found themede l0 well-mlﬁcient for the
time to themeelvee, thnt it wan eleven o’clock, rather I
late hour at the , before they quitted the r-
mom on the day of enry’l They ha juet
reached the head ofthe stain, when it Icemed, :- far a
the thickness of the wall. would allow them to judge,
that a carriage wu driving up to the door, and the next
momentoonﬁmedtheideahytheloudnoiseofthe
house-hell. After the (int perturbation of rurprize had
passed away, in a "Good Heawn! what can he the
matter?" it war quickly decided by Eleanor to be her
eldest brother, whore arrival wan often an mdden, if not
quite to unneeeonable, and accordingly the hurried down
to welcome him.

2 14 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Catherine walked on to her chamber, making up her
mind, as well as she could, to a further acquaintance
with Captain Tilney, and comforﬁng herself under the
unpleasant impression his conduct had her, and
the persuasion of his being by far too line a gentleman
no'approve of her, that at least they should not meet
under such circumstances as would make their meeting
materially painful. She trusted he would never speak
of Miss Tho , and, indeed, as he must by this time
be ashamed o the part he had acted, there could he no
danger of it; and as long as all mention of Bath scenes
were avoided, she thought she could behave to him very
civilly. In such considerations time passed away, and it
was certainly in his favour that Eleanor should he so
glad to see him, and have so much to say, for half an
hour was almost gone sinca his arrival, and Eleanor did
not come up.

At that moment Catherine thought she heard her
step in the gallery, and listened for its continuance, but
all was silent. Scarcely, however, had she convicted
her fancy of error, when the noise of something moving
close to her door made her start; it seemed as if some
one was touching the very doorway, and in another
moment a slight motion of the lock proved that some
hand must he on it. She trembled a little at the idea
of anyone’s approaching so cautiously, but resolving not
to be again overcome by trivial appearances of alarm, or
misled by a raised imagination, she stepped uietly for-
ward, and opened the door. Eleanor, and only Eleanor,
stood there. Catherine’s spirits, however, were mn-
quillized but for an instant, for Eleanor’s cheeks were
pale, and her manner greatly agitated. Though
evidently intending to come in, it seemed an effort to
enter the room, and a still greater to speak when there.
Catherine, supposing some uneasiness on Captain
Tilney’s account, could only express her concern by

 ‘ -- lh-w

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3 I 5

silent attention, obliged her to be seated, rubbed her
temples with lavender water, and hung over her with
aﬁ'ecu'onate solicitude. “ My dear Catherine, you must
not, you mun not, indeed—” were Eleanor‘s lint
connected words. “ I am quite well. This kindness
distracts me. 1 cannot bear it. I come to you on such
an errand! ”

“ Errand! to me! ”

“How dial] Itellynn! Oh!howshallItell
you 2 I,

A new idea now darted into Catherine’s mind, and
taming as e as her friend, she exclaimed, “’Tis a
messenger mWoodmn! ”

“ You are mistaken, indeed,” normed Elnor,
looking at her most compassionately, " it is no one from
Woodston. It is my father himself." Her voice
faltered,andhereyesweremmdtothegroundas she
mentioned his name. His unlocked-for return was
enough in itself to make Catherine’s heart sink, and for
a few moments shehardly supposed there were any thing
worse to he told.

She aid nothing; and Eleanor, endeavouring to
collect herself and speak with ﬁrmness, but with eyes
su'll cut down, soon went on. “ You are too good, I
am sure,to think the worse of me for the part I am
obliged to perform. I am, indeed, a most unwilling
messenger. After what has so lately passed, so lately
been settled between us, how joyfully, how thankfully,
on my side! as to your continuing here, as I hoped, for
many, many weeks longer, how can I tell you that your
kindness is not to he accepted, and that the happiness your
company hashitherto given us is to be repaid by
butImustnottmstmyselfwithwords. Mydear
Catherine, we are to part My father has recollected
an engagement that takes our whole family away on
Monday; we are going to Lord Longtown's, near

 

216 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Hereford, for a fortnight. Ex ' n and lo
are equally impossible.’ ‘ I mnnmplmamempt either-Jaye 8’

“M dear Elmor,” cried Catherine, nuppming
herfee'ngsaswell as she could, “do not be no dis-
trmed. A second engagement must give way to a
ﬁrst. Iumvery,veryeorryweuretopartsoloon,
and I0 suddenly too, but I am not olIended, indeed
I am not. I can ﬁniah my vidt here, you know, at any
time; othopeyouwilloometome. Canyomwhen

return from this lord’s, come to Fullerton?"

“ It will not he in my power, Catherine."

" Come when you can, then.”

Eleanor made no annwer; and Catherine’s thoughu
recurring to something more directly interesting, she
added, thinking aloud, “ Monday ; I0 soon as
Monday; and you A! go! Well, I am certain of—
I shall be able to take leave, however. I need not go
tilljustbeforeyoudo,youknow. Donotbediatresoed,
Elamr; I can go on Monday very well. My father
and mother‘s having no notice of it in of very little can-
quuence. The General will send a oervant with me, I
dareny,halftheway;undthenlehallloonbeat
Salisbury, and then I am only nine miles from home.”

“Ah, Catherine! were it settled so, it would be
somewhat less intolerable; though in luch common
attendone, you would have received but half what you
ought. But, how can I tell you? To-morrow morn-
ing is ﬁxed for your leaving us, and not even the hour
is left to your choice; the very carriage is ordered. and
will be here at Ieven o’clock, and no servant will be
offered you.”

Catherine sat down breathless and speechless. “I
could hardly believe my semea when I heard it; and
no displeasure, no resentment that you can feel at this
moment, however jurtly great, can he more than I my—
Ielf—but I must not talk of what I felt. Oh, that I

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 217
could suggest anything in extenuation! Good God!
what will your father and mother my! After conning
you from the protection of real friends to this, almost
double dimnCe from your home, to have you driven out
of the house, without the consideration- even of decent
civility! Dear, dear Catherine, in bein the bearer of
mhameasage,I seem guiltymytelfo all its insult;
yet I trust you will acquit me, for you must have
been longenough in this house to aeethat I amhut
anominnlmimeuofigthatrnyreal powerie
nothing."

“ Have I offended the Genenl ? " said Catherine, in
a faltering voice.

“Alan! for my feelings an a daughter, all that I
know, all that I answer for is, that you an have given
him no just canoe of oﬂ‘enoe. He certainly is greatly,
very greatly discompoaed ; I have seldom seen him more
an. Hietemperia not happy, and Iomething has now
oocurredtomﬂeitinanuncommon degree; comedie-
appointment, some vexalion, which just at thin moment
seems important; but which I can hardly suppose you
to have any concern in; for how in it pouible?”

Itwaawithpaindut Catherine could speak at all;
and it was only for Eleanor’a sake that she attem '
“I am Mlle," aid the, “I am very oorryif have
offended him. It was the last thing I would willingly
have done. But do not be unhappy, Eleanor. An eu-
gagement, you know, mun he kept. I am only tony it
was not recollected mner, that I might have wriuen
home. But it in of very little oonaequence.”

“I hope, I mostly hope that to your real aafety it
will he of none; but to everything elle it in of the
gmteet consequence; to comfort, appearance, pm-
priety, to your famil , to the world. Were your
friends, the Allena, in Bath, you might go to them
with comparmive ease; a few houn would take you

P

=18 noun-tween sunny.

there; but a journey of sevty miles, to be taken post
by you, at your age, alone, unattended! ”

‘4 0h! thqu is nothing. Do not think about
that. And ‘ we are to part,a fey/hours sooner or
later, you know, makes no diﬂ'erence. I can be ready
by seven. Let me be called in time.” Eleanor saw
that she wished to be alone ; and believing it better for
each that they should avoid any ﬁrrther conversation,
now left her with, “ I shall see you in the morning.”

Catherine’s swelling heart needed relief. In Eleanor‘s
presence friendship and pride had equally restrained
her tears, but no sooner was she gone than they burst
forth in torrents. Turned from the house, and in
such a wayl Without any reason that could justify,
any apology that could atone for the abruptness, the
rudeness, nay, the insolence of it. Henry at a distance;
not able even to bid him farewell. Every hope, every
expectation from him suspended, at least, and who
could say how long? Who could say when they might
meet again? And all this by such a man as General
Tilney : so polite, so well-bred, and heretofore so par-
o’cularly fond of her! It was as incomprehensible as it
was mortifying and grievous. From what it could arise,
and where it would end, were considerations of equal
perplexity and alarm. The manner in which it was
done so grossly uncivil: hurrying her away without any
reference to her own convenience, or allowing her even
the appearance of choice as to the time or mode of her
travelling; of two days, the earliest ﬁxed on, and of
that almost the earliest hour, as if resolved to have her

ne before he was stirring in the morning, that he
might not be obliged even to see her. What could all
this mean but an intentional affront? By some means
or other she must have had the misfortune to olfend him.
Eleanor had wished to spam" her from so painﬂil a
notion, but Catherine could not believe it possible that

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 I 9

any injury or any misfortune could provoke such ill-will
against a person not connected, or, at least, not sup-
posed to be connected with it.

Heavily passed the night Sleep, or repose that de-
served the name of sleep, was out of the question. That
mom, in which her disturbed imagination had tormented
her on her ﬁrst arrival, we again the scene of agitated
spirits and unqniet slumbers. Yet how different now
the source of her inquietude from what it had been
then ; how mournfully superior in reality and substance!
Her ann'ety had foundation in fact, her fears in pro-
bability; and with a mind so occupied in the contem-
plation of actual and natural evil, the solitude of her
situau'on, the darkness of her chamber, the antiquity of
the building, were felt and considered without the
smallest emotion : and though the wind was high, and
often produced strange and sudden noises throughout
the house, she heard it all as she lay awake, hour after
hour, without curiosity or terror.

Soon after six Eleanor entered her room, eager to
show attention, or give assistance where it waspossible ;
but very little remained to be done. Catherine had not
loitered; she was almost dressed, and her packing
almost ﬁnished. The possibility of some conciliatory
message from the General occurred to her as his
daughter appeared. What so natural, as that anger
should pass away and repentance succeed it? and she
only wanted to know how far, after what had ,
an apology might properly be received by her. ut the
knowledge would have been useless here, it was not
called for; neither clemency nor dignity was put to the
trial ; Eleanor brought no message. Very little passed
between them on meeting: each found her greatest

in silence; and few and trivial were the sen-
tences exchanged while they remained upstairs; Catherine
in busy agitation completing her dress, and Eleanor, with
more good-will dun experience, intent upon ﬁlling the

220 NORTKANGER ABBEY.

trunk. When everything was done, they left the room,
Catherine lingering only half: minute behind her friend
to throw a parting glance on every well-known cherished
and went down to the breakfast-parlour, where
breakfast wan prepared. She tied to eat, aewell to cave
hersle from the pain of being urged, as to make her
friend comfortable; but she had no appeﬁm, and could
not swallow many mouthﬁrls. The contrast between
thieandherlastbreakfastin that room gave her fresh
misery, and strengthened her distaste for everything
before her. It wan not four-and-twenty hours ago
since theyhadmthemmthemempambutin cir-
cumstances how different! With what cheerful use,
what happy, though false security, had she then looked
around her, enjoying everything present, and fearing
little in future, beyond Henry’s going to Woodman for
a day! Happy, happy breakﬁm! for Henry had been
there; Henry had sat by her and helped her. These
reﬂections were long indulged undisturbed by any address
from her companion, who eat as deep in thought as her-
self; andthe appearance of the carriage was the ﬁrst
thing to startle and recall them to the recent moment.
Catherine’s colour rose at the sight it; and thein-
dignity with which she was treated striking, at that
instant, on her mind with peculiar force, made her for

’a short time sensible only of resentment. Eleanor

seemed now impelled into resolution and speech.

“ You my! write to me, Catherine,” she cried ; “ you
mun let me hear from you as soon as possible. Till I
know you to be safe at home, I shall not have an hour‘s
comfort Formlemrataumauhawngmu-t
entreat. Let me have the ntinﬁcﬁon of knowing that
you are safe at Fullerton, and have found your family
well; and then, till I can alk for your cor ndence
as I ought to do, I will not expect more. irect to
me at Lord Longmwn’s, and, I must ask it, under cover
to Alice.”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 221

“No, Eleanor, if you are not allowed to receive
alemer ﬁnmmlammreIhadbemrnotwrite.
There can be no doubt of my getting home
safe.”

Eleanor only replied, “I cannot wonder at your
feelings. I will not imporlune you. I will trust to
your own kindness of heart when I am at a distance
from you." But this, with the look of sorrow
accompanying it, was enough to melt Catherine’s pride
in a moment, and she instantly said, “ 0h! Eleanor, I
will write to you, indeed!”

There was yet another point which Miss Tilney was
anxious to settle, though somewhat embarrassed in speak-
ing of. Ithad occurred to her, that after so long an
absence from home, Catherine might not be provided
with money enough for the expenses of her journey,
and, upon suggesting it to her with most aﬁectionate
offers of accommodation, it proved to he exactly the
case. Catherine had never thought on the subject till
that moment; but, upon examining her purse, was con- '
vinced that but for this kindness of her friend, she might
have been turned fmrn the house without even the means
of getting home; and the distress in which she must
have been thereby involved ﬁlling the minds of both,
warper another word was said by either during the
time of their remaining together. Short, however, was
that time. The carriage was soon announced to be
ready ; and Catherine instantl rising, along and affec-
tionate embnoe supplied the p ace of language in bidding
each other adieu; and, so they entered the hall, unable
to leave the house without some mention of one whose
Mme had not yet been spoken by either, she paused a
moment, and with quivering lips just made it intelligible
that she left “her kind remembrance for her absent
friend.” But with this approach to his name ended all
possibility of remaining her feelings; and1 hiding her

> 222 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

face as well as she could with her handkerchief, she
darted across the hall, jumped into the chaise, and in a
moment was driven from the door.

Chasm it”.

ATHERINE was too wretched to be fearful.
The journeyin itself had no terrors for her ; and
she began it without either dreading its length, or

feeling its solitariness. Lanin back in one corner of
the carriage, in a violent burst tears, she was conveyed
some miles beyond the walls of the abbey before she
raised her head; and the highen point of ground within
the park was almost closed from her view before she
was capable of turning her eyes towards it. Unfomm-
ately, the road she now travelled was the same which
only ten days ago she had so happily passed along in
going to and from Woodston; and, for fourteen miles,
every bitter feeling was rendered more severe by the
review of objects on which she had ﬁrst looked under
impressions so different. Every mile, as it brought her
nearer Woodston, added to her sulferings; and when
within the distance of live, she passed the turning which
led to it, and thought of Hry, so near, yet so uncon-
scious, her grief and agitation were execssive.

The day which she had nt at that place had been one
of the hap iest of her life. t wasthere, it was on that day
that the (general had made use of such expressions with
regard to Henry and herself, had so spoken and so looked
as to give her the most positive conviction of his actually
wishing their marriage. Yes, only ten days ago had he
wished her by his pointed regard—had he even confused
her by his too signiﬁcant reference! And now, what
had the done, or what had she omitted to do, to merit
such a change?

NORTHANGQ ABBEY. 2 2 3

The only oEenoe agaimt him, of which she could
accuse herself, had been such as was scarcely possible to
reach his knowledge. Henry and her own heart only
were privy to the shocking suspicions which she had so
idly entermined; and y safe did she believe her
secret with each. Deer y, at least, Henry could
not have betrayed her. f, indeed, by any arrange mie-
chanoe his father should have gained intelligence of
what she had dared to think and look for, of her canoe-
leu fancies and injurious examinations, she could not
wonder-stony degreeof hie indignation. If aware of
her having viewed him as a murderer, she could not
wonder at his even turning her from his house. But a
justiﬁcation so full of torture to herself she muted would
not be in his power.

Anxious as were all her conjectures on this int, it
was not, however, the one on which she dwet most.
There was a thought yet nearer; a more prevailing,
more impetuous concern; how Henry would think, and
feel, and look, when he returned on the marrow or
Northanger,andheardof herheing goue,was a quen-
rion of force and inlereot to rile om erery other, to he
never-ceding, alternately imitating and loathing : it
sometimes auggesced the dread of his calm acquiescence,
and at other: was answered by the sweetest conﬁdence
in his regretand resentment. To the General, of course,
he would not dare to ; but to Eleanor, what
might he not say no Eleanor shoot her?

In this unoeasing recurrence of double snd inquiries,
on any one article of which her mind was incapable of
more than momentary repose, the hours passed away,
and her journey advanced much faster than she looked
for. The pressing anxieties of thought which prevean
her from noticing anything before her, when once beyond
the neighbourhood of Woodmn, saved her at the same
time from watching her progress; and though no object

124 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

on the road could engage a moment’s attention, she found
no stage of it tedious. From this she was preserved,
too, by another cause; by feeling no eagerness for her
journey’s conclusion; for to remrn in such a manner to
Fullerton was almost to destroy the leasure of a
meeting with those she loved best, even r an absence
such as hers: an elev weeks’ absence. What had
she to say that would not humble herself and pain her
family; that would not increase her own grief by the
confession of it; extend an useless resentment, and
perhaps involve the innocent with the guilty in undis-
n'nguishing ill-will? She could never do justice to
Henry and Eleanor’s merit : she felt it too strongly for
expression, and should a dislike be taken against them,
should they be thought of unfavourably on their father’s
account, it would cut her to the heart.

With these feelings, she rather dreaded than sought
for the ﬁrst view of that well-known spire which would
announce her within twenty miles of home. Salis-
bury she had known to be her point on leaving North-
anger, but after the ﬁrst stage, she had been indebted to
the post-masters for the names of the places which were
then to conduct her to it; so great had been her
ignorance of her route. She met with nothing, how-
ever, to distress or frighten her. Her youth, civil
manners, and liberal pay, rocured her all the attention
that a n-aveller like herse could require; and stopping
only to change horses, she travelled on for about eleven
hours without accident or alarm, and between six and
seven o’clock in the evening found herself entering
Fullerton.

A heroine returning at the close of her career, to her
native village, in all the triumph of recovered reyutation,
and all the dignity of a countess, with a long train of
noble relations in their several phaetons, and three
waiting-maids in a travelling chaise-and~four behind

NORTHANGIR ABBEY. '35

her, is an event on which the pen of the oontriver may
well delight to dwell; it gives credit to every con-
clusion, and the author must share in the glory she so
liberally bestows. But my afair is widely diﬁ'erent:
I bringbsckrnyheroine to her home in solitude and
disgrace, and no sweet claim: of spirits can lad me
into minuteness. A heroine in a hack post-chaise is
sudi a blowupon sentiment as no attanptat grandeur
or pathos ‘can withstand. Swiftly, therefore, shall
her post-boy drive through the village, amid the
gaze of Sunday gmps, and speedy shall be her
descent from it.

But whatever might be the dim-ens of Catherine’s
mind as she thus advanced towards the parsonage, and
whatever the humiliation of her biographerin relating it,
she was preparing enjoyment of no every-day nature for
those to whom she went; ﬁrst, in the appearance of
her carriage, and secondly, in herself. The chaise of a
traveller being a rare sight in Fullerton, the whole
family were immediately at the window; and to have
itswpatthelweep-gaeewal apleasuretobrighten
every eye, and occupy every fancy; a pleasure quite
unlocked for by all but the two youngest children,
a boy and girl of six and four years old, who expected
abmdnrordsmrineverycarﬁageH the
glance that first Catherine! ppy
the voice that proclaimed glimovery ! {BS whether
such ‘ were the a o eor or
never be exactly gmdmodny . 3‘:

Her father, mother, Sarah, George, and Harriet, all
assembled at the door, to welcome her with affectionate
eagerness, was a sight to awaken the best feelings of
Catherine’s heart; and in the embrace of each, as she
stepped from the carriage, she found herself soothed
beyond anything that she had believed possible. So
surrounded, so caressed. she was even happy! In the

226 NORmANGRR Ann.

'yoyﬁzlnell ofﬁmil love,everything,for a drmtﬁme,
was subdued; audythe plenum ofneeing her, laving
them at ﬁmhuleleilure for cahncuriotity,they were
all seated round the m-table, which Mn Morland lad
hurried forthemmﬁmofthepoormveller,whme pale
andjadedloohnoon caught hernotice, beforeany
inquiry-odirectaltodemandapoliﬁveanlwerwu
addmed to her.

Reluctantly, and with much heintion, did the then
begin whtmighgpuhapgattheend ofhalfan hour,
hetemed hythe courtesyofherhnrersanex lanation;
but namely, within that time, could theynt discover
the came, or collect the of her sudden
return. Theywere ﬁr ﬁum being an initable race;
far from an quickneu in catching, or bitterness in
manning u; but here, wh the whole Wan
unfolded, was an insult not to be overlooked, nor, for
the int half hour, to be easily pardoned Without
nﬁ‘ering any romantic alarm in the consideration of their
daughter‘s long and lonely journey, Mr and Mr:
Morlaud could not but feel that it might have been
productive of much unpleasanmeu to her; that it was
what they could never have voluntarily tuﬁ'ered; and
that, in forcing her on such a meuurg General Tilncy
had acted neither honourath nor feelingly, neither a a
gentleman nor an a '- Why he had done itI wlnt
could have provok him to such a breach of hotpilality,
and I0 auddenly turned all hit regard for their
daughter into actual ill-will, was a matter which they
were at least. as far from divining an Catherine herself :
but it did not oppress them by my meant so long; and,
after a due course of useless conjecture, that “ it was a
mange business, and that he must be a very strange
man,” grew enough for all their indignation and wonder ;
though Sarah, indeed, still indulged in the sweets of
incomprehensibility, exclaiming and conjecturing with

NORTHANGER ABBEY. a 2 7 '

youthful ardour—“ My dear, you give yonrlelf a great
deal of needless trouble,” said her mother at last;
“ depend upon it, it in something not at all worth under-
standing.”

“ I can allow for his wishing Catherine away when
he recollected this engagement," said Sarah; “ but why
not do it civilly ? ”

“I am sorry for the young le,” reamed Mn
Morland; “ they murt have a some ofit; but aafor
anything else, it in no matter now : Catherine is Iafe at
home, and our comfort does not depend upon General
Tilney." Catherine sighed. “Well,” continued her
philosophic mother, “ I am glad I did not know of
your journey at the time; but now it in all over, per-
haps there in no harm done. It is always good
for young people to be put upon exerting themselvea;

you know, my dear Catherine, you always were a
sad little rhatter-brained creature: but now you must
have been forced to have your wits about you, with so
much changing of chaioea and so forth; and I hope it
will appur that you have not left anything behind you
in any of the pockets."

Catherine hoped so mo,andtriedto feelanintereat
in her own amendment, but her spirits were quite worn
down; and to be Iilent and alone becoming noon her
only wiah, she readily agreed to her mother’s next
counsel of going early to bed. Her parents neeing
nothing in her ill-loch and agitation but the natural
consequence of mortiﬁed feelinga, and of the unusual
exertion and fatigue of such a journey. parted from her
without any doubt of their being noon dept away; and
though, when they all met the next morning, her re-
covery war not equal to their hopes, they were nil] per-
fectly unsurpicioua of there being any deeper evil. They
never once thought of her heart, which, for the parenm
of a young lady of seventeen, just returned from her ﬁrst
excurrion from home, war odd enough!

228 NORTHANGER sum.

Asmasbreakfastwasover,shentdownto fulﬁl
her promise to Miss Tilney, whose trust in the eﬁ'ect of
time and distance on her friend’s disposition was already
justiﬁed. for already did Catherine reproach herself with
having parted from Eleanor coldly; with having never
enough ulned her merit: or kindneu; and never
enoughoommiseratedherforwbatshehadheenymr.
day left to endure. The strength of these feelings,
however, was far from assisting her pen ; and never had
it been harder for her to write than in addre-ing
Eleanor Tilney. To compose a letter which might at
once do justice to her sentiments and her situation, convey
gratitude without senile regret, be guarded without
coldness, and hone: without resentment; a letterwhich
Eleanor might not be ' b the of; and,
above all, which she mimt bylush Were“, if Henry
should chance to see, was an unan to frighten
away all her powers of performance; and, after long
thought and much perplexity, to be very brief was all
that she could determme on with any conﬁdence of
safety. The money, therefore, which Eleanor had
advanced, was enclosed with little more than grateful
thanks, and the thousand good wishes of a most alfec-
tionate heart.

“This has been a ﬂange acquaintance,” observed
Mrs Morland, as the letter was ﬁnidied; “ soon made
and soon ended. I am sorry it happens so, for Mn Allen
thought them Very pretty kind of young mp1” and
yonweresadlyoutoflucktoo,inyourlsa :1. Ah,
poor James! Well, we mustlive and learn; and the
next new friends you make I hope will be better worth
k ~n .”

tlgzerine coloured as the warme answered, “ No
friend can be better worth keeping than Eleanor.”

“ If so, my dar, I dare ny you will meet again some
time orother; donotbeuneasy. Itistento one but

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 229

youarethrowntogether again in the course of: few
years; mdthemwhatapleaaureitwill be! ”

Mrs Morland was not happy in her attempt at can-
uolation. The hope of meeting '1: in the course of
a few years could only put into atherine’a head what
nﬁghthaypenwithinthattimetomakeameeting
dreadful to her. She could neveribrget Henry Tilney,
or think of him with lean tenderneu than she did at
that moment, but he might forget her, and in that case
to meet—-! Her eye. ﬁlled with man the pictured
her acquaintance IO renewed; and her mother perceiving
her comfortable suggestions to hfzve had no good effect,

mpooed, an another expedient r reaming her ixitl,
that they should call on Mn Allen. W

Thetwohwoeawereonlyaquarterofamileapart;
and, a they walked, Mn Morland Quickly deqmched
all that the felt on the more (3me a disappoinment.
“We are lorry for him," said the; “but otherwise
thueienohxrm done in the match going of; for it
could not he a desirable thing to have him engaged to a
girl when we had not the amalleat acquaintance with,
and who wan an entirely without fortune; and now after
such behaviour, we cannot think at all well of her.
Juetatpreaent it comes hard to poor Jamea.hut that
willnntlaltforever; andldnlela hewill be a die-
creetermanallhit life,for the {00' eat of hie lira
choice.”

Thiswaajuatmcha mmmaryviewof the disk as
Catherine could linen to: “Odie; Ientenoe mightl hlawe
endanguedhermmplamn' oe,an madeher yen:
rational; for anon were all herng power- Israllowed
npinrhereﬂectionofher own change offeelinga and
spirit: lince last Ihe had nodden that well-known road.
It wu not three months ago Iince1 wild with
expectau'on, Ille had there run backwards and forwards
aometentimeaa-day,witlunheart light, gay,and in-

2 3o NORTHANGER ABBEY.

dependent; looking formrd lo pleasures untaeted and
unalloyed, and as free from the apprehension of evil as
from the knowledge of in Three month: ago had seen
her all this, and now, how altered a being did the
return!

She wan received by the Allen: withall thekindnesa
which her unlocked-for appearance, acting on a steady
aﬁcﬁon, would naturally call forth; and great was
their urn-prize, and warm their displeasure, on hearing
how ahe had been treated, though Mn Morland's
account of it was no inﬂated representation, on studied
appeal to their passions. “Catherine took no quite by
surprize yesterday evening," said she. “She travelled
all the way pout by herself, and knew nothing of coming
till Saturday night; for General Tilney, from acme odd
fancy or other,»all of a sudden grew tired of having her
there, and almost turned her out of the house. Very
unfriendly, certainly; and he moat he a very odd man;
but we are so glad to have her amongst us again!
And it in a great comfort to ﬁnd that the is not a poor
hel less creature, but can shift very well for herself.”

{Ir Allen expressed himself on the occasion with the
reasonable resentment of a. sensible friend; and Mn
Allen thought his expressions quite good enough to be
immcdiately made use of again by herself. Hi3 wonder,
hi1 conjectures, and his explanations, became in succee-
sion hen, with the addition of this single remark: “ I
really have not patience with the Gene ,” to ﬁll up
every accidental pause; and “I really ham not au'ence
with the General,” was uttered twice after .6 Allen
left the room, without any relaxation of anger, or Any
material digression of thought. A more considerable
degree of wandering attended the third repetition; and,
after completing the fourth, she immediately added,
“ Only think, my dear, of my having got that frightful
great rent in my beet Mechlin l0 charmingly mended,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23!

beforeIleftBath,thatonecanhardlyseewhereit
was. I must shew it you some day or other. Bath is
a nice place, Catherine, after all. I assure you I did
not shove half like coming away. Mn Thorpe’s being
there was such a comfort to us, was not it? You know,
you and I were quite forlorn at ﬁrst.” >

“ Yes, but (bat did not last long,” said Catherine, her
eyes brightening at the recollection of what had ﬁnt
given spirit to her existence.

“Very true: we soon meet with Mrs Thorpe, and
then we wanted for nothing. My dear, do not you
think these silk gloves wear very well? I put them on
new the that time of our going to the Lower Rooms,

On know, and I have worn them a greasdeal since.

0 on remember that eveniu 2"

" o I! Oh! perfectl .'

“It was v agreeablefwaa not it? Mr Tilney
drank tea with us, and I alwa s thought him a great
addition ; he is so very agreeah . I have anotion you
danced with him, but am not quite sure. I remember
I had my favourite gown on."

Catherine could not answer; and, after a short trial
of other subjects, Mrs Allen again returned to—"I
really have not patience with the General! Such an
agreeableworthyrnan as he seemed tobe! Idonot
suppose, Mrs Morland, you ever saw a better-bred man
in your life. His lodgings were taken the day
after he left them, Catherine. But no wonder ; ilsom
Street, you know."

As they walked home again, Mrs Morland en-
deavoured to impress on her daughter’s mind the i-
lieu of having such steady well-wishers as Mr and n
Allen, and the very little consideration which the neglect
or nnkindneea of slight acquaintance like the Tilneys
oughtto have with her, while she could preterve the
good opinion and affection of her earlier: friends. There

232 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

waaagreatdmlofgoodoenaeinallthis; hutthereare
tome situau'ona of the human mind in which good sense
has very little power; and Catherine's feelings connap
dined almost everypoailionher motheradvanccd. It
was upon the behaviour of these very’ulight acquaint-
ance that all her present ha ineu depended; and
while Mn Morland was me y conﬁrming her own
opinions by the juutnen of her own represenmtiom,
Catherine was silently reﬂecting that m Henry Inuot
have arrivedat Northanger; not: he must have heard
of her departure ; and now, the were all
outing of for Hereford. Perm y

cheat" iiﬁ.

ATHERINE’S was not naturally
epdentary,norhadherhahiubeeneververy
industrious; but, whatever might hitherto have

heenherdefecu of that Iorgherrnmherconldnotbut
perceive them now to be grudy increased. She could
neither sit still nor employ herself for ten ruiuutel
together; walking round the gardw and orchard again
and again, a: if nothing but motion was voluntary ; and
iueemedaa if the could em walk about the home
rather than remain ﬁxed for anytime in theparlour.
Herlonoflpirinwasa yetgmheralmﬁon. In her
rambling mdheridlenegthemightonly be a mricature
ofheraelf; butin herrilenoeand eadnesu, the was the
ve reverie of all that the had been before.

or two days Mn Morland allowed it to pass em
without a hint; but when a third night’s res had
ndthummndhercheerﬁdmimprovedherinuaeﬁrl
activity, nor given her a greater Inclination for needle-
work, uhe could no longer refrain from the gentle re-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 233

V proof of, “ My dar Catherine, I am afraid you are
growing quite a line lady. I donot know when
Richard’s cmvau would be done, if he had no friend
but you. Your head rune too much upon Bath ; but
timeisatimeforeverythin—qtimeforhallaand
playa, and a time for work. on have had a long nm
of amusement, and now you must try to be until.”

Catherine took up her work directly, laying, in a
dejected voice, that “ ha- head did not run upon Bath
—much.”

“Then you are fretting about General Tilney, and
that in very aimple of you ; (or ten to one whether you
overseehimagain. You ahouldneverfretabout
triﬂeu." After a «hon silence: “I hope, my Cathe-
rine, you are not getting out of humour with home,
because it in not so grandee Nonhanger. That would be
turning your viait into an evil, indeed. Wherever you
are, you should alwaye he contented, but especially at
home,hecaunethereyou mun [pend the motof your
time. I did not quite like, at Imam-gm bar you
talk to much about the F reach bread at Northanger."

“Iamaureldouotcare aboutthehread. Itiaall
the name to me what I at.”

“Therein: very clevereaoayinoneofthebookanp
stain upon much Mb I Iubject, about young girl: who
have been spoilt for home by grat acquaintance : ‘ The
Mirror,’ I think. I will look it out for you some day
orother,becauaelamtureitwilldoyougood.”

Catherine laid no more; and, with an endeavour to
do right, applied to her work; but, after a few minutes,
eunk again, without knowin it henelf, into [an nor and
linleuneee; moving heneﬁ in her chair, In the
irritation of marine-u, much oftener than ahe moved
her needle. Mrs Morland watdmd the rogreal of thin
relapse; and seeing, in her daughter’e aEaent and die-
atiaﬁed look, the full proof of that repining to

Q

234. NORTr-rsuonk new.

which she hadnowbegun to attribute her want of
cheerfulness, hastily left the room to fetch the book in
nation. anxious to lose no time in attacking so dread-

a malady. It was some time before she could ﬁnd
what she looked for; andother family matters occurring
todebin her,aguamerofanhourhadelapsedereshere-
turneddown mm with the volume from whichso much
was hoped. Her avocaﬁons above having shut out all
noise but what she created herself, she knew not that a
visitor had arrived within the last few minutes, till, on
entering the room, the ﬁrst object she beheld was a

. g man whom she had never seen before. With a
m of much respect, he immediame rose, and being
introduced to her by her conscious daughter as “ Mr
Henry Tilney," with the embarrassment of real sensi-
bility, began to apologise for his appeuance there,
acknowledging that after what had passed he had
limle right to expect a welcome at Fullerton, and
stating hisimpatience to be assured of Miss Morland’s
having reached her home in safety, as the cause of
his intrusion. Hedid not address himself a) an un~
candidjudge or a resentful heart. Far from compres
bending him or his sister in their father’s misconduct,
Mrs Moriand had been always kindly disposed towards
each ; and instantly, pleased by his appearance, received
him with the simple professions of unaffected benevol-
ence; thanking him for such an attention to her
daughter; assuring him that the friends of her children
were always welcome there, and intreating him to say
not another word of the past.

He was not ill inclined to obey this request; for
though his heart was greatly relieved by such unlocked-
for mildness, it was not, just at that moment, in his ppwer
toss an ‘ tothe urpose. Returning in sience
to hiz “ﬁction, l'l’e remained for some minutes
most dvilly answering all Mrs Morland’s common re-

.- A..‘A‘i

NORTHANGER ABBEY. :35

mark: about the weather and roads. Catherine, mean-
while, the anxious, agimted, happy, feverish Catherine,
mid not a word: but her glowing cheek and brightened
eyemadehermother trust that this good-namredviu't
would, at leaat,net her heart at ease fora time; and
gladly, thereﬁore, did the lay aside the ﬂm volume at
“ The Mirror " for a future hour.

Deairoue of Mr Morland’a assistance, an well in giving
encouragement u in ﬁnding convex-laden for her
whose emhamument on his father's account die earnestly
pitied, Mn Morland had very early deepatched one of
the children to summon him; but Mr Morland wan
from home, and being thus without any support, at the
endofaqunnerofanhmrehehaduodungtony.
After a couple of minutea' unbroken silence, Henry,
turning to Catherine for the lint time lince her mother’s
enmce, uhed her, with sudden alacrity, if Mr and
Mn Allen were now It Fullerton? and on developing,
from amidn all her perplexity of words in reply, the
meaning, which one short syllable would have given,
immediately expressed his intention of paying his respects
to them, and with a rising colour, asked her if ahe would
have the goodness to thew him the way. “ You may
lee the home from this window, air,” wan infomau'on,
on Sarah’a side, which roduced only a bow of acknow-
ledgment From the gen em, and a Iileneing nod from
her mother: for Mn Morland, thinking it probable, as
a neondary consideration in his with of waiting on their
worthy neighboun, that he might have Jame explanation
to give of hie ﬁther'n behaviour, which it must he more
pleaaant for him to communicate only to Catherine, would
not, on any account, prevent her accompanying him.
They began their walk, and Mrs Morland wan not entirely
Inimken in his object in wiehing it. Some explanation
on hiefnther’eaccounthehad togive; but hieﬁrutpur-
pone wan to explain him-elf; and before they reached

236 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Mr Allen's grounds he had done it In well that Cath-
erine did not think it could ever be repeated too often.
She was assured of his affection ; and that heart in return
was oolicited, which, perhaps, they pretty equally knew
was almdy entirely his own; for, though Henry was now
sincerely attached to her——though he felt and delighted
in all the excellencies of her character, and trulyloved
her society—I must confess that his aﬁection originated
in nothing better than gratitude; or, in other words,
thataperxnasionofherpanialityforhhn hadbeenthe
only cause of giving her a serious thought. It is a new
circumstance in romance, I acknowledge, and dreadfully
derogatory of an heroine’s dignity ; but if it be as new
in common life, the credit of a wild imagination will at
least be all my own.

A very short visit to Mrs Allen, in which Henry
talked at random, without sense or connection, and
Catherine, wrapt in the contemplation of her own un-
utterable happiness, scarcely opened her dismissed
them to the extasies of another tétc-h-téte; and before
it was suffered to close, she was enabled to judge how
far he was sanctioned by parental authority in his present
application. On his return from Woodston, two days
before, he had been met near the abbey by his impatient
father, hastily informed in angry terms of Miss Morland’s
departure, and ordered to think of her no more.

Such was the permission n which he had now
offered her his hand. The aﬁ'righted Catherine, amidst all
the tenors of expectation, as she listened to this account,
could not but rejoice in the kind caution with which
Henry had saved her from the necessity of a conscientious
rejecuon, by engaging her faith before he mentioned the
subject; and as he proceeded to give the particulars, and
explain the motives of his father's conduct, her
soon hardened into even a triumphant delight. The
General had had nothing to accuse her of, nothing to

nonrmxcnn ABBEY. 237

lay to her charge, but her being the involnnury, uncon-
scious object, of a dec don which his pride could not
pardon, and which a pride would have been
ashamed to own. She was guilty only of being less
rich than he had eupposed her to be. Undera mirtaken
persuasion of her possessions and.ch he had courted
her acquaintance in Bath, Iolicited her company at
Northanger, and designed her for his daughter-in-law.
On discovering his error, to turn her from the house
seemed the best, though to his feelings an inadequate
proof, of hil resentment towards herself, and his con-
tem of her family.
ohn [Thorpe] had ﬁrst misled him. The General
perceiving his son one night at the theatre, to be paying
considerable mention to Miss Morland, had accidentally
inquired of Thorpe if he knew more of her than her
name. Tho ,moot ha y to be on speaking terms
with a man 0 General Ilney's importance, had hem
joyfully and proudly communicative; and being at that
time not only in daily expectation of Morland'a engag-
ing Isabella, hut likewiee pretty well resolved upon
marrying Catherine himself, his vanity induced him to
represent the family as yet more wealthy than his vanity
and avarice had made him believe them. With whom-
soever he was, or was likely to be connected, his own
consequence alwayl required thatthein ohould he gmt;
and as hie intimacy with any acquaintance grew, la
y grew their forum. The expectatinns of his
ﬁiend Morland, therefore, from the (int over-rated, had,
ever since hie introduction to Isabella, been gradually
increasing; and by merely adding twice as much for
the grandeur of the moment, by doubling what he chose
to think the amount of Mr Morland’a preferment,
trehling his private fortune, bestowing a rich aunt, and
linking half the children, he was able to represent the
whole family to the General in a most respectable light.

2 38 non-mama): ABBEY.

For Catherine, however, the peculiar object or the
General’s curioaity and his own speculations, he had
yet something more in reserve; and the ten or ﬁfteen
thousand pounds which her father could give her, would
he a pretty addition to Mr Allen's estate. Her in-
timacy there had made him seriously determine on her
being handsomely legacied hereafter; and to speak of
her, therefore, as the almost acknowledged ﬁxture heirece
of Fullerton, naturally followed. Upon such intelli-
gence the General had proceeded, for never had it
occurred to him to doubt its authority. Thorpe’s
interest in the family, by hi: sister’s approaching con-
nection with one of in memhen, and hrs own views on
another of which he boasted with almost
equal openness), seemed suﬂicient vouchers for his truth ;
and to these were added, the absolute facts of the Aliens
being wealthy and childless, of Miss Morland’s being
under their care, and, as soon as his acquaintance allowed
him to judge, of their tinting her with parental kind-
ness. His resolution was soon formed. Already had
he discerned a liking towards Miss Morland in the
countenance of hit son; and, thankful for Mr Thorpe’s
communication, he almost inmntly determined to spare
no pains in wukening his boasted interelt, and mining
his dearest hopea. Catherine herself could not be more
ignorant at the time of all this than his own children.
Henry and Elmor, perceiving nothing in her situation
likely to engage their father’s 'cular respect, had
seen with astonishment the an entrees, continuance,
and extent of his attention; and though latterly, from
some hints which had accompanied an almost positive
command to his son, of doing everything in hinpower
to attach her, Henry was convinced of his father’s
helievin it to be an advantageous connection, it was not
till the be explanation at Northanger that they had the
smallelt idea of the false calculation. which had hurried

NORTHANGER annnv. e39

him on. That they were false, the General had learned
from the very person who had suggested them, from
Thorpe himself, whom he had chanced to meet again
in town; and who, under the inﬂuence of exactly
opposite feelings, irritated by Catherine’s reﬁml, and
yet more by the failure of a very recent endeavour to
acco lish a reconciliation between Morland and
Isabe convinced that they were for ever,
and spinning a friendship which co d be no longer
rervieeahle,hmened to contradict all that he had laid
before to the advantage of the Morlands: confused
himaelfto have been totally mistaken in his opinion of
their circumstances and character, misled by the
rhodomontade of his friend to believe his fathera nun of
eubsunce and credit, whereas the “auction. of the two
orthreelastweeluprovedhimtoheneitber; for,after
coming eagerly forward on the ﬁrst overture of a marriage
between the families, with the most liberal proposals, he
had, on being brought to the point, by the threwdneu
of the relator, been conmained to acknowledge himself
incapable of giving the young people even a decent
support. They were, in fact, a necessitous family; '
numerous too, almost beyond example; by no means
respected in their own neighbourhood, Is he had lately
had particular opportunities of ditoovering; aiming at a
style of life which their fortune could not warrant; seek-
ing to better themselvel by wealthy connexion; a for.
ward, bragging, scheming race.

The terriﬁed General pronounced the name of Allen
with an inquiring look; and here, too, Thorpe had
learnt his error. The Allens, he believed, had lived
nearthem too long, and he knew the young man on
whom the Fullerton eute must devolve. The General
neededno more. Enraged with almost everybody in
the world but himtelf, he let out the next day for the
abbey, where his performances have been seen.

24° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

I leave it to my model”: sagacitytodetermine how
much ofallthisitwas ' for Henryto communi-
azeat thistime to therine;how muehofithe
could have learnt from his fates-:1, in what point his own
conjecture: mi ht assist him, what rtion must
remainto beuEldin almfrom James?" Ihaveuuityedef
for their case what they must divide for mine. Catherine,
at any rate,heard enough to feel, that, in wapecdng
Genenl Tilney of either murdering or shutting up his
wife, she had Icaroely sinned again his character or
magniﬁed hit cruelty.

Henry, in having such things to relate of his father,
was almost an pitiable as in their first avnwal to hime
He blushed for the narrow-minded counsel which he was
obliged to expo-e. The conversation between them at
Nonlnnger had beenof the mostunfriendly kind. Henry’s
indignation on hearing how Catherine had been treated,
on comprehending his father's views, and being ordered
to acquiesce in them, had been open and hold. The
General, accustomed on every ordinary occasion to give
the luv in his family, prepared for no reluctance but of
’ feeling, no desire that should dare to clothe
itself in words, can d ill brook the opposition of his son,
Ready as the sanction of reason and the dictate of non-
scienoe could make it. But, in such a cause, his anger,
though it mun Ihock, could not inﬁmidate Henry, who
was mtained in his purpose by a conviction of its
justice. He felt himself bound as much in honour as
in aﬁ'ection to Miss Morland, and believing that hurt
to be his own which he had been directed to gain, no
unworthy retraction of a tacit consent, no reversing
decree of unjustiﬁable anger, could shake his ﬁdelity, or
inﬂuence the resolution: it prompted.

He steadily reﬁned to accompany his father into
Herefordahire, an engagement formed almost at the
moment, to promote the dismiual of Catherine, and as

NORTHANGLK ABBEY. 24 l

steadil declared hie innention of offering her his hand.
The eneral was fin-ions in his anger, and they parted in
dreadful disagreement. Henry, in an agitation of mind
which many solitary hours were required to compose,
had returned almost instantly to Woodmn; and on the
afternoon of the following day had begun his journey to
Fullerton.

Chum iii].

R and Mn Morland’t eurprize on being applied
to by Mr Tilney for their consent to hit marry-
ing their daughter, was, for a few minutes,

considerable; it having never entered their heads to
mepect an attachment on either aide; but as nothing,
after all, could be more natural than Catherine'l being
beloved, they soon learnt to consider it with only the
happy agitation of gratiﬁed pride; and, ae far as they
alone were concerned, had not a single objection to
start. His pleasing manner: and good sense were edf-
evident recommendation; and having never heard evil
of him, it was not their way to uppoee any evil could he
told. Good-will lupplying the place of experience, his
character needed no aueotation. “Catherine would
make a sad, heedleu young honeekeeper, to be sure,”
wan her mother‘l foreboding remark; but quick
wit the consolation of there being nothing like
practice.

There was but one obstacle, in short, to be men-
tioned; but till that one was removed, it muat be
impossible for them to uncu‘on the engagement. Their
tempera were mild, but their principlet were steady;
and while hi- parent no exprenl forbad the con-
nexion, they could not allow vee to encourage it.
That the General should come forward In oolicit the

242 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

alliance, or that he should even very hartily approve it,
they were not reﬁned enough to make any parading
stipulation, but the decent appearance of consent must
be yielded, and that once obtained, and their own hearts
made them must that it could not be very long denied,
their willing approbation was instantly to follow. His
count was all that they wished for. They were no
more inclined than entitled to demand his money. Of
a very considerable fortune, his son was, by marriage
settlement), eventually secure; his reeent income wax
an income of independence and c on, nnd under every
pecuniary view it was a match beyond the claims of their
daughter.

The young people could not be surprized at a decision
like this. They. felt and they deplored, but they could
not resent it; and they parted, endeavouring to hope
that such a change in the General, as each believed
almost in: ssible, might y take cc, to unite
them agaiho in the fullnesl of privileged aﬂecﬁou.
Henry returned to what was now his only home, to
watch over his young plantations, and extend his
improvements for her sake, to whose share in them he
looked anxiously forward; and Catherine remained at
Fullerton to cry. Whether the tonnents of absence
were softened by a clandestine correspondence, let us
not inquire. Mr and Mn Morland never did; they
had been too kind to exact any promise,and when-
ever Catherine received a letter, as at that time
happened pretty often, they ,alwlys looked another
wa .

'l‘he anxiety which in this state of their amchment
must be the portion of Henry and Catherine, and of all
who loved either, as no its ﬁnal event, can hardly extend.
Ifetr,tothebosmnofmyreaders,whowillseeinthe
tell-tale compression of the pages before them, that
waste all hastening together to perfect felicity. The

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 243

mean. by which their early marriage was effected can
be the only doubt: what probable circumstance could
work upon a temper like the General’a? The circum-
stance which chieﬂy availed was the. marriage of his
daughter with a man of fortune and consequence, which
tookplace in the mom of the vumrner: anacoeuion
ofdignitythat threw him into a ﬁt ofgoodhumour,
from which he did not recover till after Eleanor bad
obtainedhiefo .veneaeofH ,andhil inlet:
for him " to bcIFfool if he will." Pew

The marriage of Elannr Tiln , her removal from
all the evils of arch a home a onhangerhadbeen
made by Henry'- baniahment, m the home of her
choice and the man of her choice, in an event which
I expecttogivegeneral aaﬁsﬁcﬁon amongallher
acquaintance. My own joy on the occaaion in very
tincere. I know no one more entitled by unpretending
merit, or better prepared byhabitual lulfering, to receive
and enjoy felicity. Her partiality for this gentleman
was not of recent origin,and he had been long withheld
only by inferiority of situation from addressing her.
Hit unex cted accession to title and famine had
removed hiediﬂicultiea; andneverhadtheGeneral
lovedhieda hterlowellinallhcrhourn ofcom-

‘onahip, uEity, and patient endurance, an when he
5: hailed her, “Your Ladyehipl" Her hulband
wan really delerving of her, independent of his peerage,
hiawalth,and bit amchmengheingtoapred-‘onthe
most charming young man in the world. Any further
deﬁnition of his merits mnetbeunnec : the man
charming young man in the world is inetandy before the
imagination of us all. Concerning the one in question,
therefore, I have only to add (aware that the rules of
compoein'on forbid the introduction of a character not
connected with my fable) that this was the very gentle-
man whose negligent tenant left behind him that

244 » NORTHANGER ABBEY.

collection of walking-bills, Milling from a long viit at
Northanger, by which my heroine was involved in one
of her most alarming adventutes.

The inﬂuence of the Viscount and Viscountens in
their brother's behalf was assisted by that right under-
standing of Mr Morland’a circummncea, which, as soon
as the General would allow himself to be informed,
tbeywere ualiliedtogive. Ittaughthimthathehad
been ymore misled byThorpe’sﬁrItboastof
the famil wealth than by his subsequent malicious over-
throw 0 it; that in no sense ofthewordwerethey
necesaiwns or poor, and that Catherine would have
three thousand pounds. This was no material an amend-
ment of his late expectations, that it greatly contributed
to smooth the descent of his pride; andbyno means
without its effect was the private intelhgmce which
he was at some pain to procure, that the Fullerton
comm, being entirely at the disposal of its present
proprietor, was consequently open to every greedy

speculation.

Onthestrengtbofthisthe General,eoonafter
Elanor’c marriage, ‘tted his son to ieturn to
Northanger, and thence made him the bearer of his
consent, very courteoust worded in a page hill of
empty professions, to Mr Morland. The event which
it authorized soon followed: Henry and Catherine
were nnrried, the bells mug and everybody smiled;
and, as this took place within a twelvenwnth from the
first day of their meeting, it will not appear, after all
the dreadful delays occasioned by the General’s cruelty,
that they were hurt by it. To begin perfect
happiness at the renpective ages of twenty-xix and
eighteen is to do p well; and profeuing myaelf,
moreover, convinced that the General’s unjuet inter-
ference, so far from being really injurious to their
felicity, was perhaps rather conducive to it, by improv-

--. --, .L;.‘;.-..4-‘. 7.;

4.. 4.4- -

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 245

. ing their knowledge of each other, and adding strength
on their attachment, I leave it to be nettled by whom-
wver it may concern, whether the tendency of this
work be altogether 10 recommend pammal tyranny or
mward ﬁlial disobedience.