NORTHANGER ABBEY.
_.,.,_.
chapter 3.

0 one who had ever seen Catherine Morland in
her infancy would have supposed her born to be
an heroine. Her situation in life, the character
of her Father and mother, her own person and disposi-
tion, were all equally against her. Her father was a
clergyman, without being neglected or a)“, and a very

ble man, though his name was ichard, and he
had never been handsome. He had a considerable
independence, besides two good livings, and he was not
in the lealt addicted to locking u his daughters. Her
mother was a woman of useful p ain sense, with a good
temper, and, what is more remarkable, with a good
connitution. She had three sons before Catherine was
born; and, instead of dying in bringing the latter into
the world, as any body might expect, she still lived on
—-lived to have six children more—to see them grow-
ing up around her, and to enjoy excellent health her-
Ielf. A family of ten children will be always called a
ﬁne family, where there are heads, and arms, and le a
enough for the number; but the Morlands had lit e
other right to the word, for they were in general very
plain, and Catherine, for many years of her life, as plain
as any. She had a thin awkward ﬁgure, a Iallow akin

2 NORTHANGER ABBEV.

without colour, dark lank hair, and strong feamres; so
much for her person, and not less unpropitious for
heroism seemed her mind. She was fond of all bo ’
plays, and greatly preferred cricket, not merely to do Is,

ut to the more heroic enjoymean of infancy, nursing
a dormouse, feeding a canary-bird, or watering a rose-
bush. Indeed she had no taste for a garden, and if she
gathered ﬂowers at all, it was chieﬂy for the pleasure of
mischief, at least so it was conjectured from her always
preferring those which she was forbidden to take.
Such were her propensities; her abilities were quite as
exu'sordina . She never could learn or understand
anything be ore she was taught, and sometimes not even
then, for she was often inattentive, and occasionally
stu id. Her mother was three months in teaching her
cull; to repeat the “ Beggar’s Petition," and, after all,
her next sister Sally could say it better than she did.
Not that Catherine was alwa s stupid; by no means;
she learnt the fable of “ The glare and many Friends,"
as quickly as any girl in England. Her mother wished
her to learn music; and Catherine was sure she should
like it, for she was very fond of inkling the keys of the
old forlorn spinner, so at eight years old she beﬁn.
She learnt a year and could not bear it; and rs
Morlsnd. who did not insist on her daughters being
accomplished in spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed
her to leave of. The day which dismissed the music-
master was one of the of Catherine's life. Her
taste for drawing was not superior; though whenever
she could obtain the outside 0 a letter from her mother,
or seize upon any other odd piece of paper, she did
what she could in that way by drawing houses and
trees, hens and chickens, all very much like one another.
Writing and accounts she was taught by her father;
French by her mother. Her proﬁciency in either was
not remarkable, and she shirked her lessons in both

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3

whenever she could. What a strange unaccountable
character! for with all these symptoms of proliigacy at
ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nhr a had temper,
was seldom stubborn, scarce] ever quarrelsome, and very
kind to the little ones, with interruptions of tyranny.
She was, moreover, noisy and wild, hated conﬁnement
and cleanliness, and loved nothing so well in the world
as rolling down the green slope at the hack of the
house.

Such was Catherine Morland at ten. At ﬁfteen
appearances were mending; she began to curl her hair
and long for balls, her complexion improved, her features
were softened by plumpness and colour, her eyes
gained more animation, and . her ﬁgure more conse-
quence. Her love of dirt gave way to an inclination
for Gnery, and she grew clean as she grew smart; the
had now the pleasure of sometimes hearing her father
and mother remark on her nal im mement.
“ Catherine grows ignite a good-looking girl; she is
almost pretty to-da , ’ were words which caught her
can now and then ; and how welcome were the sounds!
To look alarm pretty is an acquisition of higher delight
to a girl who has been looking plain the ﬁrst ﬁfteen
years of her life than a beauty from her cradle can ever
receive.

Mn Morland was a very good woman, and wished to
see her children everything they ought to be: but her
time was so much occu ied in lying-in and teaching the
little ones, that her el er daughters were inevitably left
to shift for themselves; and it was not very wonderful
that Catherine, who had by nature nothing heroic about
her, should prefer cricket, base ball, riding on horse-
back, and running about the count , at the age of
fourteen, to books, or at least books ginfonnation, lhr,
provided that nothing like useful knowledge could he
gained from them, provided they were all story and no

V/

4 ’ NORTHANGER nanny.

reﬂection, she had never any objection to booh at all.
But from ﬁfteen to eeventeen she was in training for a
heroine; she feed all such works a heroinee mun read
to supply their memories with thoee quotation: whidl
are so serviceable and so soothing in the viciuimdel of
their eventful lives.

From Pope, she lmrnt to censure those who

“ har about the mockery of woe."
From Gray, that

“ Many I ﬂower in barn to blush uueeeu,
And waste lt- hgnno: on the desert air.”

'From Thomson, that
_“ It is l delightful task
To teach the yoyng ldu hos! to shake”

And from Shakepeare she gained a great store of in-
formation: amongst the rest, that

__—u Triﬂes light es air,
Are, to the 'ealnus, oonﬁnunlon strung,
A; proofs a Holy ert."

That

“ The poor beetle. which we tread upon,
In corporal sulfennee feels a pang u greet
As when a glen: dies."

And that a young women in love always looks

—“ llke Petienee on a monument
Smiling ut Grief.”

So far her improvement was auﬂicient, and in many
other points she came on exceedingly well; for though
she could not write sonneta, she brought herself to read
them; end though there seemed no chance of her
throwing a whole party into ruptures by a prelude on the
piano-forte of her own compoeitiou, else could listen to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 5

other people’s performance with very little fatigue. Her
greatest deﬁciency was in the pencil—the had no notion
of drawing—not enough even to attempt a aketch of her
lover’ s profile, that the might be detected in the design.
There she fell miserably short of the true heroic height.
At present she did not know her own poverty, for the
had no lover to pourtray. She had reached the age of
seventeen, without having seen one amiable youth who
could call forth her sensibility: without having inspired
one real passion, and without having excited even any
admiration but what was very moderate and very
transient. This was strange indeed! But strange
things may be generally accounted for if their cause be
fairly searched out. There wu not one lord in the
neighbourhood; no, not even I baronet. There was
not one family among their acquaintance who had
reared and supported a boy accidentally found at their
door; not one young man whose origin was unknown.
Her father had no ward, and the squire of the no
children. '

But when a young lady is to be a heroine, the per-
verseneu of forty surrounding families cannot prevent
her. Something must and will happen to throw a hero
in her way.

Mr Allen, who owned the chief of the property about
Fullerton, the village in Wiltshire where the Morlanda
lived, was ordered to Bath for the beneﬁt of a gouty
constitution; and hisllady, a good-humoured woman,
fond of Misc Motland, and probahl aware that, if
advmturu will not befall a young lidy in her own
village, the mutt leek them abroad, invited her to go
with them. Mr and Mrs Morland were all compliance,
and Catherine all happineu.

6 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

chapter ‘3].

N addition to what has been almdy aid of Catherine

l Morland’a personal and mental endowmenta, when

about to be launched into all the diﬁicultiee and
dangen of a nix weeke’ relidenoe in Bath, it may be
named, for the mder’t more certain information, lent the
following pages ehould otherwise fail of giving any idea
. of what her character is meant to be, that her heart wan
affectionate, her diepoeition cheerful and open, without
conceit or aﬁ'ectatian of any kind; her manners juet
removed from the awkwardness and nhyneu of a girl;
her non pleasing, and, when in good looke. pretty;
and er mind about an ignorant and uninformed u the
female mind at seventeen umlly is.

When the hour of departure drew near, the maternal
anxiety of Mn Modand will be naturally tuppoaed to be
most aevere. A thousand alarming prelentimenu of evil
to her beloved Catherine from this terriﬁc separation must
oppress her heart with sadness, and drown her in tears
for the last day or two of their being together; and
advice of the most important and applicable nature must
of course ﬂow from her wise lips in their parting con-
ference in her closet. Cautions against the violence of
such noblemen and baronett as delight in forcing young
ladies away to tome remote farm-home, mum, at such a
moment, relieve the fulnesa of her heart. Who would
not think no? But Mn Morlnnd knew no little of lords
and baroneta, that the entemined no notion of their
general mischievousneu, and was wholly unmpiciona of
danger to her daughter from their machinationl. Her
caution: were conﬁned to the following intI: “ I beg,
Catherine, you will alwayt wrap your-elixir}: very warm
about the throat when you come from the Roonu at night;
and I with you would try to keep tome account of the

NDRTHANGER ABBEY. 1

money you spend; I will give you this little book on
PW-”

Sally, or rather Sarah (for what young lady of
common gentility will reach the age of sixteen without
altering her name as far as she can .), must from situation
be at this time the intimate friend and conﬁdante of her
sister. It is remarkable, however, that she neither in-
sisted on Catherine’s writing by every post, nor exacted
her promise of transmitting the character of every new
acquaintance, nor a detail of every interesting conversa-
tion that Bath might produce. Everything, indeed,
relative to this impomnt journey was done on the pan
of the Morlands with a degree of moderation and com-
posure, which seemed rather consistent with the common
feelings of common life, than with the reﬁned susceptibili-
ties—the render emotions which the ﬁrst separation of a
heroine from her family ought always to excite. Her
father, instead of giving her an unlimited order on his
banker, or even putting an hundred pounds hank-bill
into her hands, gave her only ten guineas, and promised
her more when she wanted it.

Under these unpromising auspices, the parting took
place and the journey began. It was rformed with
suitable quietness and uneventful safety. either robbers
nor tem earn befriended them, nor one lucky overturn
to int uce them to the hero. Nothing more alarming
occurred than a fear, on Mrs Allen’s side, of having
once left her clogs behind her at an inn, and that for-
tunately proved to be groundless.

They an'ived at Bath. Catherine was all eager de-
light; her eyes were here, there, everywhere, as they
approached its fine and striking environs, and afterwards
drove through those streets which conducted them to the .
hotel. She was come to be happy, and she felt happy
already. .

They were soon settled in comfortable lodgings in
Pulreney Street. »

3 NORTHANGER ABBEV.

It is now expedient to give some description of Mrs
Allen, that the reader may be able to judge, in what
manner her actions will hereafter tend to romote the
genera] distress of the work, and how she wrll probably
contribute to reduce poor Catherine to all the desperate
wretchedness of which a last volume is capable—whether
by her imprudence, vulgarity, or jealousy—whether by
intercepting her letters, nrining her character, or turning
her out of doors.

Mrs Allen was one of that numerousclass of females,
whose society can raise no other emotion than an ‘ze at
there being any men in the world who could like them
well enough to marrythem. She had neither beauty,
genius, uccompliahment, nor manner. The air of a
gentlewoman, a great deal of quiet, inactive good tem-
per, and a triﬂing turn of mind, were all that could
account for her being the choice of a sensible, intelli-
gent man, like Mr Allen. In one respect she was
admirably ﬁtted to introduce a young lady into public,
being as fond of going everywhere and seeing everything
herself, as any young lady could be. Dreu was her
passion. She had a most harmless delight in being ﬁne;
and our heroine’s entrée into life could not take place
till after three or four days had been epent in learning
what was mostly worn, and her chaperon was provided
with a dress of the newest fashion. Catherine, too,
made some purchases herself, and when all these
matrers were arranged, the important evening came
which wasto usher her into the U r Roomr. Her
hair was cut and dreased by the best hand, her clothe.
put on with care, and both Mrs Allen and her maid
declared ehe looked uire as she should do. With
such encouragement, therine hoped at lean to pus
uncensured through the crowd ; as for admiration, it
was always very welcome when it name, but she did not
depend on it

30' 4! A'Hx/g" L

FORTRANle ABBEY. 9

Mrs Allen was so long in dressing that they did not
enter the ball-room till late. The season was full, the
room crowded, and the two ladies squeezed in asvlell as
they could. As fol| Mr Allen, be repaired directly to
the card-room, and left them to enjoy a mob by them-
selves. With more care for the safety of her new
gown than for the comfort of her protegée, Mrs Allen
made her way through the throng of men by the door,
as swiftly as the necessary caution would allow ;

Catherine, however, kept close at her side, and linked '

her arm too firmly within her friend’s to hemm asunder
by any common eﬁ'ort of a struggling assembly. But,
to her utter amazement, she found that to proceed along
the room was by no means the way to disengage them-
Ielvea from the crowd; it seemed rather to increase as
they went on ; whereas she had imagined that, when
once fairly within the door, they should easily ﬁnd seats,
and be able to watch the dances with perfect conveni-
ence. But this was far from being the case; and
though by unwearied diligence they gained even the top
of the room, their situation was just the same: they saw
nothing of the dancers, but the high feathers of some of
the ladies. Still they moved on: something better was
yet in view ; and by a condoned exertion of strength and
ingenuity, they found themselves at last in the passage
behind the highest bench. Here there was something
less of crowd than below ; and hence Miss Morland had
acom rehensive view of all the company beneath her,
and 0 all the dangers of her late passage through them.
ll was a splendid sight ; and she began, for the ﬁmtime
that evening, to feel herself at a ball: she longed to
dance, but she had not an ac uaintance in the room.
Mn Allen did all that she could do in such a case, by
trying very placidly, every now and then, “ I with you
could dance, my dear ; I wish you could geta partner.”
For some time her young friend felt obliged to her for

I o NORTHANGER ABBEY.

these wishes, but they were re ated so often, and
roved so totally ineffectual, that atherine grew tired at
st, and would thank her no more.

They were not long able, however, to enjoy the
repose of the eminence they had so laboriously gained.
Everybody was shortly in motion for tea, and they must
squeeze out like the rest. Catherine began to feel
something of disappointment: she was tired of being
continually pressed against by people, the generality of
whose faces possessed nothing to interest, and with all
of whom she was so wholly unacquainted that she could
not relieve the irksomeness of imprisonment by the ex-
change of a syllable with any of her fellow-ca lives;
and when at last arrived in the tea-room, she elt yet:
more the awkwardness of having no party to join, no
acquaintance to claim, no gentleman to assist them. They
saw nothing of Mr Allen ; and after looking about them
in vain for a more eligible situation, were obliged to sit:
down at the end of a table, at which a large party were
already placed, without having anything to do there, or
anybody to speak to, except each other.

Mrs Allen congratulated herself, as soon as they
were seated, on having preserved her gown from injury.
“ It would have been very shocking to have it torn,”
said she, “ would not it? It is such a delicate muslin.
For my part, I have not seen anything I like so well in
the whole room, I assure you.”

“ How uncomfortable it is,” whispered Catherine,
“ not to have a single acquaintance here! ”

“Yes, my dear,” replied Mrs Allen, with perfect
serenit , “ it is very uncomfortable, ind .”

“ hat shall we do? The gentlemen and ladies at
this table look as if they wondered why we came here ;
We seem forcing ourselves into their party."

“ Aye, so we do. That is very diugreeable. I
wish we had a large acquaintance here.”

NORTEANGER ABBEY. ! l

“ I wish we had an] ,- it would be somebody to go
my.

“ Very true, my dear; and if we knew any body,we
would join them directly. The Skinners were here last
year; I wish they were here now.”

“Had not webettergo awayalit is?
la-things for us, you see.”

“No more there are, indeed. How very provoking l
But I think we had better sit still, for one gets so
Imubled in such a crowd. How is my head, my dear?
Somebody gave me a push that has hurt it I am afraid.”

“No, indeed, it looks very nice. But, dear Mrs
Allen, are you sure there is nobody you know in all
this multitude of people? I think you mu! know
somebody.”

“I don’t, upon my word; I wish I did. I wish I
had a large acquaintance here with all my heart, and
then I should get you a partner. I should be so glad
to have you dance. There goes a strange-looking
woman I What an odd gown she has got onl How
old-fashioned it in! Look at the back.”

After some time they received an offer of tea from
one of their neighbours; it was thankfully accepted,
and this introduced a light conversation with the gentle-
man who offered it, which was the only time that any-
body spoke to them during the evening,_till they were
discovered and joined by Mr Allen when the dance was
aver.

“Well, Miss Morland," said he, directly, “ I hope
you have had an agreeable ball.”

“ Very agreeable, indeed," she replied, vainly endu-
ruuring to hide a great yawn.

“ I wish she had been able to dance,” said his wife;
"I wish we could have got a partner for her. I have
been ying how glad I should be if the Skinners were
here this winter instead of last; or if the Panyl

Here are no

! I NORTHANGER ABBEY.

had come, as they talked of once, she might have
danced with George Parry. I am no sorry she has not
had a ner.”

“ e shall do better another evening, I hope,” was
Mr Allen’s consolation.

The company began to disperse when the dancing
was over: enough to leave space for the remainder to
walk about in some comfort; and now was the time
for a heroine, who had not yet played a very distin-
guished part in the events of the evening, to be noticed
and admired. Every ﬁve minutes, by removing some
of the crowd, gave greater openings for her charms.
She was now seen by many young men who had not
been near her before. Not one, however, started with
rapturous wonder on beholding her, no whisper of eager
inquiry ran round the room, not was she once called a
divinity by anybody. Yet Catherine was in very good
looks, and, had the company only seen her three years
before, they would now have thought her exceedingly
handsome.

She cum looked at, however, and with some admira—
tion; for, in her own healing, two gentlemen pro-
nounced her to be a pretty girl. Such words had their
due efect: she immediately thought the evening plea-
santer than she had found it before, her humble vanity
was contented; she felt more obliged to the two young
men for this simple praise, than a true quali heroine
would have been for ﬁfteen sonnets in celebration of her
charms, and went to her chair in good humour with
everybody, and perfectly satisﬁed with her share of
public attention.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. [3

cbsnttr 33].

VERY morning now brought its regular duties;
E shops were to be visited, some new part of the
town to be looked at, and the Pump-room to be
attended, where they paraded up and down for an hour,
looking at everybody and speaking to no one. The
wish of a numerous acqaintance in Bath was still upper-
most with Mrs Allen, and she repeated it after every
fresh proof, which every morning brought, of her
knowing nobody at all.

They made their appearance in the Lower Rooms;
and here fortune was more favourable to our heroine.
The master of the ceremonies introduced to her a very
gentleman-like young man as a partner; his name was
Tﬂney, He seemed to be about four or ﬁve and
twenty, was rather tall, had a pleasing countenance, a
very intelligent and lively e e, and, if not quite hand-
some, was very near it. is address was good, and
Catherine felt herself in high luck. There was little
leisure for speaking while they danced; but when they
were seated at tea she found him as agreeable as she had
already given him credit for being. He talked with
ﬂuency and spirit, and there was an archness and
pleasantly in his manner which interested, though it
was hardly understood by her. After chatting some
time on such matters as naturally arose from the objects
around them, he suddenly addressed her with—“I
have hitherto been very remiss, madam, in the proper
attentions of a partner here; I have not yet asked you
how long you have been in Bath, whether you were
ever here before, whether you have been at the Upper
Rooms, the theatre, and the concert, and how you like
the place altogether. I have been very negligent; but
are you now at leisure to satisfy me in these particulars?
If you are. I will begin directly."

r4 NORTHANGER ans“.

“ You need not give yourself that trouble, sir.”

“No trouble, I assure you, madam.” Then form-
ing his features into a set smile, and aﬁ‘ectedly softening
his voice, he added, with a simpering air, “ Have you
been long in Bath, madam?”

“ About a week, sir," replied Catherine, trying not
to laugh.

“ Really l ” with aﬂ'ected astonishan

“ Why should you be surprized, sir P ”

“ Why, indeed .’” said he, in his natqu tone ;
“ but some emotion must appear to be raised by your
reply, and surprize is more easily assumed, and not less
reasonable, than any other. Now let us go on. Were
you never here before, madam E"

“ Never, sir.”

“ Indeed! Have you yet honoured the Upper
Rooms i”

“Yes, sir; I was there last Monday.”

“ Have you been to the theatre?”

“ Yes, sir; I was at the play on Tuesday.”

“ To the concert ? ”

“ Yes, sir; on Wednesday.”

“ And are you altogether pleased with Bath 2 ”

“ Yes; I like it very well.”

“ Now I must give one smirk, and then we may be
rational again.”

Catherine turned away her head, not knowing whether
she might venture to laugh.

“ I see what you think of me,” said he, gravely;
“ I shall make but a poor ﬁgure in your journal to-
marrow.”

" My journal ! " .

“ Yes; I know exactly what you will say. Friday,
went to the Lower Rooms; were my sprigged muslin
robe with blue trimmings, plain black shoes; appeared
to much advantage, but was strangely harassed by a

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 5

queer half-witted man, who would make me dance with
him, and distressed me by his nonsense.”

“ Indeed I shall say no such thing.”

“ Shall I tell you what you ought to my i "

“ If you please.”

“ I danced with a very agreeable young man, inu'o-
duced by Mr King; had a great deal of conversation
with him ; seems a most extraordinary genius; hope I
may know more of him. Tbar, madam, is what I «nib
you to say.”

“ But perhaps I keep no journal.”

“ Perhaps you are not sitting in this room, and I am
not sitting by you. These are points in which 1 doubt
is equally possible. Not keep a journal! How are
your absent cousins to understand the tenour of your life
in Bath without one? How are the civilities and com-
pliments of every day to related as they ought to be
unless noted down every evening in a journal! How
are your various dresses to be remembered, and the
particular state of your complexion, and curl of your
hair to be described, in all their diversities, without
having constant recourse to a journal? My dear
madam, I am not so ignorant of young ladies’ ways as
you wish to believe me. It is this delightful habit of
journalizing which largely contributes to form the easy

he of writing for which ladies are so generally
celebrated. Everybody allows that the talent of writing
agreeable letters is peculiarly female. Nature may have
done something, but I am sure it must be essentially
assisted by the practice of keeping a journal.”

“ I have somtimes thought,” said Catherine, doubt-
ingly, “ whether ladies do write so much better letters
than gentlemen. That is, I should not think the
superiority was always on our side."

“ As far as I have had 0 portunity of judging, it
appears to me that the u style of letter<writing

Y

I6 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

among women is faultless, except in three par-
dculsrs.”

“ And what are they ? "

“A general deﬁciency of subject, a total inattention
to stops, and a very frequent ignorance of grammar.”

“ Upon my word, I need not have been afraid of
disclaiming the compliment! You do not think too
highly of us in that war .”

“ I should no more ay it down as a general rule that
women write better letter! than men, than that they
sing better duets, or draw better landscapes. In every
power of which taste is the foundation, excellence is
pretty fairly divided between the sexes.”

They were interrupted by Mrs Allen. “ My dear
Catherine," said she, “ do take this pin out of my sleeve.
I am afraid it has torn a hole already. I shall be quite
sorry if it has, for this is a favourite gown, though it
cost but nine shillings a yard."

"That is exactly what I should have guessed it,
madam," said Mr Tilney, looking at the muslin.

“ Do u understand muslins, sir ?”

“Particularly well; I always buy my own cravats,
and am allowed to be an excellent judge; and my sister
has often trusted me in the choice of a gown. I bought
one for her the other day, and it was pronounced to be
a prodigious bargain by every lady who saw it. I gave
but ﬁve shillings a yard for it, and a true Indian
muslin.”

Mrs Allen was quite struck by his genius. “ Men
commonl take so little notice of those things,” said
she. “ can never get Mr Allen to know one of my
gowns from another. You must be a great comfort to
your sister, sir.”

" I hope I am, madam."

“ And pray, sir, what do [you] think of Miss Mar-
lsnd’s gown? ”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 7

“ It is very re , madam,” said he, gnvely exam-
ining it ; “ but {dﬁot think it will wash welL I am
afraid it will fray.”

“ How can you,’ ’ said Catherine, laughing, “ be
lo——-—? ” she had almost said “ strange.”

“ I am quite of your opinion, sir,” replied Mrs
Allen ; “ and so I told Miss Morland when she bought
it.”

“ But then you know, madam, muslin always turns
to some account or other; Miss Morland will get
enough out of it for a handkerchief, or a cap, or a cloak.
Muslin can never be said to be wasted. I have heard
my sister say so forty times, when she has been extra-
vagant in buying more than she wanted, or careless in
cutting it to pieces."

“ Bath is a charming place, sir; there are so many
good shops here. We are sadly OE in the country:
not but what we have very good shops in Salisbury, but
it is so far to go; eight miles is a long way. Mr Allen
says it is nine, measured nine; but I am sure it cannot
be more than eight; and it is such a fag; I come back
tired to death. Now, here one can step out of doors,
and get a thing in ﬁve minutes."

Mr Tilney was polite enough to seem interested in
what she said; and she kept him on the subject of
muslins till the dancing recommenced. Catherine feared
as she listened to their discourse, that he indulged him-
self a linle too much with the foibles of others.
“ What are you thinking of so earnestly?" said he, as
they walked back to the ballroom; “ not of your
partner, I hope, for by that shake of the head, your
meditations are not satisfactory.”

Catherine coloured, and said, “ I was not thinking of
anything.”

“That is artful and deep, to be sure; but I had
rather be told at once that you will not tell me.”

r8 NORTHANGER assay.

“ Well, then, I will not.”

“ Thank you; for now we shall soon be acquainted,
as I am authorized to tease you on this subject when-
ever we meet, and nothing in the world advances intim-
acy so much.”

They danced again; and when the assembly closed,
parted, on the lady’s side at least, with a strong inclina-
tion for continuing the acquaintance. Whether she
thought of him so much, while she drank her warm
wine and water, and prepared herself for bed, as to
dream of him when there, cannot be ascertained, but I
hope it was no more than in a slight slumber, or a
morning doze at most; for if it be true, as a celebrated
writer has maintained, that no young lady can be
justiﬁed in falling in love before the gentleman’- love
is declared,‘ it must be Very im roper that a young lady
should dream of a gentleman before the gentleman is
ﬁrst known to have dreamt of her. How proper Mr
Tilney might be as a dreamer or a lover, had not yet,
perhaps, entered Mr Allen’s head, but that he was not
objectionable as a common acquaintance for his young
charge, he was on inquiry satisﬁed ; for he had early in
the evening taken pains to know who her partner was,
and had been assured of Mr Tilney’s being a clergyman,
and of a very respectable family in Gloucestershire.

Gibson: 317.

[TH more than usual eagernesa did Catherine
hasten to the Purn room the next day,
secure within herself-of seeing Mr Tilney

there before the morning were over, and ready to meet
him with a smile: but no smile was demanded—Mr

' Vid: I letter from Mr Richardson, No. 97, vol. ii., Rambler.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 19

Tilney did not appear. Every creature in Bath, ex-

himselﬂwu to be seen in the room at diﬂ'erent
periods of the faahionnble houn; crode of people were
every moment paling in and out, n the steps and
down ; people whom nobody cared about, and nobody
wanted to see; and he only was absent. “What a
delightful place Bath is,” laid Mn Allen, as they at
down near the great clock, after parading the room till
they were tired ; “ and how pleasant it would be if we
had any acquaintance here.”

Thin sentiment had been uttered so often in vain,
that Mrs Allen had no pardcular reason to hope it
would be followed with more advantage now; but we
are told to " Despair of nothing we would attain,” as
“Unwearied diligence our point would gain,” and the
unwearied diligence with which the had every day
wished for the same thing was at length to have it! just
reward; for hardly had she been seated ten minutes,
before a lady of about her own age, who was sitting by
her, and had been looking at her attentively for several
minutes, addressed her with great complainnce in these
words :—“I think, madam, I cannot be mistaken; it
is a long time since I had the pleasure of ceing you, but
isnot your name Allen 2" This question answered,
a it readily was, the stranger pronounced her’s to he
Thorpe; and Mrs Allen immediately recognized the
{genres of a forrnerschoolfellow and intimate, whom she
had seen only once since their respective marriages, and
that many years ago. Their joy on this meeting was
very great, as well it might, since they had been con-
tented to know nothing of each other for the last ﬁfteen
yearl- Compliments on good looks now passed; and,
after observing how time had slipped away since they
were last together, how little they had thought of meet-
ing in Bath, and whata pleasure it was to see an old
friend, they proceeded to make enquiries and give in-

:0 NORTHANGER ABE“.

selligence as to their families, sisters, and cousins, talking
both together, far more ready to give than to receive infor-
mation, and each hearing very little what the other said.
Mrs Thorpe, however, had one great advantage as a
talker, over Mrs Allen, in a family of children; and
when she expatiated on the talents of her sons, and the
beauty of her daughters, when she related their different
situations and views, that John was at Oxford, Edward
at Merchant Taylors’, and William at sea, and all of
them more beloved and respected in their dilferent [sta-
tions] than any other three beings ever were, Mrs Allen
had no similar information to give, no similar triumphs
to press on the unwilling and unbelieving ear of her
friend; and was forced to sit and appear to listen to all
these maternal eﬂ’iisions, consoling herself, however,
with the discovery, which her keen eyes soon made,
that the lace on Mrs Thorpe’s pelisse was not half so
handsome as that on her own. '

“ Here come my dear girls,” cried Mrs Thorpe,
pointing at three smart-looking females, who, arm in
ami, were then moving towards her. “ My dear Mrs
Allen, I long to introduce them; the will be so
delighted to see you : the tallest is [sale my eldest;
is not she a fine young woman? The others are very
much admired too, hut I believe Inbella is the hand-
somest.”

The Miss Thorpes were introduced; and Miss Mor-
land, who had been for a short time forgonen, was
introduced likewise. The name seemed to strike them
all; and, after speaking to her with great civility, the
eldest young lady observed aloud to the rest, “ How
excessively like her brother Miss Morland is! ”

“The very icture of him, indeed! ” cried the
mother; and “ i should have known her any where for
his sister!” was repeated by them all, two or three
times over. For a moment Catherine was surprized ;

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 l

but Mrs Thorpe and her daughters had scarcely begun
the history of their acquaintance with Mr James Mor-
land, before she remembered that her eldest brother had
lately formed an intimacy with a young man of his own
college, of the name of Thorpe, and that he had spent
the last week of the Christmas vacation with his family,
near London.

The whole being explained, many obliging things were
laid by the Miss Thorpes of their wish of being better
acquainted with her ; of being considered as already
friends, through the friendship of their brothers, &c.,
which Catherine heard with pleasure, and answered with
all the pretty ex ressions she could command; and, as
the ﬁrst proof 0 amity, she was soon invited to accept
an arm of the eldest Miss Thorpe, and take a turn with
her about the room. Catherine was delighted with this
extension of her Bath acquaintance, and almost forgot
Mr Tilney while she talked to Miss Thorpe. Friend-
ship is certainly the ﬁnest balm for the pangs of
disappointed love.

Their conversation turned upon those subjects of
which the free discussion has generally much to do in
perfecting a sudden intimacy between two young ladies;
such as dress, balls, ﬂirtations, and quizzes. Miss
Thorpe, however, being four years older than Miss
Morland, and at least four years better infomed, had a
very decided advantage in discussing such points. She
could compare the balls of Bath with those of Tun-
bridge; its fashions with the fashions of London; could
rectify the opinions of her new friend in many articles
of tasteful attire; could discover a ﬂirtation between any
gentleman and lady who only smiled on each other;
and point out a quiz through the thickness of a crowd.
These powers received due admiration from Catherine,
to whom they were entirely new; and the respect which
they naturally inspired might have been too glut for

2 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

familiarity, had not the easy gaiety of Miss Thorpc’s
manners, and her frequent expressions of delight on this
acquaintance with her, softened down every feeling of
awe, and left nothing but tender affection. Their
increasing attachment was not to be satisﬁed with half a
dozen turns in the Pump-room, but required, when they
all quitted it together, that Miss Thorpe should accom-
pany Miss Morland to the very door of Mr Allen’s
house; and that they should there part with a most
affectionate and lengthened shake of hands, after learn-
ing, to their mutual relief, that they should see each
other across the theatre at night, and say their prayers
in the same chapel the next morning. Catherine then
ran ‘directly up stairs, and watched Miss Thorpe’s
progress down the street from the drawing-room win-
dow; admired the graceful spirit of her walk, the
fashionable air of her ﬁgure and dress, and felt grateful,
as well she might, for the chance which had procured
her such a friend.

Mrs Thorpe was a widow, and not a very rich one;
she was a good-humoured, well-meaning woman, and
a very indulgent mother. Her eldest daughter had
great personal beauty, and the younger ones, by pre-
tending to be as handsome as their sister, imitating
her air, and dressing in the same style, did very well.

This brief account of the family is intended to
supersede the necessity of a long and minute detail
from Mrs Thorpe herself, of her past adventures and
sufferings, which might otherwise be expected to occupy
the three or four following chapters, in which the
worthlessness of lords and attomies might be set forth ;
and conversations which had passed twenty years
before be minutely repeated.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23

¢bapttr 17.

ATHERINE was not so much engaged at the
theatre, that evening, in returning the nods and
smiles of Miss Thorpe, though they certainly

claimed much of her leisure, as to forget to look with
an inquiring eye for Mr Tilney in every box which
her eye could reach; but she looked in vain. Mr
Tilney was no fonder of the play than the Pump-room.
She hoped to be more fortunate the next day; and
when her wishes for ﬁne weather were answered by
seeing a beautiful morning, she hardly felt a doubt of it;
for a ﬁne Sunday in Bath empties every house of its
inhabitants, and all the world appears on such an
occasion, to walk about, and tell their acquaintance
what a charming day it is.

As soon as divine service was over, the Thorpes and
Allen: eagerly joined each other; and, after staying

g enough in the Pump-room to discover that the
Crowd was insupportable, and that there was not a
genteel face to be seen, which everybody discovers
every Sunday throughout the season, they hastened
away to the Crescent, to breathe the fresh air of better
company. Here Catherine and Isabella, arm in arm,
again tasted the sweets of friendship in an unreserved
Conversan'on. They talked much, and with much
mjoy‘ment; but again was Catherine disappointed in
htr hope of re-seeing her partner. He was no where
to be met with; every search for him was equally
mmccessful, in morning lounges or evening assemblies,
nn'tber at the upper nor lower moms, at dressed or
undressed balls was he perceivable; nor among the
V’l-lkﬂ‘s, the horsemen, or the curricle-drivers of the
morning. His name was not in the Pump-room book,
Ind curiosity could do no more. He must be gone

24 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

from Bath; yet he had not mentioned that his stay
would be so short. This sort of mysteriousness, which
is always so becoming in a hero, threw a fresh grace, in
Catherine’s imagination, around his person and manners,
and increased her anxiety to know more of him. From
the Thorpes she could learn nothing, for they had been
only two days in Bath before they met with Mrs
Allen. It was a subject, however, in which she often
indulged with her fair friend, from whom she received
every possible encouragement to continue to think of
him; and his impression on her fancy was not suffered
therefore to weaken. Isabella was very sure that he
must be a charming young man; and was equally sure
that he must have been delighted with her dear
Catherine, and would therefore shortly return. She
liked him the better for being a clergyman, “for she
must confess herself very pam'al to the profession;”
and something like a sigh escaped her. as she said it.
Perhaps Catherine was wrong in not demanding the
cause of that gentle emotion, but she was not experi-
enced enough in the ﬁnesse of love, or the duties of
friendship, to know when delicate millery was properly
called for, or when a conﬁdence should be forced.

Mrs Allen was now quite happy, quite satisﬁed with
Bath. She had found some acquaintance; had been so
lucky, too, as to ﬁnd in them the family of a most
Worthy old friend; and, as the completion of good
fortune, had found these friends by no means so ex-
pensiver dressed as herself. Her daily expressions
were no longer, “I wish we had some acquaintance in
Bath! ” They were changed into, “ How glad I am
we have met with Mrs Thorpe!” and she was an
eager in promoting the intercourse of the two families
as her young charge and Isabella themselves could be ;
never satisﬁed with the day unless she spent the chief
of it by the side of Mn Thorpe, in what they called

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 25

convention ; but in which there wan scarcely ever any
exchange of opinion, and not often any resemblance of
subject, for Mrs Thorpe talked chieﬂy of her children,
and Mr: Allen of her gowns.

The progrers of the friendrhip between Cadrerine
and lrabella was quick as its beginning had been warm;
and they parsed so rapidly through every gradation of
increaaing tenderness, that thereAwas shortly no freeh
mot” of it to be given to their friends or themselves.
ll'hey called each other by their Chrietian name, were
alny arm-in-arm when they walked, pinned up each
other‘s train for the dance, and were not to be divided
intheset; and, if a rainy morning deprived them of
other enjoymente, they were still recolute [in meeting in
deﬁance of wet and dirt, and lhut themselvee up to
read novela together. Yes, novels; for I will not
adopt that ungenerous and impolitic custom, so common
with novel writers, of degrading, by their contemptuous
canon-e, the very performances to the number of
which they are themselves adding: joining with their
greatest enemies in bestowing the hanheet epithets on
llCh works, and Icarcely ever permitting them to be
lead by their own heroine, who, if she accidentally take
up a novel, is sure to turn over its insipid page. with

' Alas! if the heroine of one novel he not.
patronized by the heroine of another, from whom an
the expect protection and regard? I cannot approve of
It- Let us leave it to the Reviewen to abuee such
rlﬁnione of fancy at their leisure, and over every new
novel to all in threadbare main of the trash with which
the press now groom. Let u not desert one another;
we are an injured body. Although our productions
have afforded more extensive and unaﬂ'ected pleasure
than those of any other literary corporation in the world,
no Ipeciee of composition has been so much decried.
From pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foes are almoet
C

26 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

as many as our readers; and while the abilities of the
nine-hundredth abridger of the History of England, or
of the man who collects and publishes in a volume some
dozen lines of Milton, Pope, and Prior, with a paper
from the Spectator, and a chapter from Sterne, are
eulogized by a thousand pens, there seems almost a
general wish of decrying the ca city and undervaluing
the labour of the novelist, and o slighn'ng the perform-
ances which have only genius, wit, and taste to recom-
mend them. " I am no novel reader; I seldom look
into novels; do not imagine that I often read novels;
it is really very well for a novel." Such is the common
cant. “ And what are you reading, Miss 2”
“Oh! it is .only a novel!” replies the young lady;
while she lays down her book with affected indifference,
or momentary shame. “ It is only Cecilia, or Camilla,
or Belinda; ” or, in short, only some work in which
the greatest powers of the mind are displayed, in which
the most thorough knowledge of human nature, the
happiest delineation of its varieties, the liveliest eﬂiuions
of wit and humour, are conveyed to the world in the
best chosen language. Now, had the same young lady
been engaged with a volume of the Spectator, instead of
such a work, how proudly would she have produced the
book, and told its name! though the chances must be
against her being occupied by any part of that voluminous
publication, of which either the matter or manner would
not disgust a young person of taste; the substance of its
papers so often consisting in the statement of improbable
circumstances, unnatural characters, and topics of con-
versation, which no longer concern any one living; and
their language, too, frequently so coarse as to give no
very favourable idea of the age that could endure it.

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 87

chum: H].

HE following conversation, which took place
between the two friends in the Pump-room one
morning, after an acquaintance of eight or nine

days, is given as a specimen of their very warm attach-
ment, and of the delicacy, discretion, originality of
thought, and literary taste which marked the reasonable-
ness of that attachment.

They met by appointment; and an Isabella had
arrived nearly ﬁve minutes before her friend, her ﬁrst
address naturally was: “ dearest creature, what can
have made you so late? {have been waiting for you
at least this age! ”

“ Have you, indeed? I am very sorry for it, but
rally I thought I was in very good time. It is but
just one. I hope you have not been here long?”

" Oh! these ten ages at least. I am sure I have
been here this half hour. But now, let us go and sit
down at the other end of the room and enjoy ourselves.
I have an hundred things to say to you. In the ﬁrst
place, I was so afraid it would rain this morning just as
I wanted to set of; it looked very showery, and that
would have thrown me into agonies! Do you know I
saw the prettiest hat you can imagine in a shop window
in Milsom Street just now; very like yours, only with
coquelicot ribbons instead of green; I quite longed for
it. But, my dearest Catherine, what have you been
doing with yourself all this morning? Have you gone
on with Udolpho?"

“Yes, I have been reading it ever since I woke;
and I am got to the black veil.”

“Are you, indeed? How delightful! Oh! I
would not tell you what is behind the black veil for the
world! Are not you wild to know ? ”

28 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“Oh! yes, quite; what can it be? But do not tell
me: I would not be told upon any account. I know
it must be a skeleton ; I am sure it is Laurentina’s
skeleton. Oh] I am delighted with the book! I
should like to spend my whole life in reading it, I assure
you; if it had not been to meet you, I would not have
come away from it for all the world.”

“ Dear creature, how much I am obliged to you;
and when you have ﬁnished Udolpho, we will read the
Italian together; and I have made out a list of ten or
twelve more of the ume kind for you.”

“ Have you, indeed! How glad I am! What are
they all ? "

“ I will read you their names directly; here they are
in my pocket-book. Castle of Wolfenbach, Clermont,
Mysterious Warnings, Necromancer of the Black Forest,
Midnight Bell, Orphan of the Rhine, and Horrid
Mysteries. Those will last us some time."

“Yes; pretty well; but are they all horrid? Are
you sure they are all horrid ? ”

“Yes, quite sure; for a pam'cular friend of mine, a
Miss Andrews, a sweet girl, one of the sweetest crea-
tures in the world, has read every one of them. I wish
you knew Miss Andrews, you would be delighted with
her. She is netting herself the sweetest cloak you can
conceive. I think her as beautiful as an angel, and I
am so vexed with the men for not admiring her! I scold
them all amazingly about it.”

“ Scold them! Do you scold them for not admiring
her 2 "

“ Yes, that I do. There is nothing I would not do
for those who are really my friends. I have no notion
of loving people by halves; it is not my nature. My
attachments are always excessively strong. I told Capt.
Hunt, at one of our assemblies this winter, that if he
was to tease me all night, I would not dance with him,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 19

unless he would allow Miss Andrews to he as beautiful
as an angel. The men think us incapable of real friend-
ship, you know, and I am determined to show them
the diﬁ'erence. Now, if I were to hear anybody speak
sligbtingly of you, I should ﬁre up in a moment: but
that is not at all likely, for you are just the kind of girl
to he a great favourite with the men.”

“Oh, dear! " cried Catherine, colouring, “how can
you say so i ”

“I know you ve well; you have so much anima-
tion, which is exac y what Miss Andrews wants; for
I must confess there is something amazingly insipid
about her. Oh! I must tell you, that, just after we
parted yesterday, I w a young man looking at you so
earnestly ; I am sure he is in love with you.” Catherine
coloured, and disclaimed again. Isabella laughed.
“ It is very true, upon my honour; but I see how it is :
you are indiﬁ‘erent to everbe s admiration, except
that of one gentleman, who be nameless. Nay,
I cannot blame you ” (speaking more seriously)—
“ your feelings are easily understood. Where the heart is
really attached, I know very well how little one can be
pleased with the attention of anybody else. Every-
thing is so insipid, so uninteresting, that does not relate
to the beloved object! I can perfectly comprehend
your feelings.”

“ But you should not persuade me that I think so
very much about Mr Tilney, for perhaps I may never
see him again."

I‘ Not see him again! My dearest creature, do not
talk ofit. I am sure you would he miner-able if you
thou ht so."

“ o, indeed; I should not. I do not pretend to
say that I was not very much leased with him; but
while I have Udol ho to read, feel as if nobody could
nuke me mineral: e. Oh ! the dreadful black veil!

30 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

My dear Isabella, I am sure there must be Lanrenu'na's
skeleton behind it."

“ It is so odd to me, that you should never have read
Udolpho before; but I suppose Mrs Morland objects to
novels.”

“ No, she does not. She very often reads Sir Charles
Grandison herself; but new books do not fall in our
wa ."

‘y‘ Sir Charles Gmdison! That is an amazing
horrid book, is it not? I remember Miss Andrews
could not get through the ﬁrst volume.”

“ It is not like Udolpho at all ; but yet I think it is
very entertaining.”

“Do you indeed? you surprize me; I thought it
had not been readable. But, my dearest Catherine,
have you settled what to wear on your head to-night?
I am determined, at all events, to ' be dressed exactly
like you. The men take notice of that sometimes, you
know.”

“ But it does not signify, if they do," aid Catherine,
very innocently,

“Signify! oh havens! I make it a rule never to
mind what they say. They are very often amazingly
impertinent, if you do not treat them with spirit, and
make them keep their distance.”

“Are they? Well, I never observed that. They
always behave very well to me.”

“Oh! they give themselves such airs. They are
the most conceited creatures in the world, and think
themselves of so much importance ! By-the-bye, though
I have thought of it a hundred times, I have always
forgot to ask you what is your favourite complexion in
a man. Do you like them best dark or fair? ”

“I hardly know. I never much,thonght about it.
Something between both, I think ; brown : not ﬁir,
and not very dark."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3 I

“ Very well, Catherine. That is exactly be. I
have not forgot your description of Mr Tilney: ‘ a
brown skin, with dark eyes, and rather dark hair.’
Well, my taste is different. I prefer light eyes; and
as to complexion, do you know, I like a sallow bener
than any other. You must not betray me, if you should
ever meet with one of your acquaintance answering that
description."

“ Betray you! What do you mean ? ”

“ Nay, do not distress me. I believe I have mid too
much. Let us drop the subject.”

Catherine, in some amazemeng‘complied; and, after
maining a few moments silent, was on the point of re-
verting to what interested her at that time rather more
than anything else in the world, Laurentina's skeleton ;
when her friend prevented her, by saying: “ For
Heaven’s sake ! let us move away from this end of the
room. Do you know, there are two odious young men
who have been staring at me this half hour. They
really put me quite out of countenance. Let us go and
look at the arrivals. They will hardly follow us there.”

Away they walked to the book; and while Isabella
examined the names, it was Catherine’s employment to
watch the proceedings of these alarming young men.

“ They are not coming this way, are they? I hope
they are not so impeninent as to follow us. Pray let
me know if they are coming. I am determined I will
not look up.”

In a few moments Catherine, with unaffected plea-
sure, mured her that she need not be longer uneasy, as
the gentlemen had just left the Pump-room.

“ And which way are they gone? ” said Isabella,
turning hastily round. “ One was a very good-looking
young man.”

" They went towards the churchyar ”

“ Well, I am amazingly glad I have got rid of them!

is

32 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

And now, what any you to going to Edgar’n Building-
with me, and looking at my new hat? You said you
Ihould like to see it."

Catherine readily agreed. “ Only,” the added,
“ perhaps we may overtake the two young men.”

“ 0h ! never mind that. If we make hate, we nhnll
pm by them presently, and I am dying to show you
my hat.”

“ But if we only wait a few minutes, there will beno
danger of our aeeing them at all.”

“ I shall not pay them any such compliment, 1 nature
you. I have no notion of treating men with such re-

Tlva: in the way to spoil them."

Catherine had nothing to oppose againut such mann-
ing; and therefore, to show the ind dence of Miss
The , and her resolution of humhﬁg the sex, they
net 0 immediately,“ fast a they could walk, in pur.
unit of the two young mam .

 

chapter 19]].

ALF a minute conducted them through thePump-
H yard to the archway, appetite Union Pamge; but

here they were stopped. Everybody acquainted
with Bath may remember the diﬁicultiee of crossing Cheap
Street at this point ; it is indeed a street of no lmpertlne'nt
a nature, I no unfortunately connected with the great
London and Oxford made, and the principal inn of the
city, that a. day never passes in which parties of ladies,
however important their bunineu, whether in queut of
pantry, millinery, or even (an in the present cane) of
young men, are not detained on one tide or other by
carriages, horsemen, or cam. This evil had been felt
and lamented, at leaat three timet a day, by Inhella

NORTHANGER ssnnv. 33

ince her residence in Bath; and she was now fated to
feel and lament it once more ; for at the very moment
of coming opposite to Union Passage, and within view
of the two gentlemen who were proceeding through the
crowds, and threading the gutters of that interesting
alley, they were prevented crossing by the approach of a
gig, driven along on bad pavement by a most knowin -
looking coachman, with all the vehemence that on d
most ﬁtly endanger the lives of himself, his companion,
and his horse.

“0h, these odious gigs! " said Isabella, looking up,
“how I detest theml ” But this damnation, though
I0 just, was of short duration, for she looked again, and
exclaimed, “Delightﬁill Mr Morland and my
brother! ”

“Good heaven! ’u's James!" was uttered at the
ﬂme moment by Catherine; and, on catching the young
men’s eyes, the horse was immediately checked with 3
Violence which almost threw him on his haunches, and the
IErnnt having now scampered up, the gentlemen
M, and the equipage was delivered to his care.

Catherine, by whom this meeting was wholl unex-
Pmed, received her brother with the liveliest p easure;
and he, being of a very amiable disposition, and sincerely
mashed to her, gave every proof on his side of equal
Hﬁlfacn‘on, which he could have leisure to do, while the
bfight eyes of Miss Thorpe were incessantly challenging
hlf notice; and to her his devoin were speedily paid,
With a mixture of joy and embarrassment which might
have informed Catherine, had she been more expert in
'lit development of other people’s feelings, and less
llaply engrossed by her own, that her brother thought
her friend quite as pretty as she could do herself.

John Thorpe, who in the mntime, had been giving
0fch about the horses, soon joined them, end from
him the directly received the amends which were her

34 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

due; for while he slightly and carelessly touched the
hand of Inbella, on her he bestowed a whole scrape
and halfo short bow. He was a Rout young man, of
middling height, who, with a plain face and ungraceful
form, seemcd fearful of being too handsome, unless he
wore the dress of a groom, and too much like a gentle.
man unless he were easy where he ought to be civil, and
impudent where he might be allowed to be euy. He ‘
took out his watch : “How long do you think we have
been running it from Tetbury, Miss Morland 2”

“I do not know the distance.” Her brother told
her that it was twenty-three miles.

" Tbree and twenty! " cried Thorpe; “ﬁve and
twenty if it is an inch.” Morland remonstrated,
pleaded the authority of road-books, innkipers, and
milestones; but his friend disregarded them 3 he had
a surer test of distance. " I know it must be ﬁve and
twenty,” said he, “ by the time we have been doing it.
It is now half after one; we drove out of the inn-yard
at Tetbury as the town-clock struck eleven; and I defy
any man in England to make my horse go less than ten
miles an hour in harness; that makes it exactly twenty-
ﬁve."

“ You have lost an hour," said Morland ; “ it was only
ten o'clock when we came from Tetbury.”

“ Ten o’clock ! it was eleven, upon my soul ! I
counted every stroke. This brother of yours would
persuade me out of my senses, Miss Morland; do but
ook at my horse; did you ever see an animal so
made forspeed in your life?” (The servant had just
mounted the carriage_ and was driving off.) “Such
true blood! Three hours and s half, indeed, coming
only three and twenty miles! Look at that creature,
and suppose it possible if you can."

“He the: look very hot to be sure! "

“Hot! he had not turned a hair till we came to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 35

Walcot church: but look at hie forehead; look at h;
loin; ; only see how he moves ; that horse :mugo le-
than ten miles an hour: tie his legs, and he will get on.
What do you drink of my gig, Min Morland? A neat
one, ia it not? Well hung; town built: I have not
had it a month. It was built for a ChriIt—church man,
I friend of mine, a very good Iort of fellow; he ran it
I few weeks, till, I believe, it was convenient to have
done with it. I happened jult then m be looking out
for name light thing of the kind, though I had preny
well denermined on a curricle too; but I chanced to
meet him on Magdalen Bridge, as he wan driving into
Oxford, lam: term: ‘Ah! Thorpe,’ said he, ‘do you
luppen to want such a little tlung at this? It in a
mpital one of the kind, but I am cursed tired of it.’
‘Oh! d ,' said I, ‘I am your man; what do you
uk?’ And how much do you think he did, Miss
Morland ? ”

“I am sure I cannot gueu at all.”

“Curricle-hung, you see; near, trunk, sword-cue,
plating-board, lampa, silver moulding, all, you see,
in late; the iron-work as good as new, ‘or better.
He asked fifty guineas: I closed with him directly,
Vhrew down the money, and the carriage was mine.”

“ And I am sure,” said Catherine, “ I know no little
of and: things, that I cannot judge whether it was cheap
or dear."

“Neither one nor t’other; I might have got it for
ls, I dare I: ; but I hate haggling, and poor Freeman
wanted calh.’

“That was very good-natured of you," said
Catherine, quite pleased.

“Oh ! d— it, when one has the means of doing a
kind thing by a friend, I hate to be pitiful."

An inquiry now took place into the intended move-
ment: of the young ladies; and, on ﬁnding whither they

 

36 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

were going, it was decided that the gentlemen Ihonld
accompany them to Edgar'e Buildinge, and pay their
reapecttto Mn Tho . James and Ihella ed the
way; and so well uniﬁed was the latter with her lot,
In contentedly was the endmvouring to enmre a pleamt
walk to him who brought the double recommendation of
being her brother’s friend and her friend’s brother, so
pure and uncoqnetu'sh were her feelings, that, though
th overtook and passed the two offending young men
in ilaom Street, the was I0 far from necking to attract
their notice, that she looked back at them only three
"HICK-

John Thorpe kept of course with Catherine, and,
after afew minutee silence, renewed the convetudon
about his gig: “You will ﬁnd, however, Min Mor-
land, it would be reckoned a cheap thing by some
people, for I might have sold it for ten guinea: more
the next day ; Jackwn, of Oriel, bid me sixty at once ;
Morland wan with me at the time.”

“Yes,” laid Morland, who overheard this; “but
you forget that your horse wan inclnd ”

“ My horse! ch, d—— it! I would not sell my
horse for a hundred. Are you fond of an open carri-
age, Mina Morland ?”

“Yes, very; I have hardly ever an opportunity of
being in one; but I am particularly fund 0 it.”

“ I am glad of it; I will drive you out in mine every
d3 .,1

a Thank you,” said Catherine, in tome distress, from
I doubt of the propriety of accepting such an ofer.

“ I will drive you up Lanadown Hill Io-morrnw.”

“ Thank you ; but will not your hone want
rent ? ”

“ Rent! he hu only come three and twenty miles
to-day; all nonsense; nothing ruins hone: to much at
rest; nothing knock- them up to noon. No, no ; I

HORN-[ANGER ABBEY. 31

shall exercise miueat the average of four hours every
while I am here.”

“ Shall you, indeed ? ” laid Catherine, very seriously,
“that will be forty miles a day."

“ Forty ! aye, ﬁfty for what I care. Well, I will drive
you rig Lansdown to—morrow ; mind, I am engaged.”

“ ow delightful that will be! " cried Isabella,
turning round; “ my dearest Catherine, I quite envy
you ; but I am afraid, brother, you will not have room
for a thir "

“ A third, indeed! no, no ; I did not come to Bath
to drive 3 sisters about; that would be a good joke,
faith ! orland must take care of you.”

This brought on a dialogue of civilities between the
other two; but Catherine heard neither the particulars
nor the result. Her companiou’s discourse now sunk
from it: hitherto animated pitch, to nothing more than a
thort, decirive sentence of praise or condemnation on the
face of every woman they met; and Catherine, after
listening and agreeing as long as she could, with all the
civility and deference of the youthful female mind,
fearful of hazarding an opinion of its own in opposition
to that of a self-assured man, especially where the beauty
of her own sex is concerned, ventured at length to vary
the subject by a question which had been long upper-
most in her thoughts: it was, “Have you ever read
‘Udol ho,’ Mr Thorpe i”

“ ‘ﬁdolpho ! ’ ob, Lordl not I ; I never read
novels; I have something else to do.”

Catherine, humbled and ashamed, was going to
apologize for her question; but he prevented her
saying, “ Novels are all so full of nonsense and so: !
there has not been a tolerably decent one come out
ince ‘ Tom Jones,’ except the ‘ Monk ; ’ I read that
t’otlner day; hutas for all the otherqthey are the
nupidelt things in creation.

38 NORTHANGIR sunny.

“ I think you must like ‘ Udolpho,’ if you were to
read it; it is so very interesting.”

“Not I, faith! No,if I read any, it shall be Mrs
Radcliﬁ‘e’s; her novels are amusing enough; they are
worth reading ; some fun and nature in tbnn.”

“ Udolpho was written by Mrs Radcliffe,” said
Catherine, with some helimion, From the fear of mor-
tifying him.

“ No, sure; was it? Aye, I remember, so it was;
I was thinking of that other stupid book, written by that
woman they make such a fnls about; she who married
the French emigrant."

“ I suppose you mean Camilla

“ Yes, that ’s the book; such unnatural m5! An
old man playing at see-saw; I took up the ﬁn volume
once, and looked it over, burl soon found it would not
do ; indeed, I guessed what sort of stuff it must be
before I saw it: as soon as I heard she had man-ied an
emigrant, I was sure I should never be able to get
through it.”

“ I have never read it.”

“ You had no loss, I assure you; it is the horridest
nonsense you can imagine; thereisnolhing in the world
in it but an old man’s playing at nee-saw and learning
Latin ; upon my soul, there is not.”

This critique, the justness of which was unfortunately
lost on poor Catherine, brought them to the door of
Mrs Thorpe's lodgings, and the feelings of the discern-
ing and unprejudiced reader of Caman gave way to the
feelings of the dutiful and aﬁ'ecn'onate son, as they met
Mrs Thorpe, who had descried them from above, in the
passage. “ Ah, mother, how do you do E ” said he,
giving her a hearty shake of the hand : “ where did you
get that quiz of a hat, it makes you look like an old
witch? Here is Morland and I come to my a few
days with you; so you must look out for a couple of

.n

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 39

good beds some where near.” And this address
seemed w satisfy all the fondest wishes of the mother’s
heart, for she received him with the most delighted and
exulu'ng aﬁaion. On his two younger sisters he then
bestowed an equal portion of his fraternal tenderness, for
he asked each of them how they did, and observed that
they both looked very ugly.

These manners did not please Catherine; but he was
James’s friend and Isabella’s brother; and her judg-
ment was further bought 05‘ by Isabella’s assuring her,
when they withdrew to see the new hot, that John
thought her the most charming girl in the world, and
by John’s engaging her before they parted to dance with
him that evening. Had she been older or vainer, such
attacks might have done little; but where youth and
diﬁidence are united, it requires uncommon steadiness of
reason to resist the attraction of being called the most
charming girl in the world, and being so very early
engaged as a partner; and the consequence was, that
when the two Morlands, after sitting an hour with the
I‘horpes, set off to walk together to Mr Allen's, and
Iarnes, as the door was closed on them, said, “ Well,
Catherine, how do you like my friend Thorpe 2 ” in-
stead of answering, as she probably would have done,
had there been no friendshi and no ﬂattery in the case,
“ I do not like him at all ; ’ she directly replied, “I like
him very much; he seems very agreeable."

“ He is as good-natured a fellow as ever lived; a
little of a rattle; but that will recommend him no your
sex, I believe: and how do you like the rest of the
family ? ”

“ Very, very much indeed : Isabella particularly.”

“ I am very glad to hear you say so: she is the
kind of young woman I could wish to see you attached
to; she has so much good sense, and is so thoroughly
unaﬁeeted and amiable; I always wanted you to know

4O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

her; and she seems very fond of you. She aid the
highest things in your praise that could possibly be;
and the praise of such a girl as Miss Thorpe, even you,
Catherine,” taking her hand with affection, “may be
proud of.”

“Indeed I am,” she replied; “I love her exceed-
ingly, and am delighted to ﬁnd that you like her too.
You hardly mentioned anything of her when you wrote
to me after your visit there.”

“ Because I thought I should soon see you myself.
I hope you will be a great deal mgether while you are
in Bath. She is a most amiable girl; such a so "or
understandingl How fond all the family are her;
she is evidently the general favourite; and how much
she gun be admired in such a place as this. Is not
she . ’

“ Yes, very much, indeed, I fancy; Mr Allen thinks
her the rettest girl in Bath.”

“ I dare say he does; and I do not know any man
who is a better judge of bauty than Mr Allen. I need
not ask you whether you are happy here, my dear
Catherine ; with such a companion and friend as
Isabella Thorpe, it would be impossible for you to be
otherwise; and the Allens, I am sure, are very kind to
you. ’

“ Yes, very kind; I never was so happy before; and
now you are come it will be more delightful dun ever.
How good it is of you to come so far on purpose to see

;

James accepted this tribute of gratitude, and qualiﬁed
his conscience for accepting it too, by saying with lper-
fect sincerity, “ Indeed, Catherine, I love you dear y.”

Inquiries and communications concerning brothers
and sisters, the situation of some, the growth of the rest,
and other family matters, now passed between them,
and continued, with only one mall digression on James's

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 4 I

in praise of Miss Thorpe, till they reached
mey Street, where he was welcomed with great
kindnele by Mr and Mrs Allen, invited by the former
In dine with them, and summoned by the latter to guess
the price and weigh the merita of a new muff and tippet.
A pure-engagement in Edgar’s Building! prevented his
accepting the invitation of one friend, and obliged him
to hurry away assoon as he had ntisﬁecl the demands
of the other. The time of the two partiea' uniting in the
Octagon Room being comedy adjusted, Catherine was
then left to the luxury of a raised, restless, and frightened
imagination over the pages of Udolpho, lost from all
worldly concems of dressing and dinner, incapable of
soothing Mrs Allen’s fears on the delay of an expected
drenmaker, and having only one minute in sixty to
bestow even on the reﬂection of her own felicity, in
hing already engaged for the evening.

Chant" 17133.

N spite of Udolpho and the dressmaker, however, the
rty from Pulteney Street reached the Upper-
ooma in very good time. The Thorpes and

James Morland were there only two minutes before
them; and Isabella having gone through the usual
Ceremonial of meeting her friend with the most emiling
and aﬁ'ecu'onate haste, of admiring the set of her gown,
and envying the curl of her hair, they followed their
chaperons, arm-in-ann, into the ball-room, whispering
tn ach other whenever a thought occurred, and sup-
plying the place of many ideas by a squeeze of the hand
or a amile of affection.

The dancing began within a few minutes after they

were Ieated; and James, who had been engaged quite
D

42 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

u long on his sister, wu very irnportunnte with labella
to «and up; but John wan gone into the card-room to
lpeak to a friend, and nothing, the declared, thould
induce her to join the net before her dear Catherine
could join it too. “ I assure you,” raid the, “ I would
not and up without your dr sister, for all the world ;
for if I did, we Ihnuld certainly be Iepanted the whole
evening.” Catherine accepted thil kindneu with grati-
hide, and they continued on they were for three minutes
longer, when Inhella, who had been talking to James
on the other ride of her, turned again to hil liner and
whispered, “ My dear creature,l am afraid I mutt leave
you, your brother in no amazingly impatient to begin ; I
know you will not mind my going away, and I dare lay
John will be back in a moment, and then you may easily
ﬁnd me out.” Catherine, though I little diuppointed,
had too much good nature to make any opposition, and
the other: rising up, thella had only time to pre- her
friend’s hand and say, “ -bye, m dear love," before
they hurried all. The younger 'u Thorpe. being
also dancing, Catherine was left to the mercy of Mn
Thorpe and Mrs Allen, between whom the now
remained. She could not he] being vexed at the non-
appearance of Mr Thorpe: gr the not only longed to
be dancing, but wan likewise aware that, an the real
dignity of her situation could not be known, the war
sharing with the scores of other young' ladie- ttill sitting
down all the dimredit of wanting a partner. To be
dilgraced in the eye of the world, to wear the appear-
ance of infamy while her heart in all 'ty, her action;
:11 innocence, and the misconduct 0 another the true
ecuree of her dehaaement, is one of thee circummcn
which peculiarly belong to the heroine’a liqu her
fortitude under it what particularly digniﬁu her charac-
ter. Catherine had fortitude too; Illa mﬂ'ered, but no

murmur paued her lipe.

NORTKANGER ABBEY. 43

From this atate of humiliation the wan roused, at the
end of ten minutes, to a pleasant-2r feeling, by aeeing,
not Mr Thorpe, but Mr Tilney, within three yards of
the place where they ant: he seemed to be moving that
way, but he did not lee her, and, therefore, the smile
and the blush, which his sudden re-appearance raised in
Catherine, passed away without rullying her heroic
importance. He looked as handsome and as lively at
ever, and wan talking with interest to a fashionable and
pleasing-looking young woman, who leant on his arm,
and whom Catherine immediately guessed to be hil
litter; thu- unthinkingly throwing away a ﬁrir oppor-
tunity of considering him lost to her for ever, by being
mamed already. But, guided only by what was Iimple
and probable, it had never entered her head that Mr
Tilney could be married; he had not behaved, he had
not talked, like the married men to whom Ihe had been
need; he had never mentioned a wife, and he had ac-
knowledged a ﬁtter. From then: circumnanoeo apnng
the innant conclusion of his Iiater’l now being by hie
tide; and, therefore, inmad of turning of a deathlike
pdeneet, and falling in a ﬁt on Mn Allen'a bosom,
Catherine tat erect, in the perfect nae of her IEIIICI, and
with cheeks only a little redder than usual.

Mr Tilney and his companion, who continued,
though dowly, to approach, were immediately preceded
by a lady, an acquaintance of Mrs Thorpe; and thin
lady an ing to speak to her, they, as belonging to her,
mappedpgkewiae, and Catherine, catching Mr Tilney’l
eye, inmntly received from him the smiling tribute of
recognition. She returned it with pleasure, and then
advancing atill nearer, he Ipoke both to her and Mn
Allen, by whom he was very uvilly acknowledged.
“I am very hap yto see you again, air, indeed; I wan
afraid you had eft Beth.” He thanked her for her
furynndeaidthatbe hadquitteditfor aweekonthe

44 NORTKANGER ABBEY.

very morning after his having had the pleantre of seeing
her.

“ Well, air, and I dare lay you are not aorry to be
back again, for it is the place for young p 1:;
and, indeed, for everybody else too. I tell Mr men,
when he talks of being sick of it, that I am sure he
Ihould not complain, for it ll so very agreeable a place,
that it in much better to be here than at home at this
dull time of year. I tell him he is quite in luck to be
sent here for his health."

“ And I hope, madam, that Mr Allen will be
obliged to like the place, ﬁ'om ﬁnding it of eenice to
him.”

“ Thank you, air. I have no doubt that he wilL A
neighbour of ours, Dr Skinner, was here for his health
last winter, and came away quite ﬂout.”

“ That circumstance must give great encouragement.”

" Yes, air; and Dr Skinner and hie family were here
three months; so I tell Mr Allen he mustat be in a
hu to get away."

ere they were interrupted by a request from Mrs
Thorpe to Mrs Allen, that she would move a little to
accommodate Mr: Hughes and Miss Tilney with seats,
as they had agreed to join their party. This wan
accordingly done, Mr Tilney still continuing standing
before them; and, after a few minutes’ consideration,
he asked Catherine to dance with him. This compli-
ment, delightful as it was, produced severe mortiﬁcation
to the lady; and, in giving her denial, she expressed
her sorrow on the occasion so very much as iflhe really
felt it, that had Thorpe, who joined her afterwards,
been half a minute earlier, he might have thought her
suffering. rather too acute. The very easy manner in
which he then told her that he had kept her waiting,
did not by any means reconcile her more to her lot; nor
did the particulars which he entered into while they

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 45

were standing up, of the horses and dogs of the friend
whom he had just left, and of a proposed exchange of
terriers between them, interest her so much as to prevent
lier looking we often towards that pan of the room
where she had eft Mr Tilney. Of her dear Isabella,
to whom she particularly longed to point out that gende-
man, she could see nothing. They were in different
sets. She was separated from all her party, and away
from all her acquaintance; one mortiﬁcatiou succeeded
another, and from the whole she deduced this useful
lesson, that to go previously engaged to a ball does
not necessarily increase either the dignity or enjoyment
of a young lady. From such a momliuug strain as this
she was suddenly roused by a touch on the shoulder,
and turning round, rceived Mrs Hughes directly
behind her, attended be Miss Tilney and a gentleman.
"I beg your pardon, 'ss Morlaud,” said she, “for
this liberty, but I cannot anyhow get to Miss Thorpe ;
and Mrs Th said she was sure you would not have
the least objecnon to letting in this young lady by you.”
Mrs Hughes could not have a plied to any creature in
the room more happy to oblige her than Catherine.
The young ladies were introduced to euh other, Miss
Ttlney expressing a proper sense of such goodness ; Miss
Morland, with the real delicacy of a generous mind,
maﬂng light of the obligation; and Mrs Hughes. satis-
ﬁed with having so respectath settled her young charge,
returned to her party.

Miss Tilney had a good ﬁgure, a pretty face, and a
my a e commance; and her air, though it had
not the decided pretension, the resolute nilishneu,
of Miss Thorpe’s, had more real elegance. Her man-
ners shewed good sense and good breeding; they were
neither shy, nor aﬂectedly open; and she seemed
capable of being young, attractive, and at a ball, without
wanting to ﬁx the attention of every man near her, and

46 FORTRANGER ABBEY.

without exaggerated feelings of extatic delight or in.
conceivable vexation on eve little triﬂing occurrence.
Catherine, interested at once y her appearance and her
relationship to Mr Tilney, was desirous of being ac-
quainted with her, and readily talked, therefore, when-
ever she could think of anything to say, and had courage
and leisure for saying it. But the hindrance thrown in
the way of a very speedy intimacy, by the frequent want
of one or more of these requisites, prevented their doing
more than going through the ﬁrst rudiments of an
acquaintance, by informing themselves how well the
other liked Bath, how much she admired its building:
and surrounding county; whether she drew, or played,
or sang, and whether e was fond of riding on horse-
back.

The two dances were scarcely concluded, before
Catherine found her arm gently seized by her faithful
Isabella, who in great spirits exclaimed, “At last I
have got you. My dearest creature, I have been looking
for you this hour. What could induce you to come
into this set, when you knew I was in the other? I
have been quite wretched without you."

“My dear Isabella, how was it possible for me to

et at you? I could not even see where you were.”

“ So I told your brother all the time, but he would
not believe me. Do go and see for her, Mr Morland,
said I ; but all in vain, he would not stir an inch. Was
not it so, Mr Morland? But you men are all so im-
moderately lazy! I have been scolding him to such a
degree, my dear Cathering you would be quite amazed.
You know I never stand upon ceremony with such

0 le.

‘ylmok at that young lady with the white beads
round her head," whispered Catherine, detaching her
friend from Jamel: “it is Mr Tilney's sister.”

“ Oh heavens ! you don’t say so! Let me loolr at

NORTHANGER assay. 47

her this moment. What a deli tful girl! I never
ﬂw anything half so beautiful! ut where is her all-
conquering brother? Is he in the room! Point him
outtomethisiustant,ifheis;ldie to seehim.
Mr Morland, you are not to listen; we are not talking
about you.’ ’

“But what is all this whispering about? What ,is
going on ? ”

“There now, I knew how it would be! You men
have such restless curiosityl Talk of the curiosity of
women, indeed! ’tis nothing. But be satisﬁed; for
you are not to know anything at all of the matter.”

" And is that likely to satisfy me, do you think 2 ”

“ Well, I declare, I never knew anything like you.
What can it signif to you, what we are talking of .’
Perhaps we are king about you; therefore I would
advise you not to listen, or you may happen to hear
something not very agreeable.”

In this common-place chatter, which lasted some
time, the original subject seemed entirely forgotten; and
though Catherine was very well pleased to have it
dropped for a while, she could not avoid a little sus-
picion at the total sussensiou of all Isabella’s impatient
desire to see Mr T' ney. When the orchestra struck
up a fresh dance, James would have led his fair partner
amy,hut she resisted. “I tell you, Mr Morland,”
she cried, “I would not do such a thing for all the
world. How can you be so teasing! Only conceive,
m dar Catherine, what your brother wants me to do?
Hy: wants me to dance with him again, though I tell
him that it is a most improper thing, and entirely against
the rules. It would make us the talk of the place, if
we were not to change err.”

“ n my honour, ’ said James, “in these public
nuernh ies it is as often done as not.”

“Nonsense, how can you ﬂy so? But when you

48 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

men have a point to carry, you never stick at anything.
My sweet Catherine, do In rt me; penuade your
brother how impolsible it in. ell him, that it would
quite shock you In see me do Iuch a thing; now would
not it P "

“No, not at all; but if you think it wrong, you had
much better change."

“There,” cried Ibella, “you hear what your inner
says, and yet you will not mind her. Well, remember
that it is not m fault, if we set all the old ladiee in Bath
in a buetle. game along, my dearest Catherine, for
heaven’l lake, and stand by me." And of they went to
regain their former place. John Thorpe,in the meanwhile,
had walked away ; and Catherine, ever willing to give Mr
Tilney an opportunity of repeating the agreeable requelt
which had already ﬂattered her once, made her way to
Mrs Allen and Mn Tho as fast as the could, in
the hope of ﬁnding him nil with them, a hope which,
when it proved to be fmitless, the felt to have been
highly unreasonable. “ Well, my dear,” laid Mn
Thorpe, impatient for praise of her Ion, “I hope you
have had an agreeable partner.”

" Very agreeable, madam.”

“I am glad of it. John ban charming spiritl, has
not he E"

“Did you meet Mr Tilney, my dear?” laid Mn
Allen.

“No: where in he?”

“ He was with us now, and laid he war no tired
of lounging about, that he wa- resolved to go and dance;
so I thought perhapl he would oak you, if he met with

om"
y “ Where can he be P ” eaid Catherine, looking round;
but she had not looked round long, before the av him
leading a young lady to the dance.

“Ah! hehugotapartner; I wilh be had naked

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 49

you," said Mrs Allen; and after a short silence, Ihe
added, “ he is a very agreeable young man.”

“Indeed he in, Mr- Allen," said Mn Thorpe,
smiling complacently; “ I must say it, though I am hi-
mother, that there is not a more agreeable young man
in the world.”

This inapplicable answer might have been too much
for the comprehension of many; but it did not puzIJc
Mrs Allen; for, after only a moment’s consideration,
the said, in a whisper, to Catherine, “ I dare my she
thought I was speaking of her son."

Catherine was disap inted and vexed. She seemed
to have missed, by so ittle, the very she had had
in View; and this persuaaion did not incline her to a
v lacious l , when John Tho came in wher
waggafterwaﬂ "and said, “Well,rPl:Iiss Moi'land, I

ouandIare to stand u and 'i it ether
3'“??? 2”? P J E “’8

“ Oh, no | I am much obligedto you, our two dances
are over; and, besides, I am tired, and do not mean to
dance any more.”

“ Do not you? then let us walk about and quiz
people. Come along with me, and I will show you
the four grates: quizzers in the room; my two younger
sisters and their partneru. I have been laughing at them
llin half hour.”

Again Catherine excused herself; and at last he
walked off to quiz his linen by himself. The rest of
the evening she found very dull ; Mr Tilney was drawn
away from their party at tea to attend that of his partner ;
Mile Tilney, though belonging to it, did not sit near
her ; and James and Isabella were so much engaged in
conversing together, that the letter had no leisure to
bestow more on her friend than one smile, one squeeze,
and one "dearest Catherine.”

50 NORTHAN GER ABBEY.

chum 1!.

HE progress of Catherine’s unhappiness from the
events of the evening was as follows. It ap-
peared ﬁrst in a general dissatisfaction with

everybody about her, while she remained in the rooms,
which 15ndin brought on considerable weariness and a
violent esire to go home. This, on sn-iving in Pul-
teney Street, took the direction of extraordinary hunger,
and when that was appeased, changed into an earnest
longing to be in bed. Such was the extreme 'int of
her distress: for when there she immediately ell into
a sound sleep, which lasted nine hours, and from which
she awoke perfectly revived, in excellent spirits, with
fresh hopes and fresh schemes. The ﬁrst wuh of her
heart was to improve her ac uaintance with Miss
Tilney, and almost her ﬁrst reso ution to seek her for
that purpose in the Pump-room at noon. In the
Pump-room one so newly arrived in Bath must he met
with; and that building she had already found so
favourable for the discovery of female excellence, and
the completion of female intimacy, so admirably adapted
for secret discourses and unlimited conﬁdence, that she
was most reasonably encouraged to expect another
friend from within its walls. Her plan for the morn.
ing thus settled, she sat quietly down to her book after
breakfast, resolving to remain in the same place and the
me employment till the clock struck one; and from
habitude very little incommoded by the remarks and
ejaculations of Mrs Allen, whose vacancy of mind, and
incapacity for thinking, were such, that, as she never
talked a great deal, so she could never be entirely silent;
and, therefore, while she sat at her work, if she loot her
needle, or broke her thread, if she heard a carriage in
the street, or saw a speck upon her gown, she must

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 5]

observe it aloud, whether there were any one at leisure
to answer her or not. At about half-past twelve a re-
markably loud rap drew her in haste to the window,
and scarcely had she time to inform Catherine of there
being two open carriages at the door, in the ﬁrst only a
servant, her brother driving Miss Thorpe in the second,
before John Thorpe came running up stairs, calling
out, “Well, Miss Morland, here I am. Have you
been waiting long? We could not come before, the
old devil of a coachmakcr was such an eternity ﬁnding
out a thing ﬁt to be got into, and now it is ten thousand
to one but they break down before we are out of the
meet. How do you do, Mrs Allen 9 A famous ball
last night, was not it? Come, Miss Morland, be quick,
for the others are in a confounded hurry to be off.
They want to get their tumble over.’ ’

“ What do you mean?” said Catherine; “where
are you all going to E”

“ Going to! Why, you have not forgot our en-
gagement? Did not we agree together to take a drive
this morning ? What a head you have i We are going
up Claverton Down.”

“Something was said about it, I remember,” said
Catherine, looking at Mrs Allen for her opinion; “ but
really, I did not expect you."

“ Not expect me I That 's a good one! And
what a dust you would have made, if I had not
come ! ”

Catherine’s silent appeal to her friend, meanwhile,
was entirely thrown away ; for Mrs Allen, not being a:
all in the habit of conveying any expre-ion herselfby a
loch was rim aware of its being ever intended by any
body else; and Catherine, whose desire of seeing Miss
Tilney again, could at that moment bear a short delay
in favour of a drive, and who thought there could be no
impropriety in her going with Mr Thorpe,” Isabella

5 2 NORTKANGER ABBEY.

was going at the same time with James, was therefore
obliged to speak plainer. “ Well ma’am, what do you
say to it? Can you spare me for an hour or two?
Shall I go i"

“Do just as you please, my dear," replied Mrs
Allen, with the most placid indifference. Catherine
took the advice, and ran of to get ready. In a very
few minutes, she re-appeared, having scarcely allowed
the two others time enough to get through a. few short
sentences in her praise, after Thorpe had procured Mrs
Allen’s admiration of his gig, and then, receiving her
friend’s parting good wishes, they both hurried down
stairs. “ My dean creature,” cried Isabella, to whom
the duty of friendship immediately called her before she
could get into the carriage, “you have been at least
three hours getting ready: I was afraid you were ill.
What a delightful ball we had last night! I have a
thousand things to say to you; but make haste and get
in, for I long to be of."

Catherine followed her orders and turned away, but
not too soon to hear her friend exclaim aloud to
James, “What a sweet girl she is! I quite doat on
her.”

“You will not be frightened, Miss Morland,” said
Thorpe, as he handed her in, “if my horse should
dance about a little at ﬁrst setting off; He will most
likely give a plunge or two, and perhaps take the rest
for a minute ; but he will soon know hrs master. He
is full of spirits, playﬁrl as can be, but there is no vice
in him.”

Catherine did not think the portrait a very inviting
one, but it was too late to retreat, and she was too
young to own herself frightened; so, resigning herself
to her fate, and trusting to the animal's boasted know-
ledge of its owner, she at peaceably down, and saw
Thorpe sit down by her. Everything being then ar-

nonmsnoex ABBEY. 53

ranged,theservantwho mod I! the horse’sheadwas
bid in an important voice “ to let him go," and of they
went in the quietest manner imaginable, without a
plunge or I caper, or anything like one. CatherineI
delighted at so happy an escape, spoke her pleasure
aloud with grateful surprize; and her companion im-
mediately made the matter perfectly simple by assuring
her that it was entirely owing to the peculiarly judicious
manner in which he had then held the reins, and the
singular discernment and dexterity with which he had
directed his whip. Catherine, though she could not
help wondering that, with such perfect command of his.
hone, he should think it nece-ary to alarm her with a
relation of its tricks, congratulated herself sincerely on
being under the care of so excellent at coachman; and
perceiving that the animal continued to go on in the
some quiet manner, without showing the smallest pro-

sity towards any unpleasant vivacity, and (consider-
mg its inevitable ace was ten miles an hour) by no
means alarmingly not, gave herself up to all the enjoy-
ment of air and exercise of the most invigorating kind
in a ﬁne mild d3 of February, with the consciousnen
of safety. A ll ence of several minutes succeeded their
ﬁrst short dialogue. It was broken by Tho 's saying
very ahru dy, “ Old Allen is as rich as a ew, is not
he?” atherine did not understand him, and he re-
peated his question, adding in explanation, “Old Allen,
the man you are with."

“0h! Mr Allen you mean. Yes, I believe he is

rich.”

“ And no children at all i "

“ No, not any."

“A famous thing for his next heirs. He is your
godfather, is not he? "

“ My godfather! No.’ ’

“ But you are always very much with them 3 "

54 NORTHANGBR ABBEY.

“Yes, very much."

“Aye, that is what I meant. He seems: good kind
of old fellow enough, and has lived very well in his
time, I dare my; he is not gouty for nothing. Does
he drink his bottle a day now 2 ”

“His bottle a-da ! No. Why should you think
of such a thing?. e is a very temperate man, and you
could not fancy him in liquor last night?”

“ Lord help you! You women are alwayl thinking
of men’l being in liquor. Why, you do not Iuppose a
man in overset by a bottle? I am sure of 1171}, that if
everybody was to drink their bottle n-day, there would
not be half the disorder. in the world there are now.
It would be a famoul good thing for us all.’ ’

“ I cannot believe it.”

“ Oh! lord, it would be the saving of thousands.
There il not the hundredth part of the wine conmmed
in this kingdom that there ought to be. Our foggy
climate wants help.”

“And yet I have heard that there is a greatdeal of
wine drank in Oxford.”

“Oxford! There is no drinking It Oxford now,
I assure you. Nobody drinlu there. You would
hardly meet with 3 man who goes beyond his four
pints at the utmost. Now, for instance, it was reckoned
a remarkable thing at the last party in my rooms, that
upon an average we cleared about ﬁve pints a head. It
was looked upon as something out of the common way.
Min: is famous good stuff, to be lure. You would not
often meet with anything like it in Oxford, and that
may account for it. But thin will just give you a non'on
‘of the general rate of drinking there.”

“ Yes, it does give a notion,” mid Catherine, warmly,
“ and that in, that you all drink a great deal more wine
than I thought you did. However, I am sure Jam:
does not drink to much.”

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 55

This declaration brought on a loud and overpowering
reply, of which no part was very distinct, except the
uent exclamations, amounting almost to oaths,
which adorned it, and Catherine was left, when it
ended, with rather is strengthened belief of there
being a great deal of wine drank in Oxford, and
the same happy conviction of her brother’s comparative
sobriety.

Thorpe’s ideas then all reverted to the merits of his
own equipage, and she was called on to admire the
spirit and freedom with which his horse moved along,
and the ease which his paces, as well as the excellence
of the springs, gave the motion of the caniage. She
followed him in all his admiration as well II she could.
To go before, or beyond him, was impossible. His
knowledge and her ignorance of the subject. his rapidity
of expression and her diilidence of herself, put that out
of her power; she could strike out nothing new in
commendation, but she readin echoed whatever he
chose to assert, and it wss ﬁnslly settled between them,
without any diﬁiculty, that his equi ge was altogether
the most complete of its kind in ngland, his carriage
the neatest, his horse the best goer, and himself the
best coachman. “You do not really think, Mr
Thorpe,” said Catherine, venturing after some time to
consider the matter as entirely decided, and to offer
some little variation on the subject, “that James’s gig
will break down i ”

“ Break down! Oh, lord! Did you ever see arch
s little u'ttupp thing in your life? There is not a
sound piece 0 iron about it. The wheels have been
fairly worn out these ten years at last; and as for the
body, upon my soul, you might shake it to pieces your-
self with a touch. It is the most devilish little ricketty
buiness I ever beheld! Thank Godl we havegots
hater. Iwouldnotbehoundrogotwomilesinitfor
ﬁfty thousand pounds."

56 NORTHANGER sssev.

“ Good havens! " cried Catherine, quite frightened,
“then pray let us turn back; they will certainly meet
with an accident if we go on. Do let us turn back, Mr
Thorpe; stop and speak to my brother, and tell him
how very unfe it is."

" Unsafe! Oh, lord! what is there in that? They
will only get a roll if it does break down ; and. there is
plenty of dirt, it will be excellent falling. Oh, curse
it! the carriage is safe enough if a man knows how to
drive it; a thing of that sort in good hands will last
above twenty years after it is fairly worn out. Lord
bless you! I would undertake for ﬁve pounds to drive
it to York and back again without losing a nail.”

Catherine listened with astonishment. She knew
not how to reconcile two such very different accounts
of the same thing; for she had not been brought up to
understand the propensities of a rattle, nor to know
to how many idle assertions and impudent falsehoods
the excess 0 vanity will lead. Her own family were
plain matter-of-fact people, who seldom aimed at wit of
any kind; her father at the utmost being contented
with a pun, and her mother with a proverb; they were
not in the habit, therefore, of telling lies to increase
their importance, or of asserting at one moment what
they would contradict the next. She reﬂected on the
affair for some time in much perplexity, and was more
than once on the point of requesting from Mr Thorpe a
clearer insight into his real opinion on the subject; but
she checked herself, because it appeared to her that he
did not excel in giving those clearer insights, in making
those things plain which he had before made ambiguous,
and, joining to this the consideration that he would not
really suffer his sister and his friend to be exposed to a
danger from which he might easily preserve them, she
concluded at last that he must know the carriage to be
in fact perfectly safe, and therefore would alarm herself

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 57

no longer. By him the whole matter seemed entirely
forgotten; and all the rest of his conversation, or
rather talk, began and ended with himself and his own
concerns. He told her of horses which he had bought
for a triﬂe and sold for incredible sums; of racing
matches, in which his judgment had infalliny foretold
the winner; of shooting parties, in which he had killed
more birds (though without having one good shot) than
all his companions together; and described to her some
famous day’s sport with the fox-hounds, in which his
foresight and skill in directing the dogs had repaired
the mistakes of the most experienced huntsman, and in
which the boldness of his riding, though it had never
endangered his own life for a moment, had been con-
stantly leading others into difﬁculties, which, he alme
concluded, had broken the necks of many.

Little as Catherine was in the habit of for
herself, and unﬁxed as were her general notions of what
men ought to be, she could not entirely repress a doubt,
while she bore with the eﬁ'usions of ill! endless conceit,
of his being altogether completely agreeable. It was a
bold surmise, for he was Ibelln's brother, and she had
been assured by James that his manners would recom-
mend him to all her sex; but in spite of this, the ex-
treme weariness of his company which crept over her
before they had been out an hour, and which continued
unceasingly to increase till they stop d in Pulteney
Street again, induced her in some s degree to resist
such high authority, and to distrust his powers of giving
univeml pleasure.

When th arrived at Mrs Allen's door, the asp
ranishment o Isabella was hardly to be expressed on
ﬁnding that it was too late in the day for them to
attend her friend into the house : —“ Past three
o’clock! " it was inconceivable, incredible, impossible,
and she would neither believe her own watch, nor her

E

58 NORTHA'NGER ABBEY.

brother’s, nor the servants, she would believe no assur-
anco of it founded on reason or reality, till Morland
produced his watch and ascertained the fact: to have
doubted a moment longer tben, would have been equally
inconceivable, incredible, and impossible, and she could
only rotest over and over again, that no two hours and
a half) had ever gone 01? so swiftly before, as Catherine
was called on to conﬁrm; Catherine could not sell a
falsehood even to please Isabella; but the latter was
spared the misery of her friend’s dissenting voice by not
waiting for her answer. Her own feelings entirely en-
grossed her; her wretchedness was most acute on ﬁnd-
ing herself obliged to go directly home. It was ages
since she had had a moment’s conversation with her
dearest Catherine, and though she had such thousands
of things to say to her, it appeared as if they were never
to be together again ; so with miles of most exquisite
misery, and the laughing eye of utter despondency, she
bade her friend adieu, and went on.

Catherine found Mrs Allen returned from all
the busy idleness of the morning, and was immediately
greeted with, “ Well, my dear, here you are! ” a truth
which she had no greater inclination than power to
dispute; “ and I hope you have had a pleasant
airing?"

“ Yes, ma’am, I thank you; we could not have had
a nicer day.”

“So Mrs Thorpe said. She was vastly pleased at
your all going.”

“ You have seen Mrs Thorpe, then?”

“Yes; I went to the Pump-room as soon as you
were gone, and there I met her, and we had a great
deal of talk together. She mys there was hardly any
veal to be got at market this morning, it is so on-
commonly scarce."

“ Did you see any body else of our acquaintance?”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 59

“Yes; we agreed to take a turn in the Crescent,
and there we met Mrs Hughes, and Mr and Miss
Tilney walking with her.”

“ Did you, indeed? and did they speak to you?”

“Yes; we walked along the Crescent together for
half an hour. They seem very agreeable people. Miss
Tilney was in a very pretty spotted muslin, and I fancy,
by what I can learn, that she always dresses very hand-
somely. Mrs Hughes talked to me a great deal about
the family.”

“ And what did she tell you of them 3 ”

“Oh! a vast deal, indeed; she hardly talked of
anything else.”

" Did she tell you what part of Gloucestean they
come from 9 ”

“Yes, she did, but I cannot recollect now. But
they are very good kind of people, and very rich. Mrs
Tilney was a Miss Drummond, and she and Mrs
Hughes were school-fellows; and Miss Dmmmond
had a very large fortune, and, when she married, her
father gave her twenty thousand pounds, and ﬁve
hundred to buy wedding clothes. Mrs Hughes saw
all the clothes after they came from the warehouse?

“ And are Mr and Mrs Tilney in Bath ? "

“Yes, I Fancy they are, but I am not quite certain.
Upon recollection, however, I have a notion they are
both dead; at least the mother is; yes, I am sure Mrs
Tilney is dead, because Mrs Hughes told me there was
a very beautiful set of pearls that Mr Drummond gave
his daughter on her wedding-day, and that Miss Tilney
has got now, for they were put by for her when her
mother died.”

“ And is Mr Tilney, my partner, the only
son .’ "

“ I cannot be quite positive about that, my dear; I
have some idea he is; but, however, he is a very ﬁne

6° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

yorirg’ man, Mrs Hughes says, and likely to do very
we .’

Catherine inquired no further; she had heard enough
to feel that Mrs Allen had no real intelligence to give,
and that she was most particularly unfortunate herself
in havin missed such a meeting with both brother and
sister. ould she have foreseen such a circumstance,
nothing should have persuaded her to go out with the
others; and, as it was, she could only lament her ill- '
luck, and think over what she had lost, till it was clear
to her that the drive had by no means been very
plasant, and that John Thorpe himself was quite
disagreeable.

chum: 5.

HE Allens, Thorpes, and Morlands, all met in
the evening at the theatre; and, as Catherine
and Isabella sat together, there was then an

opportunity for the latter to utter some few of the many
thousand things which had been collecting within her
for communication in the immeasurable length of time
which had divided them. “ Oh, heavens! my beloved
Catherine, have I got you at last?” was her address
on Catherine’s entering the box and sitting by her.
" Now, Mr Morland,” for he was close to her on the
other side, “I shall not speak another word to you all
the rest of the evening; so I charge you not to expect
it. My sweetest Catherine, how have you been this
long age? but I need not ask you, for you look dc.
lightfuliy. You really have done your hair in a more
heavenly style than ever; you mischievous creature, do
you want to attract everybody? I assure you, my
brother is quite in love with you already; and al for
Mr Tilney—but (bat is a- settled thing—even your

NORTHANGER assay. 61

modesty cannot doubt his attachment now; his coming
back to Bath makes it too plain. Oh! what would not
I give to see him! I really am quite wild with im-
patience. My mother ys he is the most delightful
young man in the world; she saw him this morning, you
know. You must introduce him to me. I. he in the
house now? Look about, for heaven’s sake! I assure
you I can hardly exist till I see him."

“No,” said Catherine, “ he is not here. I cannot
see him any where.”

“ Oh, horrid i am I never to be acquainted with him ?
How do you like my gown? I think it does not look
amiss; the sleeves were entirely my own thought. Do
you know, I get so immoderately sick of Bath! Your
brother and I were agreeing this morning, that, though
it is vastly well to be here {or a few weeks, we would
not live here for millions. We soon found out that our
tastes were exactly alike in preferring the country to
every other place ; really our opinions were so exactly
the same, it was quite ridiculousl There was not a
single point in which we dilTered. I would not have
had you by for the world ; you are such a sly thing, I
am sure you would have made some droll remark or
other about it.”

“ No, indeed, I should not.”

" Oh, yes! you would, indeed. I know you better
than you know yourself. You would have told us that
we seemed born for each other, or some nonsense of
that kind, which would have distressed me beyond con-
ception; my cheeks would have been as red as your
roses 3 I would not have had you by for the world.”

“ Indeed, you do me injustice; I would not have
made so improper a remark upon any account; and he-
ides, I am sure it would nenr have entered my head.”

Isabella smiled incredulously, and talked the rent of
the evening to James.

62 NORTKANGER ABBEY.
I ,

Catherine's resolution of endeavouring to meet Miss
Tilney again continued in full force the next morning ;
and till the usual moment of going to the Pump-room,
she felt some alarm from the dread of a second preven-
tion. But nothing of that kind occurred, no visitors
appeared to delay them, and they all three set 05 in
good time for the Pump-room, where the ordinary
course of events and conversation took place. Mr
Allen, after drinking his glass of water, joined some
gentlemen to talk over the politics of the day, and com-
pare the accounts of their newspapers; and the ladies
walked about together, noticing every new face, and
almost every new bonnet in the room. The female part
of the Thorpe family, attended by James Morland,
appeared among the crowd in less than a quarter of an
hour, and Catherine immediately took her usual place
by the side of her friend. James, who was now in
constant attendance, maintained a similar position, and
separating themselves from the rest of their party, they
walked in that manner for some time, till Catherine
began to doubt the happiness of a situation which, con-
ﬁning her entirely to her friend and brother, gave her
very little share in the notice of either. They were
always engaged in some sentimental discussion or lively
dispute, but their sentiment was conveyed in such
whispering voices, and their vivacity attended with so
much laughter, that though Catherine’s supporting opin-
ion was not unfrequently called for by one or the other,
she was never able to give any, from not having heard a
word of the subject. At length, however, she was em-
powered to disengage herself from her friend, by the
avowed necessity of speaking to Miss Tilney, whom she
most joyfully sawjust entering the room with Mrs Hughes,
and whom she instantly jained,with a firmer determination
to be ac uainted, than she might have had courage to
common had she not been urged by the disappointment

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 63

of the day before. Miss Tilney met herwith great civility,
returned her advances with equal good will, and they
continued talking together as long as both parties re-
mained in the room; and though in all probability not
an observation was made, nor an expression used by
either which had notbeen made and used some thouunds
of times before, under that roof, in every Bath season,
yet the merit of their being spoken with simplicity and
truth, and without personal conceit, might be something
uncommon.

“ How well your brother dances! " was an artless
exclamation of Catherine’s towards the close of their
conversation, which at once surprized and amused her
companion.

“Henry!” she replied with a smile. “Yes, he
does dance very well.”

“ He must have thought it very odd to hear me say
I was engaged the other evening, when he saw me
sitting down. But I really had been engaged the whole
day to Mr Thorpe." Miss Tilney could only how.
“ You cannot think,” added Catherine, after a moment’s
silence, “ how surprized I was to see him again. I felt
so sure of his being quite gone away.”

" When Henry had the pleasure of seeing you before,
he was in Bath but for a couple of days. He came
only to engage lodgings for us.”

“ Tbs: never occurred to me; and of course, not
seeing him anywhere, I thought he must be gone.
Was not the young lady he danced with on Monday a
Miss Smith ? ”

" Yes; an acquaintance of Mrs Hughes.”

" I dare my she was very glad to dance. Do you
think her pretty 2 ”

“ Not very.”

“ He never comes to the Pump-room, I suppose ? ”

“ Yes; sometimes; but he has rid out this morning
with my father.”

.ﬁ

54 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Mrs Hughes now joined them, and asked Min Til-
ney ifshewas readytogo. “I hope I shall have the
pluaure of seeing you again soon,” Hid Catherine.
“ Shall you be at the cotillion ball to-morrow 3”

“ Perhaps we—yes, I think we certainly shall.”

“ I am glad of it, for we shall all be there.” This
civility was duly returned, and they parted: on Miss
Tilne 's side with some knowledge of her new acquain-
tance s feelings, and on Catherine’s without the smallest
consciousness of having explained them.

She went home very happy. The morning had
answered all her hopes, and the evening of the following
day was now the object of expectation—the future
good. What gown and what head-dress she should
wear on the occasion became her chief concern. She
cannot be justiﬁed in it. Dress is at all times a frivo-
lous distinction, and excessive solicitude about it often
destroys its own aim. Catherine knew all this very
well; her great aunt had read her a lecture on the sub-
ject only the Christmas before; and yet she lay awake
ten minutes on Wednesday night debating between her
spotted and her tamboured muslin ; and nothing but the
shortness of the time prevented her buying a new one
for the evening. This would have been an error in
judgment, great though not uncommon, from which one
of the other sex nther than her own, a brother rather
than a great aunt, might have warned her; for man
only can be aware of the insensibility of man towards a
new gown. It would be mortifying to the feelings of
many ladies could they be made to understand how
little the heart of man is aﬁ'ected by what in costly or
new in their attire; how little it is biased by the tex-
ture of their muslin, and how unsucoeptiblc of peculiar
tendemets towards the spotted, the qrigged, the mull,
or the jackonet. Woman is ﬁne for her own satisfac-
tion alone. No man will admire her the more, no

NORTHANGER an“. 65

Woman will like her the better for it. Neatnees and
fashion are enough for the former, and a something of
ehabhiness or impropriety will be most endearing to the
later. But not one of these grave reﬂections troubled
the tranquillity of Catherine.

She entered the rooms on Thursday evening with
feelings very different from what had attended her
thither the Monday before. She had then been exult-
ing in her engagement to Thorpe, and was now chieﬂy
anxious to avoid his eight, lest he should engage her
again ; for though she could not, dared not expect that
Mr Tilney should ask her a third time to dance, her
wishes, hopes, and plans, all centered in nothing lens.
Every young lady may feel for my heroine in this
critical moment, for every young lady has at some time
or other known the same agitation. All have been,
or at least all have believed themselves to be, in danger
from the pursuit of some one whom they wished to
avoid ; and all have been anxious for the attendant of
home one whom they wished to please. As soon as
they were joined by the Tho s, Catherine’s agony
began; she ﬁdgetted about if ohn Thorpe came to-
warda her, hid herself as much as possible from his
view, and when he spoke to her pretended not to hear
him. The cotillions were over, the country-dancing
beginning' and she saw nothing of the Tilneya. “Do
not be frightened, my dear Catherine,” whispered
Isabella, “but I am really going to dance with your
brother again. I declare positively it it quite shock-
ing. I tell him he ought to be ashamed of himself, but
you and John must keep us in countenance. Make
hate, my dear creature, and come to us. John in
walked off, but he will be back in a moment”

Catherine had neither time nor inclination to answer.
The others walked away. John Tho was still in
View, and she gave herself up for lost. but she might

66 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

not appear, however, to observe or expect him, she kept
her eyes intently ﬁxed on her fan; and a self-con-
demnation for her folly, in supposing that among such a
crowd they should even meet with the Tilneys in any
reasonable time, had passed through her mind, when
she suddenly found herself addressed and again solicited
to dance, by Mr T ilney himself. With what sparkling
eyes and ready motion she granted his request, and with
how pleasing a ﬂutter of heart she went with him to the
set may be easily imagined! To escape, and as she
believed, so narrowly escape John Thorpe, and to be
asked, so immediately on his joining her, asked by Mr
Tilney, as if he had sought her on purpose !—it did not
appear to her that life could supply any greater felicity.

Scarcer had they worked themselves into the quiet
possession of a place, however, when her attention was
claimed by John Thorpe, who stood behind her.
“Heyday, Miss Morland!” said he, “ what is the
meaning of this! I thought you and I were to dance
together."

“”I wonder you should think so, for you never asked
me.

“ That is a good one, by Jove I I asked you as soon
as I came into the mom, and I was just going to ask

on again, but when I turned round, you were gone!

his is a cursed shabby trick! I only came for the
sake of dancing with you, and I ﬁrml§ believe you were
engaged to me ever since Monday. es; I remember,
I asked you while you were waiting in the lobby for
your cloak; and here have I been telling all my
acquaintance that I was going to dance with the
prettiest girl in the room; and when they see you
standing up with somebody else, they will quiz me
famously.”

“ Oh! no; they will never think of me, after such
a description as that.”

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. 67

“Byhenvcns! it they do not, Iwill kick themout
of the room for blackheads. What chap have you
that 3 ” Catherine satisﬁed his curiosity. “ Tilney,”
he repeated; “hum; I do not know him. A good
ﬁgure of a man; well put together. Does he want a
horse? Here is a friend of mine, Sam Fletcher, has
got one to sell that would suit anybody. A famoue
clever animal for the road; only forty guineas. I had
ﬁfty minds to buy it myself, for it is one of my maxim
always to buy a good horse when I meet with one; but
it would not answer my purpose, it would not do for
the ﬁeld. I would give any money for a real good
hunter. I have three now, the best that ever were
back’d. I would not take eight hundred for
them. Fletcher and I mean to get a house in Leices-
tershire against the next season. It is so d—
uncomfortable living at an inn."

This was the last sentence by which he could weary
Catherine’s attention, for he was just then born of by
the resisdees pressure of a long string of passing ladies.
Her partner now drew near, and said, “That gentle-
man would have put me out of patience, had he staid with
you halfa minute longer. He has no business to with-
drew the attention of my partner from me. We have
entered into a contract of mutual agreeableuess for the
lpace of an evening, and all our agreeablenea belongs
solely to each other for that time. Nobody can fasten
themnelves on the notice of one, without injuring the
rights of the other. I consider a country-dance as an
emblem of marriage. Fidelity and complainance are
the principal duties of both; and those men who do
not chuse to dance or marry themselves, have no busi-
ness with the partners or wives of their neighbours.”

“ But they are such very different things! "

“ That you think theycannot be compared together! "

“ To be sure not. eople that marry can never part,

' 68 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

but must go and keep house together. People that
dance, only stand opposite to each other in a long room
for half an hour.”

“ And such is your deﬁnition of matrimony and
dancing. Taken in that light certainly, their resem-
blance is not striking; but I think I could place them
in such a view. You will allow that in both man has
the advantage of choice, woman only the power of re<
fusal; that in both it is an engagement between man
and woman, formed for the advantage of each; and that
when once entered into, they belong exclusively to
ench other till the moment of its dissolution; that it
is their duty each to endeavour to give no cause for
wishing that he or she had bestowed themselves
elsewhere, and their best interest to keep their own
imaginations from wandering towards the perfections of
their neighbours, or fancying that they should have been
better of? with any one else. You will allow all this? ”

“ Yes, to be sure, as you state it, all this sounds very
well; but still they are so very dilferent. I cannot
look upon them at all in the same light, nor think the
same duties belong to them."

“ In one respect, there certame it a difference. In
man-iage, the man is supposed to provide for the support
of the woman; the woman to make the home agreeable
to the man ; he is to purvey, and she is to smile. But
in dancing, their duties are exactly changed ; the agree-
ableness, the compliance are expected from him, while
she furnishes the fan and the lavender water. “at, I
suppose, was the difference of duties which struck you, as
rendering the conditions incapable of comparison.”

“ No, indeed, I never thought of that.’

“Then I am quite at a loss. One thing, however,
I must observe. This disposition on your side in rather
alarming. You totally disallow any similarity in the
obligations; and may I not thence infer, that your

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 69

notions of the dutiel of the dancing state ale not to
strict at your partner might with? Have I not reason
to fear, that if the gentleman who spoke to you jun
now were to return, or if any other gentleman were to
address you, there would be nothing to reetrain you from
convening with him at long as you chose ? "

" Mr Thorpe is such a very particular friend of my
brother’s, that if he talk: to me, I Inuit talk to him
again; but there are hardly three young men in the
mom beddea him that I have any acquaintance wi ”

“And is that to be my only security? Alan! alan!”

“ Nay, I am sure that you cannot have a better; for
ifI do not know anybody, it in importible for me to
talkmthem; nnd,heeidet, I do not was: to talk to
anybody."

" Now you have given me a security worth having;
and I Ilnll procoed with courage. Do you ﬁnd Bath
as agreeable as when I had the honour of making the
inqui before?”

“ en, quite; more no, indeed.”

“ More to! Take care, or you'will forget to be
ﬁred of it at the proper time. You ought to be tired at
the end of nix weeks."

“ I do not think I should be tired, if I were to my
here Iix months.”

“Bath, compared with London, haa little variety,
and so everybody ﬁnds out every year. ‘ For nix
weelu, I allow Bath is pleasant enough; but beyond
rbar, it in the moot tirelnme place in the world.’ You
would be told so by people of all descriptions, who
come regularly every winter, lengthen their nix week:
into ten or twelve, and go away at lalt became they
can afford to stay no longer.’ '

“ Well, other people murt judge for themrelvel, and
those who go to London may think nothing of Bath.
But I, who live in a small retired village in the country,

7° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

can never ﬁnd greater mmeness in such a place as this
than in my own home; for here are a variety ofamuse-
ments, a variety of things to be seen and done all day
long, which I can know nothing of there."

“You are not fond of the country.”

" Yes, I am. I have always lived there, and always
been very happy. But certainly there is much more
sameness in a country life than in a Bath life. One day
in the country is exactly like another."

“ But then you spend your time so much more
rationally in the country.”

“ Do I P "

“ Do you not?"

“ I do not believe there is much difference.”

“ Here you are in pursuit only of amusement all day
long.”

“ And so I am at home: only I do not ﬁndso much
of it. I walk about here, and so I do there; but here
I see a vari of lein eve street, and there I can
on] go andncyall oheollﬁrs Allen?"

ﬁr Tilney was very much amused. " Only go and
call on Mrs Allen!" he repeated. “What a picture
of intellectual poverty! However, when you sink into
this abyss agsin, you will have more to say. You will
be able to talk of Bath. and of all that you did here.”

“ Oh! es; I shall never be in want of something
to talk 0 again to Mrs Allen, or anybody else. I
really believe I shall always be talking of Bath, when I
am at home again; I do like it so very much. If I
could but have papa and mamma, and the rest of
them here, I suppose I should be too happy! James’s
coming (my edest brother) is quite delightful; and
especially as it turns out, that the very family we are
just got so intimate with are his intimate friends already.
Oh ! who can ever be tired of Bath?”

“ Not those who bring such fresh feelings of every

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 7 I

sort to it as you do. But papas and mammas, and
brothers and intimate friends, are a good deal gone
by, to most of the frequenters of Bath ; and the honest
relish of balls and plays, and every-day sights, is past
with them."

Here their conversation closed; the demands of the
dance becoming now too importunate for a divided
attention.

Soon after their reaching the bottom of the set,
Catherine perceived herself to be earnestly regarded by
a gentleman who stood among the. lockers-on, immedi-
ately behind her partner. He was a very handsome
man, of a commanding aspect, past the bloom, but not
past the vigour of life; and with his eye still directed
towards her, she saw him presently address Mr Tilney
in a familiar whisper. Confused by his notice, and
blushing from the fear of its being excited by something
wrong in her appearance, she turned away her head.
But while she did so, the gentleman retreated, and her

armer coming nearer, said, “I see that you guess what

have just been asked. That gentleman knows your

name, and you have a right to know his. It is General
Tilney, my father.”

Catherine’s answer was only “ 0h ! " but it was an
“ 0h !” expressing everything needfu]; attention to his
words, and perfect reliance on their truth. With real
interest and strong admiration'did her eye now follow
the General, as he moved through the crowd, and
" How handsome a family they are! ” was her secret
remark. '

In chatting with Miss Tilney before the evening con-
cluded, in new source of felicity arose to her. She had
never taken a country walk since her arrival in Bath.
Miss Tilney, to whom all the commonly frequented en-
virons were familiar, spoke of them in terms which
made her all eagerness to know them too; and on her

72 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

openly faring that she might ﬁnd nobody to go with
her, it was proposed by the brother and sister that they
should join in a walk, some morning or other. “ I
shall like it," ohe cried, “beyond anything in the world ;
and do not let us put it oi? : let us go ro-morrow,"
This was readily agreed to, with only a-proviso of Miss
Tilney’s, that it did not rain, which Catherine was sure
it would not. At twelve o’clock, they were to call for
her in Pulteney Street, and “ remember, twelve o’clock,”
was her parting speech to her new friend. . Of her other,
her older, her more established friend, Isabella, of whose
ﬁdelity and worth the had enjoyed a foi'tnight’s experi-
enCe, she scarcely eaw anything during the evening.
Yet, though longing to make her acquainted with her
happiness, she cheerfully submitted to the wish of Mr
Allen, which took them rather early away, and her
spirits danced within her, is oh: danced in her chair all
the way home.

 

chum: $3.

HE morrnw brought a very sober-looking morn-
ing ; the sun making only a few efforts to appear;
and Catherine augured from it everything most

favourable to her wishes. A bright morning so early
in the year, she allowed, would generally turn to rain ;
but a cloudy one foretold improvement as the day ad-
vanced. She a lied to Mr Allen for conﬁrmation of
her hopeo, but r Allen not having his own skies and
barometer about him, declined giving any aboolute ro-
rnise of sunshine. She applied to Mrs Allen, and re
Allen’e opinion wan more 'tive. “ She had no
doubt in the world of its berng a very fine day, if the
clouds would only go off, and the sun kee out.”

At about eleven o'clock, however, a w apecks of

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 7 3

mall min upon the windows caught Catherine’s watch-
ful eye, and “ Oh dear! I do believe it will be wet,"
broke from her in a most desponding wne.

“ I thought how it would be,” said Mrs Allen.

“ No walk for me to-day,” sighed Catherine; “ hut

rhapl it may come to nothing, or it may hold up
:{ore twelve.”

“ Perhaps it may; but then, my dmr, it will he so
dirty.”
“ Oh ! that will not signify; I never mind dirt."

“ No,” lied her friend very placidly, “ I know you
never mind ' ”

After a short pause, “ It cornea on faster and faster! ”
said Catherine, as she stood wntghing at a window.

“ So it does, indeed. If it keeps raining, the stleeta
will be very wet.”

“ There are four umbrellas up already. How I hate
the sight of an umbrella! "

“ They are disagreeable things to carry. I would
much rather take a chair at any time.”

“ It was such a nice looking morning i I felt so
convinced it would be dry! "

“ Any body would have thought so, indeed. There
will be very few people in the Pump-room, if it rains
all the morning. I hope Mr Allen will put on his
great coat when he goes, but I dare say he will not, for
he had rather do anything in the world than walk out
in a great coat; I wonder he should dislike it, it must
be so comfortable."

The rain continued, fast though not heavy. Cath-
erine went every ﬁve minutes to the clock, threatening,
on each return, that, if it still kept on raining another ﬁve
«litmus, she would give up the matter as hopeless.
The clock muck twelve, and it still mined “ You
will not be able to go, my dear."

“I do not quite despair yet. I shall not give it up

I, .

74 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

till a quarter after twelve. This is just the time of day
for it to clear up, and I do think it looks a little lighter.
There, it is twenty minutes after twelve, and now I
the]! give it up entirely. Oh ! that we had such
weather here as they had at Udolpho, or at least in
Tuscany and the South of France !-the night that poor
St Auhin died !—such beautiful weather! "

At half past twelve, when Catherine’s anxious atten-
tion to the weather was over, and she could no longer
claim an merit from its amendment, the sky began
volunta ' y to clear. A gleam of sunshine took her
quiteby our-prize; she looked round, the clouds were
parting, and she instantly returned to the window to
watch over and encoumge the happy appearance. Ten

1 minutes more made it certain that a bri ht afternoon
would succeed, and justiﬁed the opinion 0 Mrs Allen,
who had “always thought it would clear up.” But
whether Catherine might still expect her friends,
whether there had not been too much rain for Min
Tilney to venture, must yet be a question.

It was too dirty for Mrs Allen to accompany her
husband to the Pump-room: he accordingly set of? by
himself, and Catherine had barely watched him down
the street, when her notice was claimed by the approach
of the same two open carriages, containing the same
three people that had surprized her so much a few
mornings back. .

“Isabella, my brother, and Mr Thorpe, I declare!
They are coming for me, perhaps; but I shall not
go ; I cannot go, indeed; for, you know, Miss Tilney
may still call." Mrs Allen agreed toit. John Thorpe
was noon with them, and his voice was with them yet
sooner, for on the stain he was calling out toMiss Mor-
land to be quick. “ Make hattel make haste! ” as he
threw open the door, “ ut on your hit this moment ;
there is no time to be 0st; we are going to Bristol.
How d'ye do, Mrs Allen i”

\ NORTHANGER ABBEY. 75

“ To Briswll Is not that a great way of“ But,
however, I cannot go with you to-day, because I am en-
gaged; I expect some friends every moment.” This was
of course vehemently talked down as no reason at all, Mrs
Allen was called on to second him, and the two others
walked in, to give their assistance. “ My sweetest
Catherine is not this delightful? We shall have a most
heavenly drive. You are to thank your brother and me
for the scheme: it darted into our heads-at breakfast
time, I verily believe at the same inmnt; and we
should have been of? two hours ago, if it had not been
for this detestable rain. But it does not signify, the
nightsare moonlight, and we shall do delightﬁllly. 0h !
I am in such extasies at the thoughts of a little country
air and quiet I so much better than goin to the Lower
Rooms. We shall drive directly to C ifton and dine
there; and as soon at dinner is over, if there is time for
it, go on to Kinglweston.”

“ I doubt our being able to do so much,” said Morland.

“ You croaking fellow! ” cried Thorpe, “ we shall
be able to do ten times more. Kingsweston ! aye, and
Blaize Castle too, and anything else we can hear of;
but here is your sister says she will not go.”

“ Blaize Castle ! ” cried Catherine ; “ what is
that 2”

“ The ﬁnest place in England; worth going ﬁfty
miles at any time to Ice."

“ What, is it really a castle, an old castle P "

“ The oldest in the kingdom."

“ But is it like what one reads of i "

“ Exactly : the very same."

" But now, really, are there towers and long gal-
leries?"

“ By dozens.”

“Then I should like to see it; but I cannot1 I can-
not go.”

76 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“ Not go l my beloved creature, what do you
mean 2 ”

“ I cannot go, because" (looking down as she Ipoke,
fenrﬁil of Isabella's smile) “ I expect Miss Tilney and
her brpther to call on me to take a country walk. They

romised to come at twelve, only it rained; but now, as
it is so ﬁne, I dare say they will be here soon.”

“ Not they, indeed,” cried Thorpe; “ for, as we
turned into Broad Street, I saw them. Does he not
drive a phztou with bright chestnuts ? ”

“I do not know, indeed."

“Yea, I know he does; I nw him. You are talk-
ing of the man you danced with last night, are not

ou .’ ”
y “Yes.”

“ Well, I saw him at that moment turn up the Lans-
down Road, driving a smart-looking girl."

“ Did you, indeed ? ”

“ Did, upon my soul; knew him again directly; and
he seemed to have got some very pretty cattle mo."

“ It is very odd! But I suppose they thought it
would be too dirty for a walk.”

“ And well they might, for I never saw so much dirt
in my life. Walk ! you could no more walk than you
could ﬂy! It ha: not been so dirty the whole winter;
it is ancle deep everywhere.”

Isabella corroborated it :—“ My dearest Catherine,
you cannot form an idea of the dirt; come, you must
go ; lyou cannot refuse going now.”

" should like to see the castle ; but may we go all
over it 9 May we go up every staircaae, and into every
suite of room- 9"

“ Yes, yes; every hole and corner.’ ’

“ But then, if they should only be gone out for an
hour till it is drier, and call by and by? ”

“ Make yourself easy, there is no danger of that;

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 77

for I heard Tilney hallooing to a man who was just
passing by on horseback, that they were going as far as
Wick Rocks.’ '

“Then I will. Shall I go, Mrs Allen? ”

“ Just as you please, my dear."

“ Mn Allen, you must persuade her to go,” was the
general cry. Mrs Allen was not inattentive to it.
“ Well, my dear,” said she, “ suppose you go.” And
in two minutes they were off.

Catherine’s feelings, as she got into the carriage, were
in a very unsettled state: divided between regret for the
loss of one great pleasure, and the hope of soon enjoy-
ing another, almost its equal in degree, however unlike
in kind. She could not think the Tilneys had acted
quite well by her, in so readily giving up their engage-
ment, without sending her any message of excuse. It
was now but an hour later than the time ﬁxed on for the
beginning of their walk; and, in spite of what she had
heard of the prodigious accumulation of dirt in the
course of that hour, she could not from her own obser-
vation help thinking that they might have gone with
verylittle inconvenience. To feel herself slighted by
them was very painful. 0n the other hand, the delight
of exploringan ediﬁce like Udolpho, as her fancy re-
presented Blaize Castle to be, was such a counterpoise
of good, as might console her for almost any thing.

They passed briskly down Pulteney Street, and
through Laura PlaCe, without the exchange of many
words. Thorpe talked to his horse, and she meditated
by turns on broken promises and broken arches, phztons
and false hangings, Tilneys and trap-doors. As they
entered Argyle Buildings, however, she was roused by
this address from her companion, “Who is that girl
who looked at you so hard as she went by 2 "

‘4 Who ? where?"

“ 0n the right-hand pavement : she must be almost

78 NORTHANGER anon.

out of sight now.” Catherine looked round, and saw
Miss Tilney leaning on her brother’s am, walking
slowly down the street. She saw them both looking
back at her. “ Sto , stop, Mr Thorpe," she impatiently
cried, “ it is Miss ilney; it is indeed. How could
you all me they were gone ? Stop, stop, I will get out
this moment and go to them." But to what purpose
did she speak? Thorpe only lashed his horse into
a brisker trot; the Tilneys, who had soon ceaned to
look after her, were in a moment out of sight round the
comer of Laura Place, and in another moment she was
herself whisked into the Market Place. Still, however,
and during the length of another street, the entreated him
tosto . “Pm , r: sto ,Mr Tho I cannot 0
on, Ilivill not gz di) 31 min: go back": NIiss Tilney?”
But Mr Thorpe only laughed, smacked his whip, en-
couraged his horse, made odd noises, and drove on;
and Catherine, angry and vexed as she was, having no
power of getting away, was obliged to give up the point
and submit. Her reproaches, however, were not spared.
“ How could you deceive me so, Mr Thorpe? How
could you Ia that you saw them driving up the Lane-
down Road . I would not have had it happen so for
the world. They must think it so strange, so rude of
me, to go by them, too, without saying a word! You
do not know how vexed I am. I shall have no pleasure
at Clifton, nor in anything else. I had rather, ten
thounnd times rather, get out now, and walk back to
them. How could you say, you saw them driving out
in a phzton P " Thorpe defended himself very stoutly,
declared he had never seen two men so much alike in
his life, and would hardly give up the point of its having
been Tilney himself.

Their drive, even when this subject was over, wan
not likely to be very agreeable. Catherine’s complain-
ance was no longer what it had been in their former

NOR‘FHANGER ABBEY. 79

airing. She listened reluctantly, and her replies were
short. Blaine Castle remained her only comfort;
towards that, the still looked at intervals with pleasure;
though rather than be disappointed of the promised walk,
and especially rather than be thought ill of by the
Tilneys, she would willingly have given up all the
happiness which its walls could supply: the happiness
of a progress through a long suite of lo rooms, ex-
hibiting the remains of magniﬁcent furniture, though
now for many years deserted: the happiness of being
stopped in their way along narrow, winding vaults, by a
low, grated door; or even of having their lamp, their
only lamp, extinguished by a sudden gust of wind, and
of being ltft in total darkness. In the meanwhile, they
proceeded on their journey without any mischance: and
were within view of the town of Keynsharn, when a
halloo from Morland, who was behind them, made his
friend pull up, to know what was the matter. The
others then came close enough for conversation; and
Morland said, “ We had better go back, Thorpe; it is
too late to go on to-day; your sister drinks so as well
as I. We have been exactly an hour coming from
Pulleney Street, very little more than seven miles; and,
I suppose, we have at least eight more to go. It will
never do. We set out a gmt deal too late. We had
much better put it of? till another day, and turn round."

“ It is all one to me,” replied Thorpe, rather angrily;
and instantly turning his horse, they were on their way
back to Bath.

“ If your brother had not got such a d beast to
drive," said he soon afterwards, “ we might have done
it very well. My horse would have trotted to Clifton
within the hour, if left to himself, and I have aim
broke my arm with pulling him in to that cursed broken-
winded jade’s pace. Morland is a fool for not keeping
a horse and gig of his own.”

 

80 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“ No, he in not," said Catherine, warmly; “for I
am sure he could not afford it.” .

“ And why cannot he afford it 2 ”

“ Because he has not money enough".

“ And whose fault is that?”

“ Nobody’s that I know of.” Thorpe then aid
something in the loud, incoherent way to which he had
often recourse, about its being a d thing to be
miserl ; and that if people who rolled in money could
not a ord things, he did not know who could, which
Catherine did not even endeavour to understand. Dis-
appointed of what was to have been the consolation for
her ﬁrst disappointment, she was less and less disposed
either to be agreeable herself, or to ﬁnd her companion
so; and they returned to Pulteney Street without her
spaking twenty words.

As she entered the house, the. footman told her, that
a gentleman and lady had called and inquired for her
a few minutes after her setting off ; that, when he told
them she was gone out with Mr Thorpe, the lady had
asked whether any message had been left for her, and
on his saying no, had felt for a card, but said she had
none about her, and went away. Pondering over these
hart-tending tidings, Catherine walked slowly up-
stairs. At the head of them she was met by Mr Allen,
who, on hearing the reason of their speedy return, said,
“I am glad your brother had so much sense; I am
glad you are come back. It was a strange, wild
scheme.”

They all spent the evening together at Thorpe’s.
Catherine was disturbed and out of spirits ; but Isabella
seemed to find a pool of commerce, in the fate of which
she shared, by private partnership, with Morland, I very
good equivalent for the quiet and country air of an inn
at Clifton. Her satisfaction, too, in not being at the
Lower Rooms, was spoken more than once. “ How

 

nonrnsucnx sassy. Sr

Ipity the poor creatures that are going there! How
glad I am that I am not amongst them! I wonder
whether it will be a full ball or not! They have not
begun dancing yet. I would not be there for all the
world. It is so delightful to have an evening now and
then to one's self. I dare say it will not be a very
ood ball. I know the Mitchells will not be there.
Iain sure I pity everybody that is. But I dare say,
Mr Morland, you long to be at it, do not you? I am
sure you do. Well, pray do not let anybody here be a
restraint on you. I dare say we could do very well
without you, but you men think yourselves of such con-
sequence.”

Catherine could almost have accused Inbella of being
wanting in tenderness towards herself and her sorrows, so
very little did they appear to dwell on her mind, and so
very inadequate was the comfort she offered. “ Do not
be so dull, my dearest creature,” she whispered. “ You
will quite break my heart. It was amazmgly shocking,
to be sure, but the ’I‘ilneys were entirely to blame.
Why were not they more unctual? It was dirty,
indeed, but what did that signify? I am sure John and
I should have not minded it. I never mind going
through anything where a friend is concerned; that is
my disposition, and John is just the name; he has
amazing strong feelings. Good heavens! what a de-
lightful hand you have got! Kings, I vow! I never
was so happy in my lifel I would fifty times rather
you should have them than myself.”

And now I may dismiss my heroine to the sleepless
couch which is the true heroine’s portion; to a pillow
strewed with thorns and wet with tears. And luck’y
may she think herself, if she get another good night I
rest in the course of the next three months.

82 NORTHANGER \ABBEY.

cmth *3].

“ RSALLEN," mid Catherine, the next mom-
ilr‘if, " will there be any harm in my calling on
iss Tilney to-day? I shall not be easy till
I have explained everything."
“ Go, b all means, my dear; only put on a white
gown. Miss Tilney always wears white.”

Catherine cheerfully complied; and, being properly
equipped, was more im atient than ever to be at the
Pump-room, that she might inform herself of General
Tilney’s lodgings; for though she believed they were
in Milsom Street, she was not certain of the house, and
Mrs Allen’s wavering convictions only made it more
doubtful. To Milsom Street she was directed; and
having made herself perfect in the number, hastened
away with eager steps and a beating heart to pay her
visit, explain her conduct, and be forgiven: tripping
lightly through the churchyard, and resoluter turning
away her eyes, that she might not be obliged to see he;
beloved Isabella, and her dear family, who, she ha
reason to believe were in a shop hard by. She reached
the home without any impediment, looked at the
number, knocked at the door, and inquired for Miss
Tilney. The man believed Miss Tilney to he at home,
but was not quite certain. Would she be pleased to
send up her name? She gave her card. In a few
minutes the servant returned, and with a look which
did not quite conﬁrm his words, said he had bun
mistaken, for that Miss Tilney had walked out. Cndk
erine, with a blush of mortiﬁcation, left the house. She
felt almost persuaded that Miss Tilney cm at home,
and too much oﬂ'ended to admit her; and as she
retired down the street, could not withhold one glance
at the drawing-room windows, in expectation of seeing

nonmsuorm ABBEY. 83

her there, but no one appeared at them. At the
bottom of the street, however, she looked back again,
and then, not at a window, but issuing from the door, she
saw Miss Tilney herself. She was followed by: gende—
man whom Catherine believed to be her father, and
they turned up towards Edgar’s Buildings. Catherine,
in deep mortiﬁcau'on, proceeded on her way. She
could almost be angry herself at such angry incivility;
but she checked the resentful sensation, she remembered
her own ignorance. She knew not how such an offence
as hers might be classed by the laws of worldly polite-
ness, to what a degree of unforgiveness it might with
propriety lead, nor to what rigours of rudeness in return
it might justly make her amenable. Dejected and
humbled, she had even some thoughts of not going with
the others to the theatre that night; but, it must be
confessed that they were not of long continuance; lbr
she soon recollected, in the ﬁrst place, that she was
without any excuse for staying at home; and, in the
second, that it was a play she wanted very much to see.
To the theatre accordingly they all went; no Tilneys
appeared to plague or please her; she feared that amongst
the many perfections of the family a fondness for plays
was not to be ranked, but perhaps it was because they
were habituated to the ﬁner rformances of the London
stage, which she knew, on sabella’s authority, rendered
everything else of the kind " quite horrid." She was
not deceived in her own expectation of pleasure: the
comedy so well suspended her care, that no one absen-
ing her during the first four sets would have supposed
she had any wretchedness about her. On the beginning
of the ﬁfth, however, the sudden view of Mr Henry
Tilney and his father joining a party in the opposite box
recalled her to anxiety and distress. The stage could no
longer excite genuine merr'ilnent1 no longer keep her
whole attention. Every other look upon an average was

84 NORTHANGER annoy.

directed towards the opposite box; and for the space
of two entire scenes did she thus watch Hen Tilney,
without being once able to catch his eye. 0 longer
could he be suspected of indifference for a play ; his notice
was never withdrawn from the stage during two whole
scenes. At length, however, he did look towards her,
and he bowed, but such a bow! no smile, no continued
observance attended it: his eyes were immediately re-
turned to their former direction. Catherine was rest—
lesst miserable; she could almost have rim round to
the box in which he sat, and forced him to hear her ex-
planation. Feelings rather natural than heroic possessed
her. Instead of considering her own dignity injured
by this ready condemnation; instead of proudly resolv-
ing, in conscious innocence, to show her resentment
towards him who could harbour a doubt of it, to leave
to him all the trouble of seeking an explanation, and to
enlighten him on the past only by avoiding his sight, or
ﬂirting with somebody else, she took to herself all the
shame of misconduct, or, at least, of its appearance, and
was only eager for an opportunity of explaining its cause.

The play concluded, the curtain fell; Henry Tilney
was no longer to be seen where he had hitherto sat, but
his father remained, and perhaps he might be now com-
ing round to their box. She was right: in a few
minutes he appeared, and making his way through the
then thinning rows, spoke with like calm politeness to
Mrs Allen and her friend. Not with such calmness
was he answered by the latter. " Oh, Mr Tilney, I
have been uite wild to speak to' you, and make my
apologies. ou must have thought me so rude; but
indeed it was not my own fault. Was it, Mrs Allen i
Did not they tell me that Mr Tilney and his sister
were gone out in a phztnn together? and then what
could I do ? But I had ten thousand times rather have
been with you. Now, had not 1, Mrs Allen ?”

'IL.

1‘;

NORTHANGER sssnv. d!

'I‘My dear, you tumble my gown,” was Mrs Allen’s
y.
mpHer assurance, however, standing sole as it did, was
not thrown away; it brought a more cordial, more
natural smile into his countenance, and he replied in a
tone which retained only a little affected reserve, “ We
were much obliged to you, at any rate, for wishing us a
leasaut walk after our passing you in Argyle Street
ou were so kind as to look back on pu ."

“ But indeed, I did not wish you a p easant walk, I
never thought of such a thing; but I begged Mr Thorpe
so earnestly to stop ; I called out to him as soon as ever
I saw you. Now, Mrs Allen, did not Oh! you
were not there. But, indeed, I did; and, if Mr Thorpe
would only have stopped, I would have jumped out and
run after you.” ~

Is there a Henry in the world who couldbe insensible
to such adeclaration? Henry Tilney, at least, was not.
With a yet sweeter smile, he said everything that need
be said of his sister’s concern, regret, and dependence
on Catherine’s honour. “ Oh, do not say Miss Tilney
was not angry,” cried Catherine, “because I know she
was; for she would not see me this morning when I
called. I saw her walk out of the house the next
minute after my leaving it. I was hurt, but I was not
aﬂ'ronted. Perhaps you did not know I had been
there.” ‘

“I was not within at the time; but I heard of it
from Eleanor, and she has been wishing ever since to
see you, to ex lain the reason of such incivility; but,
perhaps, I can a it as well. It was nothing more than
that my father they were just preparing to walk
out, and he being hurried for time, and not caring to
have it put of, made a point of her being denied. That
was all, I do assure you. She was very much vexed,
and meant to make her apology as soon as possible."

 

 

86 RORTHANGER ABBEY.

Catherine’s mind was greatly eased by this informa-
tion, yet a something of solicitude remained, from which
sprang the following question, thoroughly artless in itself,
though rather distressing to the gentleman: “ But, Mr
Tilney, why were you less generous than your sister?
If she felt such conﬁdence in my good intentions, and
could suppose it to be only a mistake, why shouldiyou
he so ready to take offence 9"

“Mel I take offence! "

“Nay, I am sure by your look, when you came into
the box, you were angry."

“ I angry! I could have no right! ”

“ Well, nobody would have thought you had no
right who saw your face."

He replied by asking her to make room for him and
talking of the play. He remained with them some
time, and was only too agreeable for Catherine to be
contented when he went away. Before they parted,
however, it was agreed that the projected walk should
be taken as soon as possible; and, setting aside the
misery of his quitting their box, she was, upon the
whole, left one of the happiest creatures in the
world.

While talking to each other, she had observed with
some surprize, that John Thorpe, who was never in the
same part of the house for ten minutes together, was
engaged in conversation with General Tilney; and she
felt something more than surprize, when she thought she
could perceive herself the object of their attention and
discourse. What could they have to may of her? She
feared General Tilney did not like her appearance. She
found it was implied in his preventing her admittance to
his daughter, rather than postpone his own walk a few
minutes. “ How came Mr Thorpe to know your
father ? ” was her anxious inquiry, as she ointed them
out to her companion. He knew nothing about it;

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 37

but his father, like every military man, had a very large
an uainrance.

hen the entertainment was over, Thorpe came to
auiet them in getting out. Catherine was the immediate
object of his gallantry; and, while they waited in the
lobby for a chair, he prevented the inquiry which had
travelled from her heart almost to the tip of her tongue,
by asking, in a consequential manner, whether she had
seen him talking with General Tilney. “ He is a ﬁne
old fellow, upon my soul ! stout, active ; looks as young
as his son. I have a great regard for him, I assure you.
A gentleman-like, good sort of fellow as ever lived."

“ But how came you to know him 5 "

“ Know him! There are few people much about
how that I do not know. I have met him for ever at
the Bedford ; and I knew his face again to-day the
moment he came into the billiard-room. One of the
belt players we have, by-the-bye; and we had I little
touch together, though I was almost afraid of him at
ﬁrst. The odds were ﬁve to four against me; and, if
I had not made one of the cleanest strokes that perhaps
ever was made in this world—I took hit ball exactly—
but I could not make you understand it without a table:
however, I did beat him. A very ﬁne fellow; as rich
as a Jew. I should like to dine with him. I daresay
he gives famous dinners. But what do you think we
have been talking of P You. Yes, by heavens! and
the General thinks you the ﬁnest girl in Bath."

“ 0h, nonsense ! how can you say so 3 ”

“ And what do you think I said?” (lowering his
voice). “ Well done, General," said I, “ I am quite
of ur ruin "

ere Catherine, who wat much lets gratiﬁed by his
admiration than h General Tilney‘s, was not sorry to
be called away by {Jr Allen. Thorpe, however, would
see her to her chair, and, till she entered it, continued

88 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

the same kind of delicate ﬂattery, in spite of her entreat-
ing him to have done.

That General Tilney, instead of disliking, should
admire her, was very delightful ; and she joyfully thought
that there was not one of the family whom she need now
fear to meet. The evening had done more, much more
for her than could have been expected. '

Chlam- $113!.

ONDAY, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Fri-
day, and Saturday, have now passed in review
before the reader; the events of each day, its

hopes and fears, mortiﬁcstions and pleasures, have been
separately stated, and the pangs of Sunday only now
remain to be described, and close the week. The
Clifton scheme had been deferred, not relinquished;
and on the afternoon’s Crescent of this day it was
brought forward again. In a private consultation be-
tween Isabella and James, the former of whom had
particularly set her heart upon going, and the latter no
less anxiously placed his upon pleasing her, it was agreed
that, rovided the weather were fair, the party should
take piace on the following morning; and they were to
set off very early, in order to be at home in good time.
The affair thus determined, and Thorpe’s approbation
secured, Catherine only remained to be apprized of in
She had left them for a few minutes to speak to Miss
Tilney. In that interval the plan was completed, and
as soon as she came again, her agreement was demanded;
but instead of the gay acquiescence expected by Isabella,
Catherine looked grave, was very sorry, but could not
go. The engagement which ought to have kept her
from joining in the former attempt would make it im-

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 89

possible for her to accompany them now. She had that
moment settled with Miss Tiloey to take their promised
walk to-morrow; it was quite determined, and she
would not, upon any account, retract. But that she
mm! and Ibnuld retract was instantly the eager cry of
both the Thorpes ; they must go to Clifton to-morrow,
they would not go without her, it would be nothing to
put off a mere walk for one day longer, and they would
not hear of a refusal. Catherine was distressed, but not
subdued. “Do not urge me, Inbella. I am engaged
to Miss Tilney. I cannot go.” This availed nothing.
The same arguments assailed her again; she must go,
she should go, and they would not hear of a refusal.
“ It would be so easy to tell Miss Tilney that you had
just been reminded of a prior engagement, and must
only beg to put off the walk till Tuesday.”

“ No, it would not be easy. I could not do it.
There has been no prior engagement” But Isabella
became only more and more urgent; calling on her in
the most affectionate manner; addressing her by the
most endearing names. She was sure her dearest,
sweetest Catherine would not seriously refuse such a
triﬂing request to a friend who loved her so dearly.
She knew her beloved Catherine to have so feeling a
heart, so sweet a temper, to be so easily persuaded b
those she loved. But all in vain; Catherine felt herse f
to be in the right, and though pained by such tender,
such ﬂattering supplication, could not allow it to inﬂuence
her. Isabella then tried another method. She re-

roached her with having more affection for Miss
ilne , though she had known her so little 3 while,
than or her best and oldest friends; with being grown
cold and indiﬁ‘erent, in short, towards herself. “ I can-
not help being jealous, Catherine, when I see myself
Wmd for strangers; I, who love you so excessively!
hen once my affections are‘ placed, it is not in the

G

9° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

power of anything to change them. But I believe my
feelings are stronger than any body’s; I am sure they
are too strong for m own peace; and to see myself
supplaan in your friendship gy strangers does cut me
to the quick, I own. These ilneys seem to swallow
up everything else.”

Catherine thought this reproach equally strange and
unkind, Was it the part of a friend thus to expose her
feelings to the notice of others? Isabella appeared to
her ungenerous and selﬁsh, regardless of everything but
her own gratiﬁcation. These painful ideas crossed her
mind, though she said nothing. Isabella, in the mean-
while had applied her handkerchief so her eyes; and
Morland, miserable at such a sight, could not help say-
ing, “Nay, Catherine, I think you cannot stand out
any longer now. The sacriﬁce is not much; and to
oblige such a friend, I shall think you quite unkind if
you still refuse.”

This was the ﬁrst time of her brother’s openly siding
against her; and anxious to avoid his displeasure, she
proposed a compromise. If they would only put of their
scheme till Tuesday, which they might easily do, as it
depended only on themselves, she could go with them,
and everybody might then be satisﬁed. But “ No, no,
no i " was the immediate answer; “that could not be,
for Thorpe did not know that he might not go to town
on Tuesday.” Catherine was sorry, but could do no
more ; and a. short silence ensued, which was broken by
Isabella, who, in a voice of cold resentment, said,
“ Very well, then there is an end of the party. If
Catherine does not go, I cannot. I cannot be the only
woman. I would not upon any account in the world,
do so improper a thing.”

“ Catherine, you must go,” said James.

" But wh cannot Mr Thorpe drive one of his other
sisters? I Lre say either of them would like to go."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 9!

“Thank ye,” cried Thorpe; “but I did not come
to Bath to drive my sisters about and look like I fool.
No, if you do not go, d— me if I do. I only go for
the sake of driving you.”

“ That is a compliment which gives me no pleasure.”
But her words were lost on Thorpe, who had turned
abruptly away.

The three others still continued together, walking in
a most uncomfortable manner to poor Catherine ; some-
times not a word was said, sometimes she was again
attacked with supplications or repmaches, and her arm
was still linked within Isabella’s, though their hearts were
at war. At one moment she was softened, at another
irritated ; always distressed, but always steady.

“I did not think you had been so obstinate, Cath-
erine,” said James ; “ you were not used to be so hard
to persuade ; you once were the kindest, best-tempered
of m sisters.”

hope I am not less so now,” she replied, very
feelingly; “ but indeed I cannot go. If I am wrong,
I am doing what I believe to be right.”

“ I suspect,” said Isabella, in a low voice, " there is
no great struggle.”

Catherine’s heart swelled; she drew away her arm,
and Isabella made no opposition. Thus seed a long
ten minutes, till they were again joined by horpe, who,
coming to them with n gayer look, said, “ Well, I have
settled the matter, and now we may all go to-morrow
with a safe conscience. I have been to Miss Tilney,
and made your excuses.”

“ You have not! ” cried Catherine.

“ I have, upon my soul. Left her this moment.
Told her you had sent me to say, that having re-
collected a prior engagement of going to Clifton with us
to-morrow, you could not have the pleasure of walking
with her till Tuesday. She said very well, Tuesday

9! NORTHANGER ABBEY.

was just as convenient to her; so there is an end of all
our difﬁculties. A pretty good thought of mine,
h ?
eyIsabella’s countenance was once more all smiles and
good-humour, and James too looked hap y again.
"A most heavenly thought, indee ! Now, my
sweet Catherine, all our distresses are over; you are
honou’i’ably acquitted, and we shall have a most delightful

“ This will not do," said Catherine ; “ I cannot
submit to this. I must run after Miss Tilney directly
and set her right.”

lnhella, however, caught hold of one hand, Thorpe
of the other; and remonstrances poured in from all
three. Even James was quite angry. When every-
thing was settled, when Miss Tilney herself said that
Tuesday would suit her as well, it was quite ridiculous,
quite absurd, to make any further objection.

“I do not care. Mr Thorpe had no business to
invent an such message. If I had thought it right to
put it o , I could have Ipoken to Miss Tilney myself.
This is only doing it in a ruder way; and how do I
know that Mr Thorpe has—; he may be mistaken again,
perhaps. He led me into one act of rudeness by his
mistake on Friday. Let me go, Mr Thorpe; Isabella,
do not hold me.’

Thorpe told her it would be in vain to go after the
Tilneys: they were turning the corner into Brock
Street. when he had overtaken them, and were at home
by this time.

“ Then I will go after them,” said Catherine;
“ wherever they are, I will go after them. It does not
signify talking. If I could not be rsuaded into doing
what I thought wrong, I never will’ebe tricked into it.”
And with these words she broke awn and hurried off.
Thorpe would have darted after her, ut Morland with- _

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 93

held him. “ Let her go, let her go, if she will go.
She is nobsﬁnate ss—”

Thorpe [3] never finished the sirnile, for it could
hardly have been a proper one.

Away walked Catherine in great agitation, as fast as
the crowd would permit her, fearful of being pursued,
yet detemrined to persevere. As she walked, the
reﬂected on what had passed. It was painful to her
to disappoint and displease them, particularly to displease
her brother; but she could not repent her resistance.
Setting her own inclination apart, to have failed a
second time in her engagement to Miss Tilney, to have
retracted a promise voluntarily made only ﬁve minutes
before, and on a false pretence too, must have been
wrong. She had not been withstanding them on
selﬁsh principles alone, she had not consulted merely
her own gratiﬁcation ; [bat might have been ensured in
some degree by the excursion itself, by seeing Blaize
Castle; no, she had attended to what was due to others,
and to her own character in their opinion. Her con-
viction of being right, however, was not enough to restore
her composure: till she had spoken to Miss Tilney,
she could not be at ease; and quickening her pace
when she got clar of the Crescent, she almost ran over
the remaining ground till she gained the top of Milsom
Street. So rapid had been her movements, that, in
spite of the Tilneys’ advantage in the outset, they were
but just turning into their lodgings as she came within
view of them; and the servant still remaining at the
open door, she used only the ceremonyof saying that
she must speak with Miss Tilney that moment, and
hurrying by him roceeded up stairs. Then, opening
the ﬁrst door re her, which ha pened to be the
right, due immediately found herself) in the drawing-

room with General Tilney, his son and daughter.
- Her explanation, defective only in being—from her

94 NORTHANGER ABBEY.
irrivau'on of nerves and shortness of breath—no explana~
tion at all, was instantly given. “I am come in a
great hurry,—-it was all a mistake; I never promised
toga; I toldthem from the ﬁrst I could not go; I
ran away in a gmt hurry to explain it; I did not
care what you thought of me ; I would not stay for the
servant.”

The business, however, though not perfectly eluci-
dated by this speech, soon ceased to be a puzzle.
Catherinerfound that John Thorpe had given the
message; and Miss Tilney had no scniples in owning
herself greatly surprized by it. But whether her
brother had still exceeded her in resentment, Catherine,
though she instinctively addressed herself as much to
one as to the other in her vindication, had no means of
knowing. Whatever might have been felt before
her arrival, her eager declarations immediately made
every look and sentence as friendly as she could
desire.

The affair thue happily settled. she was introduced by
Miss Tilney to her father, and received by him with
such ready, such solicitous politeness, as recalled
Thorpe’s information to her mind, and made her think
with pleasure that he might he sometimes d nded on.
To such anxious mention was the Genenl’s civility
canied, that, not aware of her extraordinary Iwiftuess
in entering the house, he was quite angry with the
servant whose neglect had reduced her to o n the door
of the a rtment herself. “What did illiam mean
by it? e should make a point of inquiring into the
matter." And if Catherine had not most warmly
asserted his innocence, it seemed likely that William
would lose the favour of his master for ever, if not his
place, by her rapidity.

After sitting with them a quarter of an hour, she
rose to take leave, and was then mot agreeably sur-

NORTHANGER user. 95

prized by General Tilney’ s asking her if she would do his
daughter the honour of dining and spending the rest ‘of
the day with her. Miss Tilney added her own wishes.
Catherine was greatly obliged; but it was quite out of
her power, Mr and Mrs Allen would expect her back
every moment. The General declared he could say no
more; the claims of Mr and Mrs Allen were not to be
superseded; but on some other day, he trusted, when
longer notice could be given, they would not refuse to
spare her to her friend. “ Oh, no; Catherine was
sure they would not have the least objection, and she
should have great pleasure in coming.” The General
attended her himself to the street door, saying every-
thing -gallant as they went down stairs, admiring the
elasticity of her walk, which corresponded exactly with
the spirit of her dancing, and making her one of the
most graceful bows she had ever beheld when they parted.

Catherine, delighted by all that had passed, proceeded
gaily to Pulteney Street, walking, as she concluded,
with great elasticity, though she hat.l never thought of it
before. She reached home without seeing anything
more of the offended party; and now that she had been
triumphant throughout, had carried her point, and was
secure of her walk, she began (as the ﬂutter of her
spirits subsided) to doubt whether she had been per-
fectly right. A sacriﬁce was always noble; and if she
had given way to their entreaties, she should have been
spared the distressing idea of a friend a brother
angry, and a scheme of great happiness to both destroyed,
perhaps through her means. To ease her mind, and
ascertain by the opinion of an unprejudiCed person what
her own conduct had really been, she took occasion to
mention before Mr Allen the half-settled scheme of her
brother and the Thorpes for the following day. Mr
Allen caught at it directly. “Well,” said he, “and
do you think of going too 2 "

96 noun-muss]: ABBEY.

“No; I had just engaged myselfto walk with Miss
Tilney before they told me of it; and therefore, you
know, I could not go with them, could I i"

" No, certainly not ; and I am glad you do not think
of it. These schemes are not at all the thing. Young
men and women driving about the country in open
can’iages! Now and then it is very well ; but going to
inns and public laces together! It is not right; and
I wonder Mrs horpe should allow it. I am glad you
do not think of going ; I am sure Mrs Morland would
not be pleased. Mrs Allen, are not you of my way of
thinking? Do not you think these kind of projects
objectionable ? ”

“ Yes, very much so, indeed. Open carriages are
nasty things. A clean gown is not ﬁve minutes’ wear
in them. You are splashed getting in and getting out;
and the wind ukes your hair and your bonnet in every
direction. I hate an open carriage myself."

“ I know you do ; but that is not the question. Do
not on think it has an odd appearance, if young ladies
are uently driven about in them by young men, to
whom they are not even related? ”

“Yes, my dear, a very odd appearance indeed. I
cannot hear to see it.”

“ Dear madam,” cried Catherine, “ then why did
not you tell me so before? I am sure if I had known
it to be imaproper I would not have gone with Mr
Thorpe at l; but I always hoped you would tell me,
if you thought I was doing wrong.’ ’

“ And so I should, my dear, you may depend on it;
for, as I told Mrs Morland at parting, I would always
do the best for you in my power. But one must not
be over particular. Young people will be young people,
as your good mother nys herself. You know I wanted
you, when we ﬁrst came, not to buy that sprigged muslin,
but you would. Young people do not like to be always
thwarted."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 97

“ But this was something of real consequence; and
I do not think you would have found me hard to per-
snade.”

“ As far as it has gone hitheroo, there is no harm
done," said Mr Allen; “and I would only advise
you, my dear, not to go out with Mr Thorpe any
more.”

“ That is what I was going to say,” added his

e.

Catherine, relieved for herself, felt many for Imbella;
and after a. moment’s thought, asked Mr Allen whether
it would not be both proper and kind in her to write to
Miss Thorpe, and explain the indecorurn of which she
must be as insensihk as herself; for she considered that
Isabella might otherwise perhaps be going to Clifton
the next clay, in spite of what had passed. Mr Allen,
however, discounged her from doing any such thing.
“ You had better leave her alone, my clear, she is old
enough to know what she is about: and if not, has a
mother to advise her. Mrs Thorpe is too indulgent
beyond a doubt; but, however, you had beuer not
interfere. She and your brother chuse to go, and you
will be only getting ill-will.” .

Catherine submitted; and though sorry to think that
Isabella should be doing wrong, felt greatly relieved by
Mr Allen’s approbation of her own conduct, and truly
rejoiced to be preserved by his advice from the danger
of falling into such an error herself. Her escape from
being one of theparty to Clifton was now an escape
indeed; for what would the Tilneys have thought of
her, if she had broken her promise to them in order to
do what was wrong in itself, if she had been guilty of
one breach of propriety only to enable her to be guilty
of another 2

98 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

than" £3193

HE next morning was fair, and Catherine almost
expected another attack from the assembled
parry. With Mr Allen to support her, the felt

no dread of the event ; but she would gladly be spared
a contest where victory itself was painful, and wan
heartily rejoiced, therefore, at neither seeing nor hearing
anything of them. The Tilneys called for her at the
appointed time, and no new difﬁculty arining, no sudden
recollection, no unexpected summons, no impertinent
intrusion to diaconoert their meaeures, my heroine wan
moot unnaturally able to fulﬁl her engagement, though
it was made with the hero himself. The determined
on walking round Beechen Cliff, that nob e hill, whose
beautiful verdure and hanging coppice render it so
striking an object from almost every opening in Bath.

“ I never look at it,” said Catherine, a: they walked
along the side of the river, “ without thinking of the
south of France.”

“ You have been abroad, then i ” mid Henry, a little
surprized.

“ 0h ! no, I only mean what I have read about.
It always um me in mind of the country that Emily
and her ather travelled through in the ‘ Mysteries
of Udolpho.’ But you never md novele, I dare
My ? n

“ Why not ? " _

“ Because they are not dever enough for you;
gentlemen rad better books."

" The perlon, be it gentleman or lady, who has not
pleasure in a good novel, must be intolerany stupid. I
have read all Mn Radcliﬂ'e'l works, and most of them
with great pleasure. The ‘ Myareriea of Udolpho,’ when
Ihad onoe begun it, I could not lay down again; I re-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 99

member ﬁnishing it in two days, my hair standing on
end the whole time.”

“ Yes,” added Miss Tilney; “and I remember that
you undertook to read it aloud to me; and that when

was called away for only ﬁve minutes to answer a
note, instead of waiting for me, you took the volume
into the Hermitage Walk. and I was obliged to may
till you had ﬁnished it.”

,“ Thank you, Eleanor; a most honourable testi-
mony. You see, Miss Morland, the injustice of your
suspicions. Here was I, in my eagerness to get on,
reﬁning to wait only ﬁve minutes for my sister; brak-
ing the promise I had made of reading it aloud, and
keeping her in suspense at a most interesting part, by
running away with the volume, which, you are to observe,
was her own, particularly her own. I am proud when I
reﬂect on it, and I thinlt it must establish me in your
good opinion.”

“ I am very glad to hear it, indeed; and now I shall
never be aahamed of liking Udolpho myself. But I
rally thought before, young men delpised novel:
amazingly.”

“ It in amazing“ it may well suggest m! if
they do, for they read nearly as many as women. I,
myself, have read hundreds and hundreds. Do not
imagine that you can cope with me in a knowledge of
Julias and Louiaas. If we proceed to Ertieulara, and
engage in the never-ceasing inquiry of ‘ live you read
this.” and‘Have you read that.’ I ahall soon lave
you as far behind me al—what shall I say? I want an
aplp'ropriate timile; a far as your friend Emily her-
se left poor Valancourt when she went with her aunt
into Italy. Consider how many yearn I have had the
moi you. Ihad entered onmymdieuatOxford,
while you were a good little girl working your ampler
at home! "

IOD NORTH-ANGER ABBEY.

“Not very good, I am afraid. But now, reall , do
not you think Udolpho the nicest book in the wo d 9 "

“ The nicest; by which I suppose you mean the
neatest. That must depend upon the binding.”

“ Henry,” said Miss Tilney, “ you are very imperti-
nent. Miss Morland, he is treating you exactly as he
does his sister. He is for ever ﬁnding fault with me
for some incorrectness of language, and now he is taking
the same liberty with you. The word ‘ nicest,’ as you
used it, did not suit him; and you had better change it
as soon as you can, or we shall be overpowered with
Johnson and Blair all the rest of the way. '

“I am sure,” cried Catherine, “ I did not mean to
say anything wrong; but it is a nice book, and why
should not I call it so ? "

“ Very true,” said Henry, “and this is a very nice
day; and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are
two very nice young ladies. Oh! it is a very nice
word, indeed! it does for everything. Originally, per-
ha s, it was applied only to express neatness, propriety,
delicacy, or reﬁnement; people were nice in their dress,
in their sentiments, or their choice. But now every
commendation on every subject is comprised in that one
word.”

“ While, in fact,” cried his sister, “it ought only to
be applied to you, without any commendation at all.
You are more nice than wise. Come, Miss Morland,
let us leave him to meditate over our faults in the utmost
propriety of diction, while we praise Udolpho in what-
ever terms we like bcst. It is a most interesting work.
You are fond of that kind of reading 2”

“ To y the truth, I do not much like any other.”

“ Indeed ! ” .

“ That is, I can read poetry and play, and things of
that sort, and do not dislike travels. ut history, real
solemn history, I cannot be interested in. Can you?"

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l o I

“ Yes, I am fond of history.”

“I wish I were too. I read it a little as aduty;
but it tells me nothing that does not either vex or
weary me. The quarrels of popes and kings, with wars
or pestilences in every page; the men all so good for
nothing, and hardly any women at all, it is very tire-
some; and yet I often think it odd that it should he so
dull, for a great deal of it must be invention. The
speeches that are put into the heroes' mouths, their
thoughts and designs: the chief of all this must be in-
vention, and invention is what delights me in other
books.”

“ Historians, you think,” said Miss Tilney, “ are not
happy in their ﬂights of fancy. They display imagina-
tion without raising interest I am fond of history, and
am very well contented to take the false with the true.
In the principal facts they have sources of intelligence
in former histories and records, which may be as much
depended on I conclude as anything that does not
actually pass under one’s own observation ; and as for
the little embellishments you speak of, they are em-
bellishments, and I like them as such. If a speech be
well drawn , I read it with pleasure, by whomever
it may be e: and probahl with much greater, ifthe
production of Mr Hume or r Robertson, than if the

enuine words of Caractacus, Agricola, or Alfred the
ers

“ You are fond of history! and so are Mr Allen and
my father; and I have two brothers who do not dislike
it. So man instances within my small circle of friends
is remarkabel At this rate, I shall not pity the
writers of history any longer. If people like to read
theirhookgitis allverywell; but to be at so much
trouble in ﬁlling great volumes, which, as I used to
think, nobody would willingly ever look into, to he
labouring only for the torment of little boys and girls,

lo! NORTHANGER ABBEY.

alwa s struck me as a hard fate; and though I know it
is all very right and necesury, I have often wondered
at the person’s courage that could sit down on purpose
to do rt"

“That little boys and girls should be tormented,"
said Henry, “is what no one at all acquainted with
human nature in a civilised state can deny; but in be-
half of our most distinguished historians, I must observe,
that they might well be offended at being supposed tr.
have no higher aim; and that by their method and
style they are perfectly well qualiﬁed to torment readers
of the most advanced reason and mature time of life.
I use the verb ‘ to torment,’ as I observed to be your
own method, instead of ‘to instruct,’ supposing them
at be now admitted as synonimous."

“You think me foolish to call instnrction a torment ;
but if you had been as much used as myself to hear poor
little children ﬁrst leaning their letters, and then imm-
ing to spell, if you had ever seen how stupid they can
be for a whole morning together, and how tired my
poor mother is at the end of it, as I am in the habit of
seeing almost every day of my life at home, you would
allow, that so lumen! and to humus might somedrnee
be used as synonimous words.”

“ Very probably. But historians are not accountable
for the difﬁculty of learning m read; and even you.
yourself, who do not altogether seem particularly
friendly to very severe, Very intense application, ma
perhaps be brought to acknowledge that it is very we
worth while to be tormde for two or three years of
one’s life, for the sake of being able to read all the rest
of it. Consider, if reading had not been taught, Mrs
Radcliffe would have written in vain, or, perhaps, might
not have written at all."

Catherine assented; and a very warm panegyric from
her on that lady’s merits closed the subject. The

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 103

Tilneys were soon engaged in another, on which the had
nothing to say. They were viewing the country with
the eyes of persons accustomed to drawing; and de-
cided on its capability of being formed into pictures,
with all the eagerness of real taste. Here Catherine
was quite lost. She knew nothing ofdrawing—nothing
of taste; and she listened to them with an attention
which brought her little proﬁt, for they talked in phrases
which conveyed scarcely any idea to her. The little
which she could understand, however, appeared to con-
tradict the very few notions she had entertained on the
matter before. It seemed as if a good view were no
longer to be taken from the top of an high hill, and that
I clear blue sk was no longer a proof of a ﬁne day.
She was hes ' y ashamed of her ignorance—a misplaced
shame. Where people wish to attach, they should
always be ignorant To come with a well-informed
mind, is to come with an inability of administering to
the vanity of others, which a sensible person would
always wish to avoid. A woman, especially, if she
have the misfortune of knowing any thing, should con-
ceal it as well as the can.

The advantages of natural folly in a beautiful girl
have been already set forth by the capital pen of a sister
author; and to her treatment of the subject I will only
add, in justice to men, that though, to the larger and
more triﬂing part of the sex, imbecility in females is a
great enhancement of their personal charms, there is a
portion of them too reasonable, and too well-informed
themselves, to desire anything more in woman than
ignorance. But Catherine did not know her own
advantages; did not know that a good-looking girl with
an affectionate heart, and a very ignorant mind, cannot
fail of attracting a clever young man, unless circum-
stances are particularly untoward. In the present in-
stance, the confessed and lamented her want of know-

104 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

ledge; declared that she would give anything in the
world to be able to draw; and a lecture on the pic-
turesque immediately followed, in which his instructions
were so clear that she soon began to see beauty in every-
thing admired by him ; and her attention was so earnest,
that he became perfectl satisﬁed of her having a great
deal of natural taste. lYle talked of fore-grounds, dis-
unces, and second distances; side-screens, and perspec- -
tives; lights and shades; and Catherine was so hopeful
a scholar, that when they gained the top of Beechen
Cliff, she voluntarily rejected the whole City of Bath, as
unworthy to make part of a landscape. Delighted
with her progress, and fearful of wearying her with too
much wisdom at once, Henry suffered the sub'ect to
decline, and, by an easy transition from a piece 0 rocky
fragment, and the withered oak which he had placed
near its summit, to oaks in general—to forests, the en-
closure of them, waste lands, crown lands and govern-
ment—he shortly found himself arrived at politics; and
from politics it was an easy step to silence. The
general pause which succeeded his short disquisition on
the mate of the nation was put an end to by Catherine,
who, in rather a solemn tone of voice, uttered these
words, “ I have heard that something very shocking
indeed will soon come out in London.”

Miss Tilney, to whom this was chieﬂy addressed, was“
startled, and hastily replied, “ Indeed! and of what
nature?”

“That I do not know, nor who is the author. I
have only heard that it is to be more horrible than any-
thing we have met with yet.”

" Good heaven! Where could you hear of such a
thing ? "

“ A rticular friend of mine had an account of it in
a letter London yesterday. It is to be uncommonly
dread’ful. I shall expect murder and'everything of the
kind. ’

.._._1 _ ,,g.g , AV_A____

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 1 05

“ You with astonishing composure. But I
hope your ‘end’s accounts have been exaggerated; and
if such a design is known beforehand, proper measures
will undoubtedly be taken by government to prevent its
coming to effect."

“ Government," said Henry, endeavouring not to
smile, “ neither desires nor dares to interfere in such
matters. There must be murder, and government cares
not how much.”

The ladies stared. He laughed, and added, “ Come,
shall I make you understand each other, or leave you to
puzzle out an explanation as you can? No, I will be
noble. I will prove myself a man no less by the
generosity of my soul, than the cleamess of my head. I
have no patience with such of my sex as disdain to let
themselves sometimes down to the comprehension of
yours. Perhaps the abilities of women are neither
sound nor acute, neither vigorous nor keen. Perhaps
they may want observation, discernment, judgment, ﬁre,
genius, and wit." _

“ Miss Morland, 'do not mind what he says; but
have the goodness to satisfy me as to this dreadful riot.”

“ Riot !—what riot ? "

“ My dear Eleanor, the riot is only in your own
brain. The confusion there is scandalous. Miss Mor-
land has been talking of nothing more dreadful than a
new publication which is shortly to come out, in three
duodecimo volumes, two hundred and seventy-six pages
in each, with a frontispiece to the ﬁrst, of two tomb-
stones and a lantern—do you understand? And you,
Miss Morland—my stupid sister has mistaken all your
clearest expressions. You talked of expected horrors
in London; and instead of instantly conceiving, as any
rational creature would have done, that such words
could relate only to a circulating library. she immedi-
:me pictured to herself a mob of three thousand men

H

toG NORTHANGER ABBEY.
assembling in St George’s Fields; the Bank attacked,
the Tower threatened, the streets of London ﬂowing
with blood, a detachment of the nth Light Dragoons
(the hopes of the nation) called up from Northampton
to quell the insurgents, and the gallant Captain Frederick
Tilney, in the moment of charging at the head of his
troop, knocked or? his horse hya brick-bat from an
upper window. Forgive her stupidity. The fears of
the sister have added to the weakness of the woman;
but she is by no means a simpleton in general.”

Catherine looked grave. “ And now, Henry,” said
Miss Tilney, “that you have made us understand each
other, you may as well make Miss Morland understand
yourself, unless you mean to have her think you in-
tolerany rude to your sister, and a great bnrte in you
opinion of women in general. Miss Morland is not
used to your odd ways."

“ I shall be most happy to make her better acquainted
with them.”

“No doubt; but that is no explanation of the
present.”

“What am I to do?”

"You know what you ought to do. Clear your
character handsomely before her. Tell her that you
think very highly of the understanding of women.”

“Miss Morland, I think very highly of the under-
standing of all the women in the world, especially of
those, whoever they may he, with whom I happen to
be in company.”

“ That is not enough. Be more serious.”

“ Miss Morland, no one can think more highly of the
understanding of women than I do. In my opiniom
nature has given them so much that they never ﬁnd it
necessary to use more than half.”

“ We shall get nothing more serious from him now,
Miss Morland. He is not in a sober mood. But I

NORTHANGER ABBEY. [07

assure you that he must be entirely misunderstood, if he
can ever appear to say an unjust thing of any woman at
all, or an unkind one of me."

It was no effort to Catherine to believe that Henry
Tilney could never be wrong. His manner might
sometimes surprize, but his meaning must always be
jun; and what she did not understand, she was almost
as ready to admire, as what she did. The whole walk was
delightful, and though it ended too soon, its conclusion
wasdelightful too. Her friends attended her into the
house, and Miss Tilney, before they parted, addressing
herself with respectful form, as much to Mrs Allen as to
Catherine, petitioned for the pleasure of her com ny to
dinner on the day after the next. No difﬁcu ty was
made on Mrs Allen' s side, and the only difﬁculty on
Catherine’s was in concealing the excess of her lessure.

The morning had passed away so chant-singly as to
banish all her friendshi and natural affection; for no
thought of Isabella or ames crossed her mind during
their walk. When the Tilneys were gone, she became
amiable again, but she was amiable for some time to little
effect; Mrs Allen had no intelligence to give that could
relieve her anxiety; she had heard nothing of any of
them. Towards the end of the morning, however,
Catherine having occasion for some indispensable yard
of ribbon, which must be bought without a moment’s
delay, walked out into the town, and in Bond Street
overtook the second Miss Thorpe, as she was loitering
towards Edgai’s Buildings between two of the sweetest
girlsin the world, who had been her dear friends all the
morning. From her, she soon learned that the party
to Clifton had taken place. “ The set off at eight
this morning," said Miss Anne, “ and am sure I do not
envy them their drive. I think you and I are verywell
of? to be out of the scrape. It must he the dullest thing
in the world, for there is not a soul at Clifton at this

m8 non-rmmcm sneer.

time of the year. Belle went with your brother, and
John drove Maria.” -

Catherine spoke the pleasure she really felt on hearing
this part of the amngernent.

“Oh! yes," rejoined the other, “Maria is gone.
She was quite wild to go. She thought it would be
something very ﬁne. I cannot say I admire her taste ;
and, for my part, I was determined from the ﬁrst not to
go, if they pressed me ever so much.”

Catherine, a little doubtful of this, could not help
answering, “ I wish on could have gone too. It is a
pity you could not a I go.”

“Thank you : but it is quite a matter of indifference
to me. Indeed, I would not have gone on any account.
I was saying so to Emily and Sophia when you over-
took us.”

Catherine was still unconvinced ; but glad that Anne
should have the friendship of an Emily and a Sophia to
console her, she bade her adieu without much uneasi-
ness, and returned home, pleased that the party had not
been revented by her refusing to join it, and very
heartiip wishing that it might be too pleasant to allow
either ames or Isabella to resent her resistanCe any
longer.

chum: SH.

ARLY the next day, a note from Isabella, speaking
peace and lendemeas in every line, and entreating
the immediate presence of her friend on a matter

of the utmost importance, hastened Catherine, in the
hap iest state of conﬁdence and curiosity, to Edgar’s .
Bu' dings. The two youngest Miss Thorpes were by
themselves in the parlour, and on Anne’s quitting it to
call her sister, Catherine took the opportunity of asking

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 109
the other for some particulars of their yesterday’s

wuﬁaria desired no greater pleasure than to speak of it;
and Catherine immediately learned that it had been
altogether the most delightful scheme in theworld, that
nobod could imagine how charming it had been, and that
it had more delightful than anﬁybody could conceive.
Such was the information of the rst ﬁve minutes; the
second unfolded thus much in detail, that they had
driven directly to the York Hotel, ate some sou , and
bespoke an early dinner, walked down to the mp-
room, tasted the water, and laid out some shillings in
purses and spars ; thence adjourned to eat ice at a pastry-
coolt’s, and hurrying back to the hotel, swallowed their
dinner in haste, to prevent being in the dark, and then
had a delightful drive back, only the moon was not up,
and it rained a little, and Mr Morland’s horse was so
tired he could hardly get it along.

Catherine listened with heartfelt satisfaction. It
appeared that Blaize Castle had never been thought of,
and as for all the rest, there was nothing to regret for
half an instant. Maria's intelligence concluded with a
tender effusion of pity for her sister Anne, whom she
represented as insupportahly cross from being excluded
the party.

“ She will never forgive me, I am sure; but, you
know, how could I help it? John would have me go,
for he vowed he would not drive her because she had
such thick ancles. I dare say the will notbe in good
humour again this month ; but I am determined I will
not he cross; it is not a little matter that puts me out
of temper.”

Isabella now entered the room with so eager a step,
and a look of such happy importance, an engaged all her
friend's notice. Maria was without ceremony sent
away, and Inabqu embracing Catherine, thus began :—-

1 1° WORN-[ANGER ABBEY.

“Yes, my dmr Catherine, it is so, indeed ; your pene-
tration has not deceived you. Oh, that arch eye of
yours! it sees through everything.” *

Catherine replied only by a look of wondering ignor-
ance.

“Nay, my beloved, sweetest friend,” conﬁrmed the
other, “ compose yourself. I am amazingly agitated, as
at? roeive. Let us sit down and talk in comfort.

e , and so you guessed it the moment you had my
note? Sly creature! Oh! my dear Catherine, you
alone who know my heart can judge of my present
happiness. Your brother is the most charming of men.
I only wish I were more worthy of him. But what
will your excellent father and mother say? Oh,
heavens! when I think of them, I am soagitatedl "

Catherine’s understanding began to awake; an idea
of the truth suddenl darted into her mind; and, with
the natural blush 0 so new an emotion, she cried out,
“Good heaven! my dear Isabella, what do you
mean? Can you—can you really be in love with
James?"

This bold surmise, however, she soon learnt com-
prehended but half the fact The anxious affection
which she was accused of having continually watched in
Isabella’s every look and action, had, in the course of
their yesterday’s y, received the delightful confes~
sion of an e ual ove. Her heart and faith were alike
engaged to ames. Never had Catherine listened to
anything so full of interest, wonder, and joy. Her
brother and her friend en ged! New to such circum-
stances, the importance 0 it appeared unspeakabe great.
and she contemplated it as one of those grand events
of which the ordinary course of life can hard! afford a
return. The strength of her feelings the co d not ex-
press; the nature of them, however, contented her
friend. The happiness of having such a sister was their

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l l I

lint effusion, and the fair ladies mingled in embrace
and tears of joy.

Delighting, however, as Catherine sincerely did, in
the pros of the connexion, it must be acknowledged
that Isa lla far surpassed her in tender anticipations.
“ You will be so infinitely dearer to me, my Catherine,
than either Anne at Maria. I feel that I shall be ll)
much more attached to my dear Morland’s family than
to my own." .

This was a pitch of friendship beyond Catherine

“ You are so like your dear brother,” continued Isabella,
“ that I quite doated on you the ﬁrst moment I saw you.
But so it always is with me: the lint moment settles
everything. The very ﬁrst day that Morland came to
us last Christmas, the very ﬁrst moment I beheld him,
my heart was irrevocably gone. I remember I wore
my yellow gown, with my hair done up in braids; and
when I came into the drawing-room, and John intro-
duced him, I thought I never saw anybody so handsome
before.”

Here Catherine secretly acknowled ed the power of
love; for, though exceedingly fond 0 her brother, and
partial to all his endowments, she had never in her life
thought him handsome.

“ I remember, too, Miss Andrews drank tea with us
that evening, and were her puce-coloured tarsenet; and
she looked so heavenly, that I thought your brother
mutt certainly fall in love with her; I could not sleep
a wink all night for thinking of it. Oh! Catherine,
the many Ileeplesa nights I have had on our brother's
account l I would not have you suffer ha f what I have
done! I an: grown wretchedly thin, I know; but I
will not pain you by describing my anxiety; you have
seen enough of it. I feel that I have betrayed myself
perpetually; so unguarded in speaking of m partiality
for the church ! But my secret I was wayl sure
would be safe with you.”

I I 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY

Catherine felt that nothing could have been safer;
but ashamed of an ignorance little expected, she dared
no longer contest the point, nor refuse to have been as
full of arch penetration and affectionate sympathy as
Isabella chose to consider her. Her brother, she found,
was preparing to set oﬂ‘ with all speed to Fullerton, to
make known his situation and ask consent; and here
was a source of some real agitation to the mind of
Isabella. Catherine endeavoured to persuade her, as
she was herself persuaded, that her father and mother
would never oppose their son’s wishes. “It is impos-
sible," said she, “ for parents to be more kind, or more
desirous of their children’ s happiness; I have no doubt
of their consenting immediately. ’

“ Morland says exactly the same,” replied Isabella;
“ and yet I dare not expect it; my fortune will be so
small ; they never can consent to it. Your brother, who
might marry anybody! ”

Here Catherine again discerned the force of love.

“ Indeed, Isabella, you are too humble. The differ-
ence of fortune can be nothing to signify.”

“ Oh! my sweet Catherine, in er generous heart I
know it would signify nothing, but we must not expect
such disinterestedness in many. As for myself,I am
sure I only wish our situations were reversed. Had I
the command of millions, were I mistress of the whole
world, your brother would be my only choice.”

This charming sentiment, recommended as much by
sense as novelty, gave Catherine a most pleasing remem-
brance of all the heroines of her acquaintance; and she
thought her friend never looked more lovely than in
uttering the grand idm. “ [am sure they will consent,"
was her f uent declaration; “ I am sure they will be
deligth With you.”

“ For my own part,” said Isabella, “ my wishes are
so moderate, that the smallest income in nature would

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I I 3

be enough for me. Where people are really attached,
poverty itself is wealth: grandeur I detest: I would
not settle in London for the universe. A cottage in
some retired village would be extasy. There are some
charming little villas about Richmond.”

“ Richmond ! ” cried Catherine. “ You must settle
near Fullerton. You must be near In."

“IamsureIshallbemisembleif wedonot. If I
can butbe near jail, I shall be satisﬁed. But this is
idle talking! I will not allow myself to think of Iuch
things till we have your father’ s answer. Morland says
tbat'hy sending it to-night to Salisbury, we may have it
to-morrow. To-morrowl I know I shall never have
courage to open the letter. I know it will be the death
of me.’ ’

A reverie succeeded this conviction, and when
Inbelln spoke again, it was to resolve on the quality of
her wedding-gown.

Their conference was put an end to by the anxious
young lover himself, who came to breathe his parting
sigh before he set off for Wiltshire. Catherine wished
to congratulate him, but knew not what to say, and
her eloquence was only in her eyes. From them, how-
ever, the eight pom of speech shone out most expres-
cively, and James could combine them with ease. Im-
patient for the realization of all that he hoped at home,
his adicus were not long, and they would have been yet
shorter had he not been frequently detained by the
urgent entreaties of his fair one that he would go.
Twice was he called almost from the door by her eager-
ness to have him gone. “Indeed, Morland, I must
drive you away. Consider how far on have to ride.
I cannot hear to see you linger so. I’m Heaven’s sake,
wane no more time. There, go, go—I insist on it.”

The two friends, with hearts now more united than
ever, were inseparable for the day; and in schemes of

I 1‘ NORTHANGER ABBEY.

sisterly happiness the hours ﬂew along. Mrs Thorpe
and her son, who were ac minted with everything, and
who seemed only to want r Morland’s consent to con-
sider Isabella’s engagement as the most fortunate cir-
cumstance imaginable for their family, were allowed to
'oin their counsels, and add their quota of signiﬁcant
coke and mysterious expressions, to ﬁll up the measure
of cu ' 't to be raised in the unprivileged younger
sisters. 0 Catherine’s simple feelings, this odd sort of
reserve seemed neither kindly meant, nor consistently
supported; and its unkindness she would hardly have
forborn pointing out, had its inconsistency been less
their friend; but Anne and Maria soon set her heart at
ease by the sagacity of their “ I know what ; ” and the
evening was spent in a sort of war of wit, a displa of
family ingenuity ; on one side in the mystery 0 an
affected secret, on the other of undeﬁned discovery, all
equally acute.

Catherine was with her friend again the next day,
endeavouring to support her spirits, and while away the
many tedious hours before the delivery of the letters: a
needful exertion ; for as the time of reasonable expecta-
tion drew near, Isabella became more and more despond-
ing, and before the letter arrived, had worked herself
into a state of real distress. But when it did come,
where could distress be found? “ I have had no difﬁ-
culty in gaining the consent of my kind parents, and am
promised that everything in their power shall be done
to forward my happiness,” were the ﬁrst three lines, and
in one moment all was joyful security. The brightest
glow was instantly spmd over Isabella’s features—all
care and anxiety seemed removed, her spirire became
almost too high for controul, and she called herself
without scruple the happiest of mortals.

Mrs Thorpe, with tears ofjoy, embraced her dnu hter,
her son, her visitor, and could have embraced f the

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I l 5

inhabitant: of Bath with satisfaction. Her heart was
overﬂowing with tenderness. It was “dear John,” and
“dear Catherine,” at every word; “dear Anne and
dear Maria ” must immediately be made sharers in their
felicity; and two “dean ” at once before the name of
Isabella were not more than that beloved child had now
well earned. John himself was no skulker in joy. He
not only bestowed on Mr Morland the high commenda-
tion of being one of the ﬁnest fellows in the world, but
swore off many sentences in his raise.

The letter whence sprang lthis felicity was short,
containing little more than this assurance of succeu ; and
every particular was deferred till James could write
again. But for rticulars Isabella could well afford to
wait. The n was com rised in Mr Morland’s
promise: his honour was pl ged to make everything
easy; and by what means their income was to be formed,
whether landed property were to be resigned, or funded
money made over, was a matter in which her disinter-
ested spirit took no concern. She knew enough to feel
secure of an honourable and speedy establishment, and
her imagination took a rapid ﬂight over its intended
felicities. She saw herself, at the end of a few weeks,
the gaze and admiration of every new acquaintance at
Fullerton, the envy of every valued old friend in Putney,
with a carriage at her command, a new name on her
tickets, and a brilliant exhibition of hoop rings on her
ﬁn er.

hen the contents of the letter were ascertained,
John Thorpe, who' had only waited its arrival to begin
his journey to London, prepared to set off. “ Well,
Miss Morland,” said he, on ﬁnding her alone in the
parlour, “ I am come to bid you good-by." Catherine
wished him a good journey. Without appearing to hear
her, he walked to the window, ﬁdgetted about, hummed
a tune, and seemed wholly self-occupied.

l 16 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

" Shall not you be late at Devizes ? ” naid Catherine.
He made no answer ; but after a minute’s ailence burnt
out with, “ A famous good thing this marrying scheme,
u n my soul ! A clever fancy of Morland’s and Belle’s.

hat do you think of it, Miss Morland? I say it is
no bad nou'on.”

“I am sure I think it a very good one.”

“Do you P—that’s honest; by heavens! I am glad
you are no enemy to matrimony, however. Did you
ever hear the old song, ‘Going to one wedding brings
on another’? I say, you will come to Belle's wedding,
I ho .”

“ es; I have promised your sister to be with her,
if possible.”

“ And then you know "—twisting himself about, and
forcing a foolish laugh—“ I say, then you know, we
may try the truth of this same old song.”

“ May we? but I never ling. Well, I with you a
good journey. I dine with Mina Tilney to-day, and
must now be going home.” »

“ Nay, but there is no such confounded huny. Who
knows when we may be together again ? Not but that
I shall be down again by the end of a fortnight, and a
devilish long fortnight it will appear to me."

“Then why do you my away so long?” replied
Catherine, ﬁnding that he waited for an answer.

“That is kind of you, however; kind and good.
natured. I shall not forget it in a hurry. But you
have more good-nature, and all that, than anybody
living, I believe. A monstrous deal of good-nature,
and it is not only good-nature, but you have so much—
so much of everything; and then you have such—upon
my soul, I do not know any body like you.”

“ Oh dear! there are a great many people like me, I
dare say, only a great deal better. Good morning to
you.”

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I I 7

“ But I say, Miss Morland, I shall come and pay
my respects at Fullerton before it is long, if not dis-
agreeable.”

" Pray do; my father and mother will he very glad
to see you.’

“ And I hope—I hope, Miss Morland, you will not
be sorry to see me.”

“Oh dear! not at all. There are very few people
I am sorry to see. Company is always cheerful.”

“ That is 'nst my way of thinking. Give me but a
little cheerfulJ company, let me only have the company of
the people I love, let me only be where I like and with
whom I like, and the devil take the rest, say I; and I
am heartily glad to hear you say the same. But I have
a notion, Miss Morland, you and I think pretty much
alike upon most matters.,"

“ Perhaps we may; but it is more than I ever
thought of. And as to snort marten, to say the tmth,
there are not many that I know my own mind about.”

“ By Jove, no more do I! It is not my way to
bother my brains with what does not concern me. My
notion of things is simple enough. Let me only
have the girl I like, say I, with a comfortable house
over my head, and what care I for all the rest? Formne
is nothing. I am sure of a good income of my own ;
and if she had not a penn , why so much the better.”

“Very true. I think ike you there. If there is a
good fortune on one side, there can be no occasion for
any on the other. No matter which has it, so that
there is enough. Ihate the idea of one great fortune
looking out for another; and to marry for money, I think
the wickedest thing in existence. Good day. We
shall be v glad to see you at Fullerton, whenever it is
convenient. ’ And away she went. It was not in
the power of all his gallantry to detain her longer.
With such new to communicate. and such a visit to

z 18 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

prepare for, her departure was not to be delayed by
anything in his nature to urge; and she hurried away,
leaving him to the undivided consciousness of his own
ha y address and her explicit encouragement.

he agitation which she had herself experienced on
first learning her brother’s engagement made her ex ct
to raise no inconsiderable emotion in Mr and rs
Allen, by the communicationof the wonderful event.
How great was her disappointment! The im rtant
affair, which many words of preparation ushered in, had
been foreseen by them both ever since her brother’s
arrival; and all that they felt on the occasion_was
comprehended in a wish for the young people’s happi-
ness, with a remark, on the gentleman’s side, in favour
of Isabella’s beauty, and on the lady’s, of her great good
luck. It was to Catherine the most sutprizing insensi-
bility. The disclosure, however, of the great secret of
James’s going to iFullerton the day before did raise
some emotion in Mrs Allen. She could not listen to
that with perfect calmness, but re eatedly regretted the
necessity of its concealmengwishe she could have known
his intention, wished she could have seen him before he
went, as she should certainly have troubled him with
her best regards to his father and mother, and her kind
compliments to all the Skinners.

Chasm £17].

ATHERINE’ S expectations ofplenlure from her
visit in Milsom Street were so very high, that
disappointment was inevitable ; and, accordingly,

though she was most politely received by General
Tilney, and kindly welcomed by his daughter; though
Henry was at home, and no one else of the , she
found on her Mum, without spending many hours In the

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I I 9

examination of her feelings, that she had gone to her
appointment preparing for happiness which it had not
a orded. Instead of ﬁnding herself improved in acquain-
tance with Miss Tilney, from the intercourse of the day,
she seemed hardly so intimate with her as before. In-
stead of seeing Henry Tilney to greater advanmge than
ever, in the ease of a family party, he had never said so
little nor been so little agreeable; and, in spite of their
father’s great civilities to her, in spite of his thanks, in-
vitations, and compliments, it had been a release to get
way from him. It puzzled her to account for all this.
It could not be General Tilney’s fault. That he was
perfectly agreeable and good-natured, and altogedier a
very charming man, did not admit of a doubt, for he was
tall and handsome, and Henry’s father. He could not be
accountable for his children’s want of s irits, or for her
want of enjoyment in his company. he former she
hoped at last might have been accidental, and the latter
she could only attribute to her own stupidity. Isabella,
on hearing the particulars of the visit, gave a different
explanation. “ It was all pride, pride; insuﬂ‘erable
haughtiness and pride! She had long suspected the
family to be very high, and this made it certain. Such
insolence of behaviour as Miss Tilney's she had never
heard of in her life ! Not to do the honours of her
house with common good breeding I To behave to
her guest with such superciliousness! Hardly even to
speak to her! ”

" But it was not so had as that, Isabella; there was
no In rciliousness; she was very civil."

“ h, don’t defend her! And then the brother, he,
who had appeared so attached to you! Good heavens!
well, some people’s feelings are incomprehensible. And
so he hardly looked once at you the whole day 2 "

“I do not say so; but he did not seem in good

Wu."

l 20 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

“I-low contempliblel Of all things in the world
inconstaocy is my aversion. Let me entreat you never
to think of him again, my dear Catherine; indeed he
is unworthy of you."

“Unworthy! I do not suppose he ever thinks of
me.”

“That is exactly what I say; he never thinks of you.
Such ﬁckleness! Oh, how different to your brother
and to mine! I really believe John has the most con-
stant heart.”

“ But as for General Tilney, I assure you it would
be impossible for any body to behave to me with greater
civility and attention; it seemed ed be his only cure to
entertain and make me happy."

“Oh! I know no harm of him; I do not suspect
him of ride. I believe he is a very gentleman-like
man. Jiihn thinks very well of him, and John’s judg-
ment—"

“ Well, I shall see how they behave to me this
evening; we shall meet them at the room”

“And must I go?"

“Do not you intend it? 'I thought it was all
nestled.”

“Nay, since you make such a point of it, I can
refuse you nothing. But do not insist upon my being
very agreeable, for my heart, you know, will be some
forty miles off ; and as for dancing, do not mention it,
I beg; Ibo! is quite out of the question. Charles
Hodges will plague me to death, I dare say; but I
shall cut him wry short Ten to one but he guesses
the reason, and that is exactly what I want to avoid ;
so I shall insist on his keeping his conjecture to
himself.”

Isabella’s opinion of the Tilneys did not inﬂuence
her friend; she was sure there had been no insolence in
the manners either of brother or sister; and she did not

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 2!

credit there being any pride in their hearts. The even-
ing rewarded her conﬁdence; she was met by one with
the me kindness, and by the other with the same at-
tention as heretofore. Miss Tilney took pains to be
near her, and Henry asked her to dance.

Having heard the day before in Milsom Street that
their elder brother, Captain Tilney, was expected
almost every hour, she was at no loss for the name of a
very fashionable-looking, handsome young man, whom
she had never seen before, and who now evidently be-
longed to their party. She looked at him with great
admiration; and even supposed it possible, that some
people might think him handsomer than his brother,
though, in her eyes, his air was more assuming, and his
countenance less prepossessing. His taste and manners
were, beyond a doubt, decidedly inferior; for, within
her hearing, he not only protested against every thought
of dancing himself, but even laughed openly at Henry
for ﬁnding it possible. From the latter circumstance it
may be presumed, that, whatever might be our heroine’s
opinion of him, his admiration of her was not of a very
dangerous kind; not likely to produce animosities be-
tween the brothers, nor persecutions to the lady. H:
cannot be the instigator of the three villains in horse-
men’s great coats, by whom she will hereafter be forced
into a travelling chaise and four, which will drive of
with incredible speed. Catherine, meanwhile, undis-
turbed by presentiments of such an evil, or of any evil
at all, except that of having but a short set to dance
down, enjoyed her usual happiness with Henry Tilney,
listening with sparkling eyes to everything he mid ; and,
in ﬁnding him Irresistible, becoming so herself.

At the end of the ﬁrst dance, Captain Tilney came
towards them again, and, much to Catherine’s dissatis-
faction, pulled his brother away. They retired whis-
pering together ; and, though her delicate sensibility did

I

I 2 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

not take immediate alarm, and lay it down as fact, that
Captain Tilney must have heard some malevolent mis-
representation of her, which he now hastened to com-
municate to his brother, in the hope of separating them
for ever, she could not have her partner conveyed from
her sight without very uneasy sensations. Her suspense
was of full ﬁve minutes’ duration ; and she was beginning
to think it a very long quarter of an hour, when they
both returned ; and an explanation was given, by
Henry’s requesting to know, if she thought her friend
Miss Thorpe would have any objection to dancing, as
his brother would be most happyto be introduced to
her. Catherine, without hesitation, replied, that she
was ve sure Miss Thorpe did not mean to dance at
all. he cruel reply was passed on to the other, and
he immediately walked away.

“ Your brother will not mind it, I know,” said she,
“ because I heard him say before that he hated dancing -,
but it was very good-natured in him to think of it. I
suppose he saw Isabella sitting down,‘ and fancied she
might wish for a partner; but he is quite mistaken,
for she would not dance upon any account in the
world.’ ’

Henry smiled, and said, “ How very little trouble it
can give you to understand the motive of other people’s
actions.”

“ Why? What do you mean 3”

“ With you it is not, how is such a one likely to be
inﬂuenced? What is the inducement most likely to
act upon such a erson’s feelings, age, situation, and

mbahle habits of life considered? But, how should I
inﬂuenced; what would be my inducement in acting
so and so ?”

“ I do not understand you.”

“ Then we are on very unequal terms, for I under-
mnd you perfectly well. ’

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 2 3

“ Me .’ yes ; I cannot speak well enough to be unin-
telligible.”

“ Bravo! an excellent satire on modern language.”

" But ray tell me what you mean.”

“ S I, indeed? Do you really desire it? But
you are not aware of the consequences ; it will involve
you in a very cruel embarrassment, and certainly bring
on a disagreement between us.”

“ No, no ; it shall not do either; [am not afraid.”

“ Well, then, I only meant that your attributing my
brother’s wish of dancing with Miss Thorpe to good-
nature alone, convinced me of your being superior in
good-nature yourself to all the rest of the world.”

Catherine blushed and disclaimed, and the gentleman’s
predictions were veriﬁed. There was a something,
however, in his words which repaid her for the pain of
confusion; and that something occupied her mind so
much, that she drew back for some time, forgetting to
speak or to listen, and almost forgetting where she was;
till, roused by the voice of Isabella, she looked up and
saw her with Captain Tilney preparing to give them
hands across.

Isabella shrugged her shoulders and smiled. the only
explanation of this extraordinary change which could at
that time be given; but as it was not quite enough for
Catherine’s comprehension, she spoke her astonishment
in very plain terms to her partner.

“ I cannot think how it could happen I Isabella was
so determined not to dance.’ ’

. “ And did Isabella never change her mind before 2”

“ 0h ! but, because and your brother! After
what you told him from me, how could he think of
going to ask her? "

“ I cannot take surprize to myself on that head.
You bid me be surprized on your friend's account, and,
therefore, I am; but as for my brother, his conduct in

 

I 24 , NORTHANGER ABBEY.

the business, I must own, has been no more than I be-
lieved him perfectly equal to. The fairness of your
friend was an open attraction ; her ﬁrmness, you know,
could only be understood by yourself.”

“ You are laughing; but, I assure you, Isabella is
very ﬁrm in general.”

“ It is as much as should be said of any one. To be
always ﬁrm must be to be often obstinate. When pro-
perly to relax is the trial of judgment; and, without re-
ference to my brother, I really think Miss Thorpe has
by no means chosen ill in ﬁxing on the present hour.”

The friends were not able to get together for any
conﬁdential discourse till all the dancing was over; but
then, as they walked about the room arm in arm,
Isabella thus explained herself : “ I do not wonder at
your surprize; and I am really fatigued to death. He
is such a rattle! Amusing enough, if my mind had
‘ been disengaged; but I would have given the world to
sit still.”

“ Then why did not you P”

“ Oh ! my dear, it would have looked so particular;
and you know how I abhor doing that I refused him
as long as I possibly could, but he would take no denial.
You have no idea how he pressed me. I begged him
to excuse me, and get some other partner ; but no, not
he; after aspiring to my hand, there was nobody else
in the room he could bear to think of ; and it was not
that he wanted merely to dance, he wanted to be with
mg. Oh, such nonsense! I told him he had taken a
very unlikely way to prevail upon me; for, of all things
in the world, I hated ﬁne speeches and compliments ;—-
and so—and so then I found there would be no peace
if I did not stand up. Besides, I thought Mrs Hughes,
who introduced him, might take it ill if I did not; and
your dear brother, I am sure he would have been
miserable if I had sat down the whole evening. I

NORTHANGER ABBEY. _ 125

am so glad it is over! My spirits are quite jaded
with listening to his nonsense; and then, being such
I smart young fellow, I saw every eye was upon us."

“ He is very handsome, indeed.”

“Handsome! Yes, I suppose he may. 'I dare
ayaﬁeople would admire him in general; but he is not
at in my style of beauty. I hate a ﬂorid complexion
and dark eyes in a man. However, he is very well.
Amazingly conceited, I am sure. I took him down
seven] times, you know, in my way.”

When the young ladies next met, they had a far
more interesting subject to discuss. James Morland’s
second letter was then received, and the kind intentions
of his father fully ex lained. A living, of which Mr
Morland was himselfP patron and incumbent, of about
four hundred pounds yearly value, was to he resigned to
his son as soon as he should be old enough to take
it; no triﬂing deduction from the family income, no
niggardly assignment to one of ten children. An estate
of at least equal value, moreover, was assured as his
future inheritance.

James expressed himself on the occasion with be-
coming gratitude; and the necessity of waiting between
two and three years before they could marry being,
however unwelcome, no more than he had expected,
was born by him without discontent. Catherine, whose
expectations had been as unﬁxed as her ideas of her
father’s inoome, and whose judgment was now entirely
led by her brother, felt equally well satisﬁed, and
hartin congratulated Isabella on having everything so
pleasantly settled.

“ It is very charming, indeed," said Isabella, with a
grave face.

“ Mr Morland has behaved vastly handsome, ind ,"
laid the gentle Mrs Thorpe, looking anxiously at her
daughter. “I only wish I could do as much. One

1:6 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

could not expect more from him, you know. I! he
ﬁnds he can do more, by-and-bye, I dare say he will;
for I am sure he must be an excellent, good-hearted
man. Four hundred in but a small income to begin
on, indeed; but your wishes, my dear Isabella, are so
moderate, you do not consider how little you ever want,
my dear."

“ It is not on my own account I wish for more;
but I cannot bear to be the means of injuring my dear
Morland, making him sit down upon an income hardly
en ugh to ﬁnd one in the common necessaries of life.
Fdi- rnyself, it is nothing; I never think of myself.”

“I know you never do, my dear; and you will
always ﬁnd your reward in the aﬂection it makes every-
body feel for you. There never was a young woman
so beloved as you are b everybody that knows you;
and I dare say when ﬂ Morlaod sees you, my dear
child—but do not let us distress our dear Catherine by
talking of such things. Mr Morland has behaved so
very handsome, you know. I always heard he was a
most excellent man; and you know, my dear, we are
not to suppose but what, if you had had a suitable
fortune, he would have come down with something
more; for I am sure he must be a most liberal-minded
man.”

“ Nobodycan think better of Mr Morland than I do,
I am sure. But everybody has their failing, you know;
and everybody has a right to do what they like with
their own money."

Catherine was hurt by these insinuations. “I am
very sure,” said she, “that my father has promised to
do as much as he can afford.”

Inbella recollected herself. “ As to that, my sweet
Catherine, there cannot be a doubt, and you know me
well enough to be sure that a much smaller income
would satisfy me. It is not the want of more money

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 27

that makes me just at present a little out of spirits. I
hate money; and if our union could take place now
upon only ﬁfty pounds a year, I should not have a wish
unsatisﬁed. Ah! my Catherine, you have found me
out. There's the sting. The long, long, endless two
years and a half that are to pass before your brother can
hold the living."

“ Yes, yes, my darling Isabella," said Mrs Thorpe,
“ we perfectly see into your heart. You have no dis-
guise. We perfectly understand the present vexation ;
and everybody must owe you the better for such a noble,
honest affection.”

Catherine’s uncomfortable feelings began to lessen.
She endeavoured to believe that the delay of the
marriage was the only source of Isabella’s regret; and
when she saw her at their next interview as cheerful
and amiable as ever, endeavoured to forget that she had
for a minute thought otherwise. James soon followed
his letter, and was received with the most gratifying
kindness.

chapter 5173}.

HE Alleus had now entered on the sixth week of
their stay in Bath; and whether it should be
the last, was for some time a question, to which

Catherine listened with a beating heart. To have her
acquaintance with the Tilneys end so soon, was an evil
which nothing could counterbalance. Her whole
happiness seemed at stake, while the affair was in
suspense, and CV83“)ng secured when it was deter-
mined that the 10 gings should be taken for another
fortnight. What this additional fortnight was to pro-
duce to her beyond the pleasure of sometimes seeing
Henry Tilney, made but a small part of Catherine’s

r 28 NORTHANGER sassy.

speculation. Once or twice, indeed, since James’s en-
gagement had taught her what could be done, she had
got so far as to indulge in a secret “ perhaps," but in
general the felicity of being with him for the present
bounded her views : the present was now comprised in
another three weeks, and her happiness being cemin for
that period, the rest of her life was at such a dimnce as
to excite but little interest. In the course of the mom-
ing which saw this business arranged, she visited Miss
Tilney, and poured forth her joyful feelings. It was
doomed to be a day of trial. No sooner had she ex-
pressed her delight in Mr Allen's lengthened stay, than
Miss Tilney told her of her father’s having just deter-
mined upon quitting Bath by the end of another week.
Here was a blow ! The past suspense of the morning
had been ease and quiet to the present disappoint-
ment. Catherine’s countenance fell; and in a voice of
most sincere concern she echoed Miss Tilney’s con-
cluding words, “ By the end of another week! "

“ Yes; my father can seldom be prevailed on to give
the waters what I think a fair trial. He has been dis-
appointed of some friends’ arrival whom he expected to
meet here, and as he is now pretty well, is in a hurry to
get home.”

“ I am very sorry for it,” said Catherine, dejectedly;
" if I had known this before ”

“ Perhaps,” said Miss Tilney in an embarrassed
manner, “you would be so good—it would make me
very happy if ”

The entrance of her father put a stop to the civility
which Catherine was beginning to hope might introduce
a desire of their corresponding. After addressing her
with his usual politeness, he turned to his daughter,
and said, “ Well, Eleanor, may I congratulate you
on being successful in your application to your fair
friend ? ”

 

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 129

“I was just beginning to make the request, sir,as

ou came in.”

“ Well, proceed by all means. I know how much
your heart is in it. My daughter, Miss Morland,” he
continued without leaving his daughter time to s ak,
“ has been forming a very bold wish. We leave ath,-
as she has perhaps told you, on Saturday se’nnig’ht. A
letter from my steward tells me that my presence is
wanted at home; and being disappointed in m hope of
seeing the Marquis of Longtown and General éouneney
here, some of my very old friends, there is nothing to
detain me longer in Bath. And could we carry our
selﬁsh point with you, we'should leave it without a
single regret. Can you, in short, be prevailed on to
quit this scene of public triumph, and oblige your friend
Eleanor with your company in Gloucutershire? I am
almost ashamed to make the request, though its pre-
sumption would certainly appear greater to every crea-
ture in Bath than yourself. Modesty such as your’s—
but not for the world would I pain it by open praise.
If you can be induced to honour us with a visit, you
will make us happy beyond expression. ’Tis true, we
can offer you nothing like the gaieties of this lively place;
we can tempt you neither by amusement nor splendour,
for our mode of living, as you see, is plain and unpre-
tending, et no endeavours shall be wanting on our side
to make orthanger Abbey not wholly disagreeable.”

Northanger Abbey! These were thrilling words,
and wound up Catherine’s feelings to the highest
pointa of extasy. Her grateful and gratiﬁed heart
could hardly restrain its expressions within the language
of tolerable calmness. To receive so ﬂattering an in-
vitation] To have her company so warmly solicited!
Everything honourable and soothing, every present en-
joyment and every future hope was contained in it, and
her acceptance, with only the saving clause of papa and

130 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

mamma’s approbation, was eagerly given. “I will write
home directly,” said she, “ and if they do not object,
as I dare sa they will not— "

General ilney was not less sanguine, having already
waited on her excellent friends in Pulteney Street, and
obtained their sanction of his wishes. ‘ “ Since they can
consent to part with you," said he, “we may expect
philosophy from all the worl. ”

Miss T ilney was earnest, though gentle, in her
secondary civilities, and the affair became in a few
minutes as nearly settled as this necessary reference to
Fullerton would allow.

The circumstances of the morning had led Cathe-
rine’s feelings through the varieties of suspense, security,
and disappointment: but they were now safely lodged
in perfect bliss ; and with s irits elated to rapture, with
Henry at her heart, and orthanger Abbey on her
1i s, she hurried home to write her letter. Mr and
ﬁrs Morland, relying on the discretion of the friendsto
whom they had already entrusted their daughter, felt no
doubt of the propriety of an acquaintance which had
been formed under their eye, and sent, therefore, by
return of post, their ready consent to her visit in Glou-
cestershire. This indulgence, though not more than
Catherine had hoped for, completed her conviction of
being favoured beyond every other human creature, in
friends and, fortune, circumstance and chance. Every-
thing seemed to co-operate for her advantage. By the
kindness of her first friends, the Allens, she had been
introduced into scenes where pleasures of every kind had
met her. Her feelings, her preferences had each known
the happiness of a return. Wherever she felt attach-
ment, she had been able to create it. The affection of
Isabella was to be secured to her in a sister. The
Tilneys, they by whom above all she desired to be
favourably thought of, outstripped even her wishes in the

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 3 1

ﬂattering measures by which their intimacy was to be
continued. She was to be their chosen visitor, she was
to be for weeks under the me roof with the person
whose society she mostly prized; and, in addition to
all the rest, this roof was to be the roof of an abbey!
Her passion for ancient ediﬁces was next in degree to
her passion for Henry Tilney, and castles and abbies
made usually the charm of those reveries which his
image did not ﬁll. To see and explore either the
ramparts and keep of the one, or the Cloisters of the
other, had been for many weeks a darling wish, though
to be more than the visitor of an hour had seemed too
nearly impossible for desire; and yet this was to happen.
With all the chances against her of house, hall, place,
park, court, and cottage, Northanger turned u an
abbey, and she was to be its inhabitant. its ong,
damp passages, its narrow cells and mined chapel,
were to be within her daily reach, and she could
not entirely subdue the hope of some traditional
legends, some awful memorials of an injured and ill-
fated nun.

It was wonderful that her friends should seem so
little elated hy the possession of such a home; that the
consciousness of it _should be so meek] born. The
power of early habit only could account or it. A dis-
tinction to which they had been born gave no pride.
Their superiority of abode was no more to them than
their superiority of person.

Many were the inquiries she was eager to make at
Miss Tilney; but so active were her thoughts, that
when these inquiries were answered, she was hardly
more assured than before of Northanger Abbey having
been a richly endowed convent at the time of the Re-
formation, of its having fallen into the hands of an
ancestor of the Tilneys on its dissolution, of a large
portion of the ancient building still making a part of the

r 32 V NORTHANGER ABBEY.

resent dwelling although the rest was decayed, or of
its standing low in a valle , sheltered from the north
and ustby rising woods 0 oak.

 

album" $17333.

1TH a mind thus full of happiness, Catherine
was hardly aware that two or three days had
passed away, without her seeing Isabella for
more than a few minutes together. She began ﬁrst to
be sensible of this, and to sigh for her conversation, as
she walked along the Pump-room one morning, by Mrs
Allen's side, without anything to say or to hear; and
scarcely had she felt a ﬁve minutes’ longing of friend-
ship, before the object of it appeared, and inviting her to
a secret conference, led the way to a seat “This is
my favourite place,’ ’ said she, [as] they sat down on a
bench between the doors, which commanded a tolerable
view of everybody entering at either, “it is so out of
the way.”

Catherine, observing that Isabella’s eyes were con-
u'nually bent towards one door or the other, as in eager
expectation, and remembering how often she had been
falsely accused of being arch, thought the present a ﬁne
op rtunity for being really so, and therefore gaily said,
“ 0 not be uneasy, Isabella. James will soon be
here.”

“ Psha! my dear creature,” she replied, “ do not
think me such a simpleton as to be always wanting to
conﬁne him to my elbow. It would be hideous to be
always together; we should be the of the place.
And so you are going to Northanger ! I am amazingly
glad of it. It is one of the ﬁnest old places in England,
Iundersrand. I shall depend upon a most particular
description of it."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I33

“ You shall certainly have the best in my power to
give. But who are you looking for? Are your sisters
coming 2 ”

“I am not looking for anybody. One’s eyes must
be somewhere, and you know what a foolish trick I
have of ﬁxing mine, when my thoughts are an hundred
miles off. I am amazingly absent; I believe I am the
most absent creature in the worid. Tilney says it is
always the case with minds of a certain stamp."

“ But I thought, Isabella, you had something in
particular to tell me P "

“ Oh, yes! and so I have. But here is a proof of
what I was saying. My poor head! I had quite
forgot it. Well, the thing is this: I have just had a
letter from John. You can guess the contents.”

“ No, indeed, I cannot.”

“ My sweet love, do not be so abominably affected.
What can he write about but yourself? You know he
is over head and ears in love with you.”

“ With m2, dear Isabella ? "

“ Nay, my sweetest Catherine, this is being quite ab-
surd. Modesty, and all that, is very well in its way,
but really a little common honesty is sometimes quite as
becoming. I have no idea of being so overstrained.
It is ﬁshing for compliments. His attentions were such
as a child must have noticed, and it was but half an
hour before he left Bath that you gave him the most
positive encouragement. He says so in this letter;
says that he as good as made you an offer, and that you
received his advances in the kindest way, and now he
wants me to urge his suit, and say all manner of pretty
things to you. So it is in vain to infect ignorance."

Catherine, with all the earnestness of truth, expressed
her astonishment at such a charge, protesting her inno-
cence of every thought of Mr Thorpe‘s being in love
with her, and the consequent impossibility of her having

l 34 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

ever intended to encourage him. “As to any atten-
tions on his side, I do declare, upon my honour, I
never was sensible of them for a moment, except just
his asking me to dance the ﬁrst day of his coming; and
as to making me an offer, or any thing like it, there
must be some unaccountable mistake. I could not
have misunderstood a thing of that kind, you know;
and, as I ever wish to be believed, I solemnly protest
that no syllable of such a nature ever passed between us.
The last half hour before he went away! It must be
all and completely a mistake, for I did not see him
once that whole morning.”

" But that on certainly did, for you spent the whole
morning in dgar’s Buildings. It was the day your
father’s consent came, and I am pretty sure that you
and John were alone in the parlour some time before
you left the house.”

“Are you? Well, if you say it, it was so, I dare
say ; but for the life of me, I cannot recollect it. I da
remember now being with you, and seeing him as well
as the rest; but that we were ever alone for ﬁve min-
utes—. However, it is not worth arguing about, {or
whatever might pass on his side, you must be convinced,
by my having no recollection of it, that ‘I never thought,
nor expected, nor wished for anything of the kind from
him. I am excessively concerned that he should have
any regard for me, but indeed it has been quite unin-
tentional on my side; I never had the smallest idea of
it. Pray undeceive him as soon as you.can, and tell him
I beg his pardon; that is—I do not know what I ought
to say—but make him understand what I mean in the

roperest way. I would not speak disrespectfully of a
rather of ours, Isabella, I am sure, but you know very
well that i I could think of one man more than another,
1!: is not the person.” Isabella was silent. “ My dear
friend, you must not be angry with me. I cannot sup-

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. [35

pose your brother cares so very much about me; and,
you know, we shall still be sisters.”

“ Yes, yes" Stith a blush), “there are more ways
than one of our ‘ng sisters. But where am I wander-
ing to? Well, my dear Catherine, the case seems to
besthat you are determined against poor John, is not it
so .

“I certainly cannot return his aﬁ'ection, and as
certainly never meant to encourage it.”

“ Since that is the case, I am sure I shall not tease
you any further. John desired me to speak to you on
the subject, and therefore I have. But I confess, as
soon as I read this letter, I thought it a very foolish,

. imprudent business, and not likely to promote the good
of either; for what were you to live upon, supposing
you came together? You have both of you something,
to be sure, but it is not a triﬂe that will support a family
now-a-dnys; and after all that romancers may say,
there is no doing without money. I only wonder John
could think of it; he could not have received my last.”

_ “ You do acquit me then of anything wrong? You
are convinced that I never meant to deceive your
brother, never suspected him of liking me till this
moment?”

“ 0h ! as to that,” answered Isabella, laughingly, “I
do not pretend to determine what your thoughts and
designs in time past may have been. All that is best
known to yourself. A little harmless ﬂirtation or so
will occur, and one is often drawn on to give more
encouragement than one wishes to stand by. But you
may be assured that I am the last person in the world
to judge you severely. All those things should be
allowed for in youth and high spirits. What one
means one day, you know, one may not mean the next.
Circumstances change, opinions alter."

" But my opinion of your brother never did alter; i!

r 36 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

was always the same. You are describing what never
happened.” ’

“ My dearest Catherine,” continued the other without
at all listening to her, “ I would not for all the world
be the means of hunying you into an engagement before
you ltnew what you were about. I do not think anything
would justify me in wishing you to sacriﬁce all your
happiness merely to oblige my brother, because he is my
brother, and who, perhaps, after all, you know, might
be just as happy without you; for people seldom know
what they would be at, young men especia‘lgly, they are
so amazingly changeable and inconstant. hat I say
is, why should a brother’s happiness be dearer to me
than a friend’s? You know I carry my notions of
friendship pretty high. But, above all things, my dear
Catherine, do not be in a hurry. Take my word for
it, that if you are in too great a hurry, you will certainly
live to repent it. Tilney says, there is nothing people
are so often deceived in as the state of their own affec-
tions; and I believe he is very right. Ah! here he
comes; never mind, he will not see us, I am sure.”

Catherine, looking up, perceived Captain Tilney; and
Isabella, earnestly ﬁxing her eye on him as she spoke,
soon caught his notice. He approached immediately,

’ and took the seat to which her movements invited him.
His ﬁrst address made Catherine starts Though spoken
low, she could distinguish, “ What! always to be
watched, in person or by proxy! "

"Psha, nonsense!” was Isabella’s answer, in the
same half whisper. “Why do you put such things into
my head? If I could believe it l—my spirit you know,
is pretty independent.”

“ I wish your heart were independent. That would
be enough for me.”

“ My heart, indeed! What can you have to do
with hearts? You men have none of you any hearts.”

 

 

 

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 137

“If we have not hearts, we have eyes; and they
give us torment enough."

“Do they? I am sorry for it; I am sorry they
ﬁnd anIything so disagreeable in me. I will look another
way. hope this pleases you ” (turning her back on
him) ; “I hope your eyes are not tormented now.”

“ Never more so: for the edge of a blooming cheek
is still in view—at once too much and too little."

Catherine heard all this, and, quite out of counten-
ance, could listen no longer. Amazed that Isabella
cauld endure it, and jealous for her brother, she rose up,
and saying she should join Mrs Allen, proposed their
walking. But for this Isabella showed no inclination.
She was so amazingly tired, and it was so odious to
palade about the Pump-room; and if she moved from
her seat, she should miss her sisters: she was expecting
her sisters every moment, so that her dearest Catherine
must excuse her, and must sit quietly down again. But
Catherine could he stubborn too; and Mrs Allen just
then coming up to propose their returning home, she
joined her and walked out of the Pump-room, leaving
Isabella still sitting with Captain Tilney. With much
uneasiness did she Xhlll leave them. It seemed to her
that Captain Tilney was falling in love with Isabella,
and Isabella unconsciously encouraging him; uncon-
sciously it must be, for Isabella’s attachment to James
was as certain and well acknowledged as her engage—
ment. To doubt her truth or good intentions was im-
possible; and yet, during the whole of their conversa-
tion, her manner had been odd. She wished Isabella
had talked more like her usual self, and not so much
about money; and had not looked so well pleased at
the sight of Captain Tilney. How strange that sh:
should not perceive his admiration ! Catherine longed
to give her a hint of it, to put her on her guard, and
prevent all the pain which her too lively behaviour

K

[38 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

might otherwise create both for him and her
brother.

The compliment of John Thorpe’s aﬁ'ection did not
make amends for this thoughtlessness in his sister. She
was almost as far from believing as from wishing it so
be sincere; for she had not forgotten that he could
mistake; and his assertion of the offer, and of her
encouragement, convinced her that his mistakes could
sometimes be very egregious. In vanity, therefore, she
gained but little: her chief proﬁt was in wonder. That
he should think it worth his while to fancy himself in
love with her was a matter of lively astonishment.
Iubella talked of his attentions; :5: had never been
sensible of any ; but Isabella had said many things which
she hoped had been spoken in haste, and would never
be id again; and upon this she was glad to rest alw-
gether for present ease and comfort.

d:vat" iii.

FEW days passed away, and Catherine, though
not allowing herself to suspect her friend, could
not help watching her closely. The result of

her observations We not agreeable. Isabella seemed
an altered creature. When she saw her indeed sur-
rounded only by their immediate friends in Edgar’s
Buildings or Pulteney Street, her change of manners
was so triﬂing that, had it gone no farther, it might
have passed unnoticed. A something of languid in-
diﬁrence, or of that boasted absence of mind which
Catherine had never heard of before, would occasion-
ally come across her ; but had nothing worse appeared,
tbs: might only have spread a new grace and inspired
a warmer interest. But when Catherine saw her in

NORTHANGER assay. x39

public, admitting Captain Tilney’s attentions as readily
as they were offered, and allowing him almost an equal
share with James in her notice and smiles, the alteration
became too positive to be past over. What could he
meant by such unsteady conducglwhat her friend could
be at, was beyond her. comprehension. Isabella could
not be aware of the pain she was inﬂicﬁng ; but it was
a degree of wilful thoughtlessness which Catherine could
not but resent. James was the sufferer. She saw him
grave and uneasy; and however careless of his present
comfort the woman might be who had given him her
heart, to Iver it was always an object. For poor Cap-
tain Tilney too she was greatly concerned. Though
his looks did not please her, his name was a passport to
her goodwill, and she thought with sincere compassion
of his approaching disappointment ; for, in ite of
what she had believed herself to overhear in the r ump-
room, his behaviour was so incompatible with a know-
ledge of Isabella’s engagement, that she could not, upon
reﬂection, imagine him aware of it. He might be
'ealous of her brother as a rival, but if more had seemed
implied, the fault must have been in her misapprehen-
sion. She wished, by a gentle remonstrance, to re-
mind Isabella of her situation, and make her aware of
this double unkindness; but for remonstmnce, either
o rtunity or comprehension was always against her.
I able to suggest a hint, Isabella could never under-
nnd it. In this distress, the intended de rture of the
Tilney family became her chief consortia; their
journey into Gloucestershire was to take place within a
few days, and Captain Tilney’s removal would at least
restore peace to every hurt but his own. But Captain
Tilney had at present no intention of removing; he
was not to be of the rtyto Northanger, he was to
continue at Bath. hen Catherine knew this, her
molution was directly made. She spoke to Henry

I 40 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

'I‘ilne on the subject, regretting his brother's evident
part' ity for Miss Thorpe, and entreating him to make
known her prior engagement.

“ My brother does know it,” was Henry’s answer.

“ Does he i then why does he stay here ? ”

He made no reply, and was beginning to talk of
something else; but she eagerly continued, “ Why do
not you persuade him to go away? The longer he
stays, the worse it will be for him at last. Pray advise
him for his own sake, and for everybody’s sake, toleave
Bath directly. Absence will in time make him com-
fortable again ; but he can have no hope here, and it is
only sta 'ng to be miserable." Henry smiled, and
said, “Iylsm sure my brother would not wish to do
that."

“ Then you will persuade him to go away."

“ Persuasion is not at command; but pardon me, if I
cannot even endeavour to persuade him. I have my-
self told him that Miss Thorpe is engaged. He knows
what he is about, and must be his own master."

“No, he does not know what he is about,” cried
Catherine ; “ he does not know the pain he is giving my
brother. Not that James has ever told me so, but I am
sure he is very uncomfortable.”

“ And are you sure it is my brother’s doing 2 ”

“ Yes, very sure.”

“Is it my brother’s attentions to Miss Thorpe, or
Miss Thorpe’s admission of them, that gives the

in 2”

“ Is not it the same thing

" I think Mr Morland would acknowledge a differ-
ence. No man is offended by another man’s admira-
tion of the woman he loves; it is the woman only who
can make it a torment.”

Catherine blushed for her friend, and id, “ Isabella
is wrong. But I am sure she cannot mean to torment,

)n

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 141

for she in very much amched to my brother. She ha-
been in love with him ever since they ﬁrst met, and
while my father’o content was uncmain she fretted
herself almoat into a fever. You know the must be
attached to him." .

" I understand; the in in love with James, and Him
with Frederick.”

“Oh no, not ﬂim! A woman in love with one
man cannot ﬂirt with another. "

“ It is probable that she will neither love so well, nor
ﬂirt IO well, al the might do either singly. ‘ The gentle-
men mun each give up a little.”

After a short pause, Catherine returned with —
“Then you do not believe Isabella on very much at-
tached to my brother.”

“ I can have no opinion on that subject.”

“ But what can your brother mean? If he know
her engagement, what can he mean by his behaviour!”

“ You are a very close quettioner.’

“ Am I? I only ark what I want to be told.”

. “ B’ut do you only ask what I can be expected to
tell .”

“ Yea, I think no; for you muet know your brother’a
heart."

. “ My brother’s heart, at you term it on the preoent
occazion, I assure you I can only guest at.”
. “ Well ?”

“Well ! Nay, if it in to be guest-work, let “I all
guest for ourselves. To be guided by second-hand
conjecture in pitiful. The premise: are before you.
My brother is a lively, and perhape oometirnea a thought-
leu, young nun ; he has had about a week’l "quaint-
ance with your friend, and he ha- Itnown her engage-
ment almoot at long at he has known her.”

“ Well,” mid Catherine, after Iome momenn' con-
tidention,“_youmayheablemgueu at your brother’-

X42 ROTH-[ANGER ABBEY.

inmntionl from all this; but I am sure l cannot. But
is not ur father uncomfortable about it? Does not he
want aptain Tilney to go away? Sure, if your father
were to speak to him he would go."

“My dear Miss Morland,” said Henry, “in this
amiable solicitude for your brother’s comfort, may you
not be a little mistaken? Are you not carried a little
too far? Would he thank you, either on his own
account or Miss Thorpe’l, for supposing that her affec-
tion, or at least her good behaviour, in only to be
secured by her seeing nothing of Captain 'l‘ilney? Is he
safe only in solitude? or, is her heart constant to him
only when unsolicited by any one else! He cannot
think this, and you may be sure that he would not have
you think it. will not my, ‘Do not be un ,’ be-
cause I know that you are so, at this moment; ut be
as little uneasy as you can. You haVe no doubt of the
mutual attachment of your brother and your friend;
depend upon it, therefore, that real jealousy never can
exrst between them; depend upon it that no disagree-
ment between them can be of any duration. Their
hearts are open to each other, as neither heart can be to

on: they know exactly what is required and what can
be borne; and you may be certain, that one will never
tease the other beyond what is known to be lea-ant.”

Perceiving her su'll to look doubtful an grave, he
added, “Though Frederick does not leave Bath with us
he will probably remain but a very short time, perha s only
a few days behind us. His leave of absence ' soon
ex 're, and he must return to his regiment. And what
W' (hen betheir acquaintance? The mess-room will
drink labella Thorpe for a fortnight, and she will
laugh with your brother over poor Tilney’s passion for
a mouth.” '

Catherine would contend no longer against comfort,
She had resisted its approaches during the whole length

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 143

of a speech, but it now carried her captive. Henry
Tilney must know best. She blamed herself for the
extent of her fears, and resolved never to think so
seriously on the subject again.

Her resolution was supported b Isabella’s behaviour
in their parting interview. The horpes spent the last
evening of Catherine’s stay in Pulteney Street, and
nothing passed between the lovers to excite her uneasi—
ness, or make her quit them in ap rehension. James
was in excellent spirits, and Isabe a most engagineg
placid. Her tenderness for her friend seemed rather
the ﬁrst feeling of her heart, but that at such a moment
was allowable; and once she gave her lover a ﬂat
contradiction, and once she drew back her hand, but
Catherine remembered Henry’s instructions, and placed
it all to judicious affection. The embraces, tears, and
promises of the parting fair ones may be fancied.

Cbspttr S”.

R and Mrs Allen were sorry to lose their oung
friend, whose good humour and cheerfirlness
had made her a valuable companion, and in the

promotion of whose enjoyment their own had been
gently increased. Her happiness in going with Miss
Tilney, however, prevented their wishing it otherwise;
and, as they were to remain only one more week in
Bath themselves, her quitn'ng them now would not long
be felt. Mr Allen attended her to Milsom Street,
where she was to breakfast, and saw her seated with the
kindest welcome among her new friends; but so great
was her agitation in ﬁnding herself as one of the family,
and so fearful was she of not doing exactly what was
right, and of not being able to preserve their good

144 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

opinion, that, in the embarrassment of the ﬁrst live
minutes, she could almost have wished to return with
him to Pulteney Street.

Miss Tilney’s manners, and Henry’s smile, soon did
away some of her unpleasant feelings : but still she was
far from being at ease; nor could the incessant atten-
tions of the General himself entirely re-assure her.
Nay, perverse as it seemed, she doubted whether she
might not have felt less, had she been less attended to.
His anxiety for her comfort, his continual solicitations
that she would eat, and his often-expressed fears of her
seeing nothing to her taste, though never in her life
before had she beheld half such variety on a break-
fast-table, made it impossible for her to forget for a
moment that she was a visitor. She felt utterly un-
worthy of such respect, and knew not how to reply to
it. Her tranquillity was not im roved by the General’s
impatience for the appearance 0 his eldest son, nor by
the displeasure he expressed at his laziness when Captain
Tilney at last came down. She was quite pained by
the severity of his father’s reproof, which seemed dis-
proportionate to the offence; and much was her con-
cern increased, when she found herself the principal
cause of the lecture ; and that his tardiness was chieﬂy
resented from being disrespectful to her. This was
placing her in a very uncomfortable situation, and she
felt great com ssion for Captain Tilney, without being
able to hope or his good will.

He listened to his father in silence, and attempted
not any defence, which conﬁrmed her in fearing that
the inqnietude of his mind, on Isabella’s account, might,
by keeping him long sleepless, have been the real cause
of his rising late. It was the ﬁrst time of her being
decidedly in his company, and she had hoped to be now
able to form her opinion of him : but she scarcely heard
his voice while his father remained in the room; and

monument: ABBEY. r43

even afterwards, so much were his spirits affected, she
could distinguish nothing but these words, in a whisper
to E,leanor, “ How glad I shall be when you are all
off! ’

The bustle of going was not pleasant. The clock
struck ten while the trunks were carrying down, and
the General had ﬁxed to be out of Milsom Street by
that hourt His great coat, instead of being brought for
him to put on directly, was spread out in the curricle in
which he was to accompany his son. The middle seat
of the chaise was not drawn out, though there were
three people to go in it, and his daughter’s maid had
so crowded it with parcels, that Miss Morland would
not have room to sit; and so much was he inﬂuenCed
by this apprehension when he handed her in, that she
had some diﬁiculty in saving her own new writing-desk
from being thrown out into the street. At last, how-
ever, the door was closed upon the three females, and
they set off at the sober pace in which the handsome,
highly-fed four horses of a gentleman usually perform a
ioumey of thirty miles: such was the‘dimnce of Nor-
thanger from Bath. to be now divided into two equal
stages. Catherine’s spirits revived as they drove from
the door; for with Miss Tilney she felt no restraint;
and with the interest of a road entirely new to her, of
an abbey before, and a curricle behind, she caught the
last view of Bath without any regret, and met with
every milestone before she expected it. The tedious-
ness of a two hours’ bait at Petty Fiance, in which
there was nothing to be done but to eat without being
hungry, and loiter about without anything to see, next
followed; and her admiration of the style in which
they travelled, of the fashionable chaise and four, pos-
tillions handsomely liveried, rising so regularly in their
stirrups, and numerous outriders, properly mounted,
sunk a little under this consequent inconvenience. Had

I46 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

their as; been perfectly agreeable, the delay would
have nothing; but General Tilney, though so
charming a man, seemed always a check upon his
children’s spirits, and scarcely anything was said but by
himself ; the observation of which, with his discontent
at whatever the inn afforded, and his angry impatience
at the waiters, made Catherine grow every moment
more in awe of him, and appeared to lengthen the two
hours into four. At last1 however, the order of release
was given; and much was Catherine then surprized by
the General’s proposal of her taking his place in his
son’s curricle for the rest of the journey : “ The day
was ﬁne, and he was anxious for her seeing as much of
the country as possible.”

The remembrance of Mr Allen’s opinion, respecting
young men’s open carriages, made her blush at the
mention of such a plan, and her ﬁrst thought was to
decline it; but her second was of greater deference for
General Tilney’s judgment : he could not propose any-
thing improper for her; and, in the course of a few
minutes, she found herself with Henry in the curricle,
as happy a being as ever existed. A very short trial
convinced her that a curricle was the rettiest equipage
in the world ; the chaise and four wheeied off with some
grandeur, to be sure, but it was a heavy and troublesome
business, and she could not easily forget its having
stopped two hours at Petty France. Half the time
would have been enough for the curricle; and so
nimbly were the light horses disposed to move, that, had
not the General chosen to have his own carriage lead
the way, they could have passed it with ease in half a
minute. But the merit of the curricle did not all
belong to the horses: Henry drove so well, so uietly,
without making any disturbance, without para 'ng to
her, or swring at them; so different from the only
gendeman-coachman whom it was in her power to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. ‘4']

compare him with ! And then his hat sat so well, and
the innumerable capes of his great coat looked so be-
comineg important! To be driven by him, next to
being dancing with him, was certainly the greatest
happiness in the world. In addition to every other
delight, she had now that of listening to her own praise;
of being thanked at least, on his sister’s account, for
her kindness in thus becoming her visitor; of hearing it
ranked as real friendship, and described as creating real
gratitude. His sister, he said, was uncomfortably cir-
cumstanced; she had no female companion, and in the
frequent absence of her father, was sometimes without
any companion at all.

“ But how can that be P ” said Catherine; “ are not
you with her 1’ ”

“Northanger is not more than half my home; I
have an establishment at my own house in Woodston,
which is narly twenty miles from my father’s, and
some of my time is necessarily spent there.”

“ How sorry you must be for that! ”

“ I am always sorry to leave Eleanor.”

“ Yes ; but besides your affection for her, you must
be so fond of the abbey ! After being used to such a
home as the abbey, an ordinary parsonage-house mustbe
very disagreeable.”

He smiled and said, “ You have formed a very
favourable ides of the abbey.”

“ To be sure I have. Is not it a ﬁne old place, jun
like what one reads about? ”

“ And are you prepared to encounter all the horrors
that a building such as ‘what one reads nbout’ may
produce? Have you a stout heart? Nerves lit for
slidin panels and tapestry?"

“(ghl yes, I do not think I should be easily fright-
ened, because there would be so many people in the
house; and besides, it has never been uninhabited and

r 41'? NoarHsNGEk Asstv.

left deserted for years, and then the family come back
to it unawares, without giving any notice, as generally
happens."

“ No, certainly. We shall not have to explore our
way into a hall dimly lighted by the expiring embers of
a wood ﬁre, nor be obliged to spread our beds on the
floor of a room without windows, doom or ﬁrmiture.
But you must be aware that when a young lady is (by
whatever means) introduced into a dwelling of this
kind, she is always lodged apart from the rest of the
family. While they snueg repair to their own end of
the house, she is formally conducted by Dorothy, the
ancient housekeeper, up a dilferent staircase, and along
many gloomy passages, into an apartment never used
since some cousin or kin died in it about twenty rs
before. Can you stand such a ceremony as this! ill
not your mind misgive you, when you ﬁnd yourself in
this gloomy chamber, too lofty and extensive for you,
with only the feeble ra s of a single lamp to take in in
size, its walls hung wrth tapestry exhibiting figures as
large as life, and the bed of dark green stulf or pu le
velvet, presenting even a funereal appearance. ill
not your heart sink within you ? ”

“ Oh! but this will not happen to me I am sure."

“ How fearfully will you examine the fumiture of
your apartment! And what will you discern? Not
tables, toilettes, mrdrobes, or drawers, but on one side
perhaps the remains of a broken lute, on the other a
ponderous chest which no eflorts can open, and over
the ﬁre-place the portrait of some handsome warrior,
whose features will so incomprehensiny strike you, that
you will not be able to withdraw your eyes from it.
Dorothy, meanwhile, no less struck by your appearance,
gazes on you in great agitation, and drops a few unintel-
ligible hints. To raise your spirits, moreover, she gives
you reason to suppose that the part of the abbey you

NORTHANGER nun r49

inhabitis undoubtedl haunted, and informs you that you
will not have I sing e domestic within call. With this
parting cordial, she curtseys off: you listen to the
sound of her receding footsteps as long as the Ian echo
can reach on: and when, with fainting spirits, you
attempt to en your door, you discover, with increased
alarm, that it has no lack."

“ Oh 1 Mr Tilney, how frightful. This is iust like
a book! But it cannot really ha pen to me. I an:
sure your housekeeper is not real y Dorothy. Well,
what then ?"

“ Nothing further to alarm, perhaps, may occur the
ﬁrst night. After surmounting your mnnqwmbk horror
of the bed, you will retire to rest, and get a few hours'
unquiet slumber. But on the second, or at farthest the
(bird night after our arrival, you will probably have a
violent storm. sis of thunder so loud as to seem to
shake the ediﬁce to its foundation will roll round the
neighbouring mountains; and during the frightful
of wind which accompany it, you will probably think you
discern for your lamp is not extinguished) one part of
the hanging more violently agitated than the rest. Un-
able of course to repress your curiosity in so favourable
a moment for indulging it, you will instantly arise, and,
throwing your dressing-gown around you, proceed to
examine this mystery. After a very short search, you
will discover a division in the tapestry so artfully
constructed as to defy the minuteet inspection, and
on opening it, n door will immediately a r, which
door being only secured by mossy bars an a padlock,
you will, after a few elforts, succeed in opening, and,
with your lamp in your hand, will pass through it into a
small vaulted room.”

“ No, indeed; I should be too much frightened to do
my such thing.”

“ What! not when Dorothy has given you to under-

l 50 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

stand that there is a secret subtemneous communication
between your apartment and the chapel of St Anthony,
scarcely two miles off. Could you shrink from so simple
an adventure ? No, no ; you will proceed into this small
vaulted room, and through this into several others, with-
out perceiving anything very remarkable in either. In
one, perhaps, there may he a dagger, in another a few drops
of blood, and in a third the remains of some instrument
of torture; but there being nothing in all this out of the
common way, and your lamp being nearly exhausted,
you will return towards your own apartment. In re-
passing through the small vaulted room, however, your
eyes will be attracted towards a large, old-fashioned
cabinet of ebony and gold, which, though narrowly ex-
amining the furniture before, you had passed unnoticed.
Impelled by an irresisﬁhle presentiment, you will eagerly
advance to it, unlock Ira folding doors, and search into
every drawer; but for sometime without discovering
an ' g of importance ; perha nothing but a consider-

e hoard of diamonds. At st, however, by touching
a secret spring, an inner compartment will open,a roll of
paper appears, you seize it—it contains many sheets of
manuscript; you hasten with the precious treasure into
your own chamber, but scarcely have you been able to
decipher, ‘ Oh thou, whomsoever thou mayst be, into
whose hands these memoirs of the wretched Matilda
may fall,’ when your lamp suddenly expires in the
socket, and leaves you in total darkness.”

“ Oh no, no ! do not say so. Well, go on.”

But Henry was too much amused by the interest he
had raised to be able to carry it farther: he could no
longer command solemnity either of subject or voice, and
was obliged to entreat her to use her own fancy in the
perusal of Matilda’s woes. Catherine, recollecting her-
self, grew ashamed of her eagerness, and began earnestly
to mature him that her attention had been ﬁxed without

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 15 l

the smallest apprehension of really meeting with what
he related. “ Miss Tilney, she was sure, would never
put her into such a chamber as he had described. She
was not at all a.in "

As they drew near the end of their journey, her im-
patience for a sight of the abbey, for some time suspended
by his conversation on subjects very different, returned
in full force, and every bend in the road was expected,
with solemn awe, to afford a glimpse of its massy walls
of grey stone, rising amidst a grove of ancient oaks, with
the last beams of the sun playing in beautiful splendour
on its high Gothic windows. But so low did the
building stand, that she found herself passing through
the great gates of the lodge, into the very grounds of
Northanger, without having discerned even an antique
chimney.

She knew not that she had any right to be surprized,
but there was something in this mode of approach which
she certainly had not expected. To as between
lodges of a modem appearance, to ﬁnd herself with such
ease in the very precrncts of the abbey, and driven so
rapidly along a smooth, level road of ﬁne gravel, without
obstacle, alarm, or solemnity of any kind, struck her as
odd and inconsistent. She was not long at leisure,
however, for such considerations. A sudden scud of
rain driving full in her face, made it impossible for her to
observe anything further, and ﬁxed all her thoughts on
the welfare of her new straw bonnet: and she was
actually under the abbey walls, was springing, with
Henry’s assistance, from the carriage, was beneath the
shelter of the old porch, and had even passed on to the
hall, where her friend and the General were waiting to
welcome her, without feeling one aweful foreboding of
future misery to herself, or one moment’s suspicion of
my past scenes of honor being acted within the solemn
ediﬁce. The breeze had not seemed to waft the sighs

152 NORTHA'NGER ABBEY.

of the murdered so her; it had waited nothing worse
than a thick mizzling rain, and having given a good
shake to her habit, she was ready to be shown into the
common drawing-room, and capable of considering
where she was.

An abbey! Yes, it was delightful to be really in an
abbey! But she doubted, as she looked round the
room, whether anything within her observation would
have given her the consciousness. The furniture was in
all the profusion and elegance of modern taste. The
lire-place, where she had expected the ample width and
ﬁnderous carving of former times, was contracted to a

umford, with slabs of plain, though handsome, marble,
and [ornaments] over it of the prettiest English china.
The windows, to which she looked with peculiar
dependenCe, from having heard the General talk of his
preserving them in their Gothic form with reverential
care, were yet less what her fancy had portra ed.
To be sure the pointed arch was preserved, the orm
of them was Gothic, they might be even easements,
but every pane was so large, so clear, so light! To an
imagination which had hoped for the smallest divisions
and the heaviest stone work, for painted glass, dirt, and
cobwebs, the difference was very distressing.

The General, rceiving how her eye was employed,
began to talk ofpfhe smallness of the room and sim-
plicity of the furniture, where everything being for
daily use, pretended only to comfort, &c., ﬂattering
himself, however, that there [were] some apartments
in the abbey not unworthy her notice, and was pro-
ceeding to mention the costly gilding of one in particu-
lar,‘ when, taking out his watch, he stopped short, to
pronounce it, with surprize, within twenty minutes of
live! This seemed the word of separation, and
Catherine found herself hurried away by Miss Tilney,
in such a manner as convinCed her that the strictest

 

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. r 5 3

punctuality to the Emily hours would be expected at
Northanger.

Returning through the large and lofty hall, they
amended a broad staircase 'of ehining oak, which, after
many ﬂighta and many landing-places, brought them
upon a long wide gallery. On one side it had a range
of doors, and it was lighted on the other by windows,
which Catherine had only time to discover looked intn
a quadrangle, before Miss Tilney led the way into a
chamber, and, scarcely staying to hope she would ﬁnd
it comfortable, left her with an anxioue entreaty that
the would make as little alteration as posible in her
dress.

cblvm use}.
A MOMENT’S glance was enough to satisfy

Catherine that her apartment was very unlike

the one which Henry had endeavoured to
alarm her by the description of. It was by no means
unreasonably large, and contained neither tapestry nor
velvet. The walls were papered, the ﬂoor was car-
peted, the windows were neither less perfect nor more
dim than those of the drawing-roam below; the furni-
ture, though not of the latest fashion, was handsome
and comfortable, and the air of the room altogether far
from uncheerful. Her heart instantaneously at ease on
this point, she resolved to lose no time in particular
examination of anything, an she greatly dreaded din-
abliging the General by any delay. Her habit there-
fore was thrown off with all possible haste, and the was
preparing to unpin the linen package, which the chaise-
aeat had conveyed for her immediate accommodation,
when her eye wddenly fell on a large high chest, stand-
ing back in a deep recess on one side of the ﬁre-place.

’-

I 54 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

The ﬁght of it made her start; and, forgetting every
thing else, she stood gazing on it in motionless wonder,
while these thoughts crossed her :—

“This is mange, indeed! I did not expect such
a sight as this! An immense heavy chest! What
can it hold? Why should it be placed here? Pushed
back, too, as if meant to be out of sight! I will look
into it; cost mewhat it an ,I will lookinto it, and
directly too—by daylight. f I my n'll evening my
candle may go out. ’ She advanced and examined it
closely; it was of cedar, curiously inlaid with some
darker wood, and raised about a foot from the ground
on a carved stand of the same. The lock was silver,
though umished from age; at each end were the im-
perfect remains of handles also of silver, broken perhaps
prematurely by some strange violence; and on the
centre of the lid, was a mysterious cipher in the same
metal. Catherine bent over it intently, but without
being able to distinguish anything with certain . She
could not, in whatever direction she took it, be 'eve the
last letterto be aT; and yet that it should be any-
thing else in that house was a circumstance to raise no
common degree of astonishment If not originally
theirs, by what strange events could it have fallen into
the Tilney family?

Her fearful curiosi was every moment growing
greater; and seizing wrth trembling hands, the hasp of
the lads. she resolved, at all hazards, to satisfy herself
at least as to its contents. With difﬁculty, for some-
thing seemed to resist. her efforts, she raised the lid a
few inches; but at that moment a sudden knocking at
the door of the room made her, starting, quit her hold,
and the lid closed with alarming violence. This ill-
timed intruder was Miss Tilney’l maid, sent by her
mistress to be of use in Miss Morland; and though
Catherine immediame dismissed her, it recalled her to

nonmmorm sonny. 155

the sense of what she ought to be doing, and forced
her, in spite of her anxious desire to penetrate this
mystery, to proceed in her dressing without further
delsy. Her progress was not quick, for her thou hts
end her eyes were still bent on the object so well c cu-
lated to interest and alarm; and though she dared not
waste a moment upon a second attempt, she could not
remain many an from the chem. At length, how-
ever, having pped one arm into her gown, her toilet
seemed so nearly ﬁnished, that the impatience of her
curiosity might safely be indulged. One moment
surely might be spared; and so desperate should be the
exertion of her strength, that unless secured by super-
natural means, the lid in one moment should be thrown
back. With this spirit she sprang forward, and her
conﬁdence did not deceive her. Her resolute effort
threw back the lid, and gave to her astonished eyes the
view of a white cotton counterpane, properly folded,
reposing It one end of the chest, in undisputed
possession!

She was gazing on it with the ﬁrst blush of surprize,
when Miss Tilney, anxious for her friend's being
ready, entered the room, and to the rising shame of
having harboured for some minutes an absurd expecta-
tion, was then added the shame of being caught in so
idle I search. “ That is a curious old chest, is not
it?" said Miss Tilney, as Catherine hastily closed it
and turned away to the glass. “ It is impossible to uy
how many generations it has been here. How it came
to be ﬁrst put in this room I know not, but I have not
had it moved, because I thought it might sometimes be
of usein holding hats and honnets. The worst of it
is, that its weight maka it diﬂicult to open. In that
comer, however, it is at least out of the way."

Catherine had no leisure for speech, being at once
blushing. tying her gown, and forming wise resolutions

s 56 noxruszmes assay.

with the most violent dispatch. Miss Tilney gently

‘ hinted her fear of being late; and in half a minute they
no down stairs together, in an alarm not wholly un-
founded, for General Tilney was pacing the drawing-
room, his watch in his hand, and having, on the very
instant of their entering, pulled the hell with violence,
ordered, “ Dinner m be on table ﬁrmly I "

Catherine trembled at the emphasis with which he
spoke, and at pale and breathless, in a most humble
mood, concerned for his children, and detesting old
chests ; and the General recovering his politeness as he
looked at her, spent the rest of his time in scolding his
daughter, for so foolishly hurrying her fair friend, who
was absolutely out of breath from haste, when there was
not the least occasion for hurry in the world; but
Catherine could not at all get over the double distress of
having involved her friend in a lecture and been a great
simpleton herself, till they were happily seated at the
dinner-table, when the Genenl’s complacent smiles, and
a good appetite of her own, restored her to peace. The
dining-parlour was a noble room, suitable in its dimen-
sions to a much larger drawing-room than the one in
common use, and ﬁtted up in a style of luxury and ex-
pense which was almost lost on the unprsctised eye of
Catherine, who saw little more than its spaciousness and
the number of their attendants. Of the former, she
spoke aloud her admiration; and the General, with a
very gracious countenance, acknowledged that it was by
no means an ill-sized room; and further confessed, that,
though as careless on such subjects as most people, he
did look upon a tolerath large eating-room as one of
the necessaries of life; he supposed, however, “that
she must have been used to much better sized spart-
ments at Mr Allen's i ”

“No, indeed,” was Catherine's honest assurance;
“ Mr Allen’s dining-parlour was not more than half as

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 5 7

large;" and she had never seen so large a room as this
in her life. The General’s good-humour increased.
Why, as he bad such rooms, he thought it would be
simple not to make use of them; but, upon his honour,
he believed there might be more comfort in rooms of
only half their size. Mr Allen’s house, he was sure,
must be exactly of the true size for rational happiness.

The evening passed without any further disturbance,
and, in the occasional absence of General Tilney, with
much positive cheerfulness. It was only in his pre-
sence that Catherine felt the smallest fatigue from her
journey; and even then, even in momenta of languor or
restraint, a sense of general happiness preponderated, and
she could think of her friends in Bath without one wish
of being with them.

The night was stormy; the wind had been rising at
intervals the whole afternoon ; and by the time the party
broke up, it blew and rained violently. Catherine, as
she crossed the hall, listened to the tempest with sensa-
n'ons of awe; and when she heard it mge round a
corner of the ancient building, and close with sudden
film a distant door, felt for the ﬁrst time that she was
re y in an abbey. Yes, these were characteristic
sounds: they brought to her recollection a countless
uriety of dreadful situations and horrid scenes, which
such buildings had witnessed, and such storms ushered
in ; and most heartily did she rejoice in the happier cir-
cumstances attending her entrance within walls so
solemn ! Sb: had nothing to dread from midnight
assassins or drunken gallsnts. Henry had certainly
been only in jest in what he had told her that morning.
In a house so furnished, and so guarded, she could have
nothing to explore or to suffer, and might go to her
bed-room as securely as if it had been her own chamber
at Fullerton. Thus wisely fortifying her mind, as she
proceeded upstairs, she was enabled, especially on per-

I 5 8 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

ceiving that Miss Tilney slept only two doors from her,
to enter ha- room with a tolerany stout heart; and her
spirits were immediately assisted by the cheerful blaze
of a wood ﬁre. “How much better is this,’ ’ said she,
ssshe walkedtothe fender; “how much better to ﬁnd
aﬁre read lit,than to have towait shivering in the
cold, till I the family are in bed, as so'many poor girls
have been obliged to do, and then to have a faithliil old
servant frightening one by coming in with a Faggot!
How glad I am that Northanger is what it is! If it
had been like some other places, I do not know that, in
such a night as this, I could have answered for my
courage; but now, to he sure, thele is nothing to alarm
one.”

She looked round the room. The window curtains
seemed in motion. It could be nothing but the violence
of the wind penetnting through the divisions of the
showers; and she stept boldly rward, arelessly hum-
ming a tune, to assure herself of its being so, peeped
courageously behind each cumin, saw nothing on either
low window-sent to scare her, and on placing a hand
against the shutter, felt the strongest conviction of the
Wind’s force. A glance at the old chest, as she turned
away from this examination, was not without its use;
she scorned the causeless fears of an idle fancy, and he-
gan with a most hap y indiEermce to prepare herself
for bed. “She shoqu take her time; she should not
hurry herself; she did not care if she were the last

11 up in the house. But the would not make up

or ﬁre: that would seem cowardly, as if she wished
for the protection of light after she were in bed." The
ﬁre, therefore, died away; and Catherine, having spent
thebestpartofan hour in her arrangemenme be-
ginning to think of stepping into bed, when, on giving
aparting glance roundtheroom, shewasstrnck bythe
appearance of a high old-fashioned black cabinet, which,

nonmwosn snssv. r59

though in a situation conspicuous enough, had never
caught her notice before. Henry’s words, the descrip-
tion of the ebony cabinet which was to escape her
observation at ﬁrst, immediately rushed across her; and
though there could be nothing really in it, there was
something whimsical, it was certainly a very remarkable
coincidence! She took her candle and looked closely
at the cabinet. It was not absolutely ebony and gold;
but it was Japan, black and yellow Japan of the hand-
somess kind; and as she held her mndle, the yellow
had very much the eﬂ'ect of gold.

The key was in the door, and she hsds strange fancy
to look into it; not, however, with the smallest expec-
tation of ﬁnding anything, but it was so very odd, after
what Henry had said. In short she could not sleep till
she had examined it. So, placing the candle with
great caution on a chair, she seized the key with a
very tremolous hand, and tried to turn it; Imi: resisted
her utmost strength. Alarmed, but not discouraged,
she tried it another way; a bolt ﬂew, and she believed
herself successful; but how strangely mysterious! the
door was still immoveahle. She paused a moment in
breathless wonder. The wind roared down the chimney,
the rain beat in torrents against the windows, and every-
thing seemed to spell the awfulness of her situation.
To retire to bed, however, unsatisﬁed on such a point,
would be vain, since sleep must be impossible with the
consciousness of a cabinet so mysteriously closed in her
immediate vicinity. Again, therefore, she applied her-
self to the key, and after moving it in e possible way,
for some instants, with the determined ce erity of hope's
last effort, the door suddenly yielded to her hand: her
hurt lped with exulmtion at such a victory, and hav-
ing thrown open each folding door, the second being
secured only by bolts of less wonderful constniction
than the lock, though in that her eye could not discern

I 60 NORTHAN GER ABBEY.

anything unusual, a double range of small drawers ap-

in view, with some larger drawers above and
below them, and in the centre, a small door, closed also
with lock and key, secured in all probability a cavity of
Importance.

Catherine’s heart beat quick, but her courage did not
fail her. With a cheek ﬂushed by hope, and an eye
straining with curiosity, her ﬁngers grasped the handle
of a drawer and drew it forth. It was entirely empty.
With less alarm and greater eagerness she seized a
second, a third, a fourth—each was equally empty.
Not one was left unsearched, and in not one was any-
thing found. Well read in the art of concealing a
treasure, the possibility of false linings to the drawers
did not escape her, and she felt round each with
anxious acuteness in vein. The place in the middle
alone remained now unexplored; and though she had
“ never from the ﬁrst had the smallest idea of ﬁnding
anything in any part of the cabinet, and was not in the
least disappointed at her ill success thus far, it would be
' foolish not to examine it thoroughly while she was
about it.” It was some time, however, before she
could unfasten the door, the same diﬁiculty occurring in
the management of this inner lock as of the outer; but
at length it did open; and not vain, as hitherto, was her
search; her quick eyes directly fell on a roll of pape.‘
pushed back into the further part of the cavity, appar-
ently for concealment, and her feelings at that moment
were indescribable. Her heart ﬂuttered, her knees
trembled, and her cheeks grew pale. She seized, with an
unsteady hand, the precious manuscript, for half a glance
sulﬁced to ascertain written characters; and while she
acknowledged with awful senmtions this striking ex-
empliﬁcstion of what Henry had foretold, resolved
instantly to peruse every line before she attempted to
n1.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 6 I

The dimness of the light her candle emitted made
herturn toit with alarm; but therewas nodanger of
its lodden exu'nction, it had yet some hours to burn;
and that she might not have any greater diﬁiculty in
distinguishing the writing than what its ancient date
might occasion, she hastily snuffed it. Alas! it was
snuffed and extinguished in one. A lamp could not
have expired with more awful effect. Catherine, for a
few moments, was motionless with horror. It was done
completely; not a remnant of light in the wick could
give ho to the rekindling hmth. Darkness irn-
penetrah e and immoveable ﬁlled the room. A violent
gust of wind, rising with sudden fury, added fresh
horror to the moment. Catherine trembled from head
to foot In the pause which succeeded, a sound like
receding footstﬁep: and the closing of a distant door
struck on her a ‘ghted ear. Human'nature could sup-
port no more. A cold sweat stood on her forehead,
the manuscript fell from her hand, and groping her way
to the bed, she jumped hastily in, and sought some sus-

nsion of agony hy creeping far underneath the clothes.
Ego close her eyes in sleep that night she felt must be
entirely out of the question. With a curiosity so justly-
awalt‘ened, and feelings in every way so agitated, repose
must be absolutely impossible. The storm, too, abroad
so dreadful! She had not been used to feel alarm from
wind, but now every blast seemed fraught with awful
inmlligence. The manuscript so wonderfully found, so
wonderfully accomplishing the moming’s prediction,
how was it to be accounted for? What could it con-
tain? to whom could it relate? by what means could
it have been so long conceded? and how singularly
strange that it should fall to her lot to dilcover itl
Till she had made herself minress of its contents, how-
ever, she could have neither repose nor comfort; and
with the sun’s ﬁrst lays she was determined to peruse

l 6 I NORTBANGER ABBEY.

it. But many were the tedious hours which must yet
intervene. She shuddered, tossed about in her bed, and
envied every quiet sleeper. The storm still raged, and
various were the noises, more terriﬁc even than the
wind, which struck at intervals on her mrtled r.
The very curtains of her bed seemed at one moment in
motion, and at another the lock of her door was agi-
tated, as if by the attempt of somebody to enter.
Hollow murmurs seemed to creep along the gallery, and
morethao once her bloodwnchilledbythesonnd of
dimnt moans. Hour after hour passed away, and the
wear-led Catherine had heard three proclaimed by all
the clocks in the house, before the tempest subsided,
or she unknowingly fell fast asleep.

cbapm 5533.

HE housemaid’s folding back her window-
shutzers at eight o’clock the next day was the
sound which ﬁrst roused Catherine; and she

opened her eyes, wanderin that they could ever have
been closed, on objects 0 cheerfulness; her ﬁre was
already burning, and a bright morning had succeeded the
tempest of the night Inmntaneously with the con-
sciousness of existence, returned her recollection of the
manuscript; and springing from the bed in the very
moment of the maid’s going away, she eagerly col-
lected eve scattered sheet which had burst Earn the
roll on itszlling to the ground, and ﬂew back to enjoy
the luxury of their perusal on her pillow. She now
plainly aw that she must not expect a manuscript of
equal length with the generality of what the had shud-
dered over in books; for the roll, seeming to consist
entirely of small disjointed sheets, was altogether but of

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 63

triﬂing size, and much less than she had supposed it
to be at first.

Her greedy eye glanced n idl over a ge. She
smrted at in import. Could iiI bey possible,P:r did not
her senses play her false? An inventory of linen, in
coarse and modern characters, seemed all that was be-
fore her! If the evidence of sight might be muted,
she held a washing-bill in her hand. She seized an-
other sheet, and saw the same articles with little varia-
tion; a third, a fourth, and a ﬁfth, presented nothing
new. Shirts, makings, cravats, and waist/wan, faced
her in each. Two others, penned by the same hand,
marked an expenditure scarcely more r-nteresting, in
letters, hair-powders, shoe-string, and breeches-hnll;
and the larger sheet, which had enclosed the rest,
seemed by its ﬁrst cramp line, “To poultice chestnut
mare," a fanier’s bill] Such was the collection of
papers (left, rhaps, as she could then suppose, by the
negligence o a servant, in the place whence she had
taken them) which had ﬁlled her with expectation
and alarm, and robbed her of half her night’s rest!
She felt humbled to the dust. Could not the adventure
of the chest have taught her wisdom? A corner of it
catching her eye a. she lay, seemed to rise in judg-
ment against her. Nothing could now be carer than
the absurdity of her recent fancies. To su se that a
manuscript of many generations hack mullI have re-
mined undiscovered in a room such as that, so modern,
sohsbitahle! orthstsheshould be theﬁrst to possess
the skill of unlocking a cabinet, the key of which was

to all.‘ ~

How could she have so on herself ? Heaven
forbid that Henry Tilney should ever know her folly!
Anditwu in a gmmumnhhowndoingforhld
nmthecahinetappenredsaeuctlytoagreewithhis
description of her adventures, she should never have felt

I 64 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

a
the smallest curiosity about it. This was the only
comfort that occurred. Impatient to get rid of those
hateful evidences of her folly, those detestable papers
then scattered over the bed, she rose directly; and
foldin them up as nearly as possible in the same shape
as Entire, returned them to the same spot within the
cabinet, with a very hearty wish that no untoward
accident might ever bring them forward again, to dis-
grace her even with herself.

Why the locks should have been so difﬁcult to open,
however, was still something remarkable, for she could
now manage them with perfect ease. In this there was
surely something mysterious, and she indulged in the
ﬂattering suggestion for half a minute, ﬁll the possibility
of the door’a having been at ﬁrst unlocked, and of
being herself its fastener, darted into her head and cost
her another blush.

She got away as soon as she could from a room in

which her conduct produced such unpleasant reﬂections,
and found her way with all speed to the breakfast-
arlour, as it had been pointed out to her by Miss
li'ilney the evening before. Henry was alone in it;
and his immediate hope of her having been undisturbed
by the tempest, with an arch reference to the character
of the building they inhabited, was rather distressing.
For the world would she not have her weakness
suspected; and yet, unequal to an absolute falsehood.
was constrained to acknowledge that the wind had kept
her awake a little. “ But we have a charming morning
after it,” she added, desiring to get rid of the subject;
“and storms and sleeplessness are nothing when they
are over. What beautiful hyacinths! I have
learnt in love a hyacinth.”

“And how might you learn? By accident or
argument ? ” i

“ Your sister taught me : I cannot tell how. Mrs

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 65

Allen useh. to take pains, as: after year, to make me
like them; but I never co d,till I saw them the other
day in Milsom Street; I am naturally indifferent about
ﬂowers.”

“ But now you love a hyacinth. So much the better.
You have gained a new source of enjoyment, and it is
well to have as man holds upon happiness as possible.
Besides, a taste for owers is always desirable in your
sex, as a means of getting you out of doors, and tempt.
ing you to more frequent exercise than you would
otherwise take : and though the love of a hyacinth may
be rather domestic, who can tell, the sentiment once
raised, but you may in time come to love a rose ? ”

“ But I do not want any such pursuit to get me out
of doors. The pleasure of walking and breathing fresh
air is enough for me, and in ﬁne weather I am out
more than half my time. Momma says I am never
within.”

“ At any rate, however, I am pleased that ou have
learnt to love :- hyacinth. The mere habit a learning
to love is the thing; and a teachableness of disposition

‘in a young lady is a great blessing. Has my sister
a pleasant mode of instruction ? ”

Catherine was saved the embarrassment of attempting
an answer by the enhance of the General, whose smiling
compliments announced a happy stwte of mind, but
whose gentle hint of sympathetic early rising did not
advance her composure.

The elegance of the breakfast-set forced itself on
Catherine's mice when they were seated at table;
and, luckily, it had been the General’s choice. “He
was enchanted by her approbation of his taste, confessed
it to be neat and limple, thought it right to encourage
the manufacture of his country; and for his part, to
his uncritical te, the tea was as well ﬂavoured from
the clay of taﬂ'ordshire as from that of Dreaden or

hit

:66 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Séve. But this was quite an old set, purchased two
ago. The manufacture was much improved since
that time: he had seen some beautiful specimens when
last in town, and had he not been perfectly without
vanity of that kind, might have been tempted to order a
new set. He trusted, however, that an opportunity
might ere long occur of selecting one, though not for
himself." Catherine was probably the only one of the
who did not understand him.

Shortly after breakfast Henry left them for Wood-
ston, where business required and would keep him two
or three days. They all attended in the hall to see
him mount his horse, and immediately on re-entering
the breakfast-room, Catherine walked to a window in
the hope of catching another glimpse of his ﬁgure.
“This is a somewhat heavy call upon your brother’s
fortitude," observed the General to Eleanor. “Wood-
ston will make but a sombre appearance today.”

“Is it a pretty place?’ ' asked Catherine.

“ What say you, Eleanor? S k your opinion;
for ladies can best tell the taste 0 ladies in regard to

laces as well as men. I think it would be acknow-
redged by the most impartial eye to have many recom-
mendations. The house stands among ﬁne madows
facing the south-east, with an excellent kitchen-garden
in the mine aspect; the walls surrounding which I built
and stocked myself about ten years ago, for the beneﬁt
of my son. It is a family living, Miss Morland; and,
the property in the place being chieﬂy my own, you
may believe I take care that it shall not be a bad one.
Did Henry’s income depend solely on this living, he
would not be ill provided for. Perhaps it may seem
odd, that with only two younger children, I should
think any profession necessary for him; and certainly
there are moments when we could all wish him dis-
engaged from every tie of business. But though I may

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 167

not exactly make converts of you young ladies, I am
sure your Esther, Miss Morland, would agree with me
in thinking it expedient to give every young man some
employment. The money is nothing, it is not an object;
but employment is the thing. Even Frederick, my
eldest son, you see, who will perhaps inherit as con-
siderable a landed prope as any private man in the
county, has his profession.’

The imposing eﬁect of this last argument was equal
to his wishes. The Iilence of the lady proved it to be
unanswer-ahle.

Something had been aid the evening before of her
being ahewn over the house, and he now offered him-
self as her conductor; and though Catherine had hoped
to uplore it accompanied only by his daughter, it was
a proposal of too much 'ness in itself, under any
circumstances, not to be y accepted; for she had
been already eighteen hours in the abbey, and had seen
only a few of its rooms. The netting-box just leisurely
drawn forth, was closed with joyful haste, and she was
ready to attend him in a moment. “ And when they
had gone over the house, he promised himself, more-
over, the pleasure of accompanying her into the shrub-
beries and garden.” She curtsied her acquiescence.
“ But perhaps it might be more agreeable to her to
make those her ﬁrst object. The weather was at pre-
sent favourable, and at this time of year the uncertainty
was very great of its continuing so. Which would she
prefer? He was equally at her service. Which did
his daughter think would most accord with her fair
friend’s wishes? But he thought he could discern.
Yes, he certainly red in Mill Morland’s eyes, a
judidous deeire of making use of the present smiling
weather. But when did she jud e min? The
would be always safe and dry. ile yielded implicitly,
and would fetch his hat~and attend them in a moment.”

168 noun-muons assay.

He left the room, and Catherine, with a disappointed
anxious face, began to speak of her unwillingness that
he should be taking them out of doors against his own
inclination, under a mistaken idea of pleasing her; but
she was stop: by Miss Tilney’s saying, with a little
confusion, “I believe it will be wisest to take the
morning while it is so ﬁne; and do not be uneasy on
my father’s account: he always walks out at this time
of day.”

Catherine did not exactly know how this was to he
understood. Why was Miss Tilney embarrassed?
Could there be any unwillingness on the General’s
side to show her over the abbey? The prpposal was
his own. And was it not odd that he tho d always
take his walk so early? Neither her father nor Mr
Allen did so. It was certainly very provoking. She
was all impatience to see the house, and had scarcely
any curiosity about the grounds. If Henry had been
with them, indeed! but now she should not know what
was picturesque when she saw it. Such were her
thoughts; but she kept them to herself, and put on her
bonnet in patient discontent.

She was struck, however, beyond her expectation, by
the grandeur of the abbey, as she saw it for the ﬁrst
time from the lawn. The whole building enclosed a
large court; and two sides of the quadrangle, rich in
Gothic ornaments, stood forward for admiration. The
remainder was shut off by knolls of old trees, or luXu-
riant plantations, and the steep woody hills rising behind
to give it shelter were beautiful even in the leaﬂess
month of March. Catherine had seen nothing to com-
pare with it ; and her feelings of delight were so strong,
that without waiting for any better authority, she boldly
burst ibrth in wonder and praise. The General lil-
tened with assentin gratitude, and it seemed as if his
own estimation of giorthanger had waited unlixed till
that hour.

NORTHAN GER ABBEY. l 69

The kitchen-garden was to be next admired, and he
led the way to it across a mull portion of the park.
The number of acres contained in this garden was
such as Catherine could not listen to without dismay,
being more than double the extent of all Mr Allen’s,
as well [as] her father's, including churchde and
orchard. The walls seemed countless in number, end-
less in length; a village of hot-houses seemed to arise
among them, and a whole parish to he at work within
the enclosure. The General was ﬂattered by her looks
of surprize, which told him almostas plainly, as he soon
forced her to tell him in words, that she had never seen
any gardens at all equal to them before; and he then
modestly owned that, “ without any ambition of that
sort himself, without any solicitude about it, he did
believe them to be unrivalled in the kingdom. If he
had a hobby-horse, it was tbal. He loved a garden.
Though careless enough in most matters of eating, he
loved good fmit; or if he did not, his friends and
children did. There were great vexau'ons, however,
attending such a garden as his. The utmost care could
not always secure the most valuable fruits. The
had yielded only one hundred in the last year. it;
Allen, he supposed, must feel these inconveniences as
well as himself. ’
“ No, not at alL Mr Allen did not care about the
garden, and never went into it."
With a triumphant smile of self-satisfaction, the
‘Genenl wished he could do the same, for he never
entered his without being vexed in some way or other,
by its falling short of his
“ How were Mr Allen s succession-houses worked?”
describing the nature of his own as they entered them.
“ Mr Allen had only one small hot-house, which
Mrs Allen had the use of for her plants in winter, and
there was a ﬁre in it now and then."

I 7 O NORmNGER ABBEY.

“ He is a happy man!” said the General, with a
look of very happy contempt

Having taken her into every division, and led her
under every wall, till she was heartily weary of seeing
\ and wondering, he suffered the girls at last to seize the
advantage of an outer door, and then expressing his
wish to examine the effect of some recent alterations
about the tea-house, proposed it as no unpleasant exten-
sion of their walk, if Miss Morland were not tired.
“ But where are you going, Eleanor? Why do you
chose that cold, damp path to it? Miss Morland will
get wet. Our best way is across the park.”

“This is so favourite a walk of mine," said Miss
Tilney, “that I always think it the best and nearest
way. But perhaps it may be damp.”

t was a narrow winding path through a thick grove
of old Scotch ﬁrs ; and Catherine, struck by its gloomy
aspect, and eager to enter it, could not, even by the
General’s disapprobation, be kept from stepping forward.
He perceived her inclination, and having again urged
the plea of health in vain, was too polite to make
further opposition. He excused himself, however, from
attending them: “ The rays of the sun were not too
cheerful for him, and he would meet them by another
course." He turned away; and Catherine was shocked
to ﬁnd how much her spirits were relieved by the separ-
au'on. The shock, however, being less real than the
relief, olfe'red it no injury; and she began to talk with
easy gaiety of the delightful melancholy which such a
grove inspired.

“ I am particularly fond of this spot," mid her com-
panion, with a sigh. “It was my mother’s favourite
walk.”

Catherine had never heard Mrs Tilney mentioned in
the family before; and the interest excited by this
tender remembrance shewed itself directly in her altered

NORTEANGER ABBEY. I 7 l

countenance, and in the attentive pause with which she
waited for something more.

“ I used to walk here so often with her,” added
Eleanor; “though I never loved it then as I have
loved it since. At that time, indeed, I used to
wonder at her choice. But her memory endears it
now."

“ And ought it not,” reﬂected Catherine, “to endear
it to her husband? Yet the General would not enter
it.” Miss Tilney continuing silent, she ventured to
say, “ Her death must have been a great inﬂiction.”

“ A great and increasing one,” replied the other, in
a low voice. "I was only thirteen when it happened;
and, though I felt m loss perhaps as etrongly as one so
young could feel it, did not, I could not then know
what a loss it was.” She Itopped fora momeng and
then added with great ﬁnances: “ I have no sister, you
know; and though Henry—though my brothers are
very aﬁ‘eetionate, and Henry is a great deal here, which
I run most thankful for, it is impossible for me not to be
often solitary.”

“ To be sure, you must mils him very much."

“A mother would have been always present; a
mother would have been a constant friend ; her inﬂuence
would have been beyond all other.”

“ Was she a very chemiing woman ? Was Ihe hand-
some? Was there any of her in the abbey?
And why had she been so to that gave? Wu
it from dejecu'on of spirits? ’ were questions now eagerly
poured forth. The ﬁrst three recewed a ready affirma-
tive, the two others were by; and Catherine’s
interest in the deceased rs Tilney augmented with
every question, whether answered or not. Of her un.
happiness in marriage the felt persuaded; The General
certainly had been an unkind husband. He did not
love her walk; could he, therefore, have loved her?

I 7 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

And besides, handsome as he was, there was a some-
thing in the turn of his feamres which spoke his not
having behaved well to her.

“Her picture, I suppose,” blushing at .the consum-
mate art of her own question, “ hangs in your father’s
room ? "

“ No; it was intended for the drawing>room; but
my father was dissatisﬁed with the painting, and for
some time it had no place. Soon after her death I
obtained it for my own, and hung it in my bedchamber,
where I shall be happy to shew it you: it is very
like.” Here was another roof. A portraitI very like,
of a departed wife, not valued by her husband. He
must have been dreadfully cruel to her.

Catherine attem ted no longer to hide from herself
the nature of the {Selings which, in spite of all his atten-
tions, he had previously excited; and what had been
terror and dislike before, was now absolute aversion.
Yes, aversion ! His cruelty to such a charming woman
made him odious to her. She had often read of such
characters; characters, which Mr Allen had been used
to call unnatural and overdrawn; but here was proof

ritive of the contrary.

She had settled this point, when the end of the
path brought them directly upon the General; and in
spite of all her virtuous indignation, she found herself
again obliged to walk with hirn,'listen to him, and even
to smile when he smiled. Being no longer able, how-
ever, to receive pleasure from the surrounding objects,
she soon began to walk with lassitude: the General
perceived it, and with a concern for her health, which
seemed to reproach her for her opinion of him, was
most urgent for returning with his daughter to the house.
He would follow them in a quarter of an hour. Again
they parted; hut Eleanor was called backin half a
minum to receive a strict charge against taking her friend

NORTHANGBR ABBEY. I 7 3

round the Abbey till his return. This second instance
‘of hip anxiety to delay what the so much wiehed for,
~ struck Catherine an very remarkable.

Charm fill}.

N hour passed away before the General came in, i
fspurt, on the part of his young guest, in no very
vourable consideration of hi: character. “ This
lengthened nbnence, these solitary rambles, did not speak
a mind at ease, or a conscienoe void of reproach.” At
length he appeared; and whatever might have been the
loom of his meditations, he could still smile with than.
ins Tilney, understanding, in part, her friend’| curi-
osityto see the house, soon rev-wed the subject; and
her father being, contrary to Catherine’s expectan'ons,
unprovided with any pretence for further delay, beyond
that of stopping ﬁve minutes to order refreshments to he
in the room by their return, was at last ready to escort
them.

They set forward; and, with a grandeur of air, a
digniﬁed step, which caught the eye, but could not shake
the doubts of the well-read Catherine, he led the way
across the hall, through the common drawing-room
and one useless ante-chamber, into I room magniﬁcent
both in size and furniture, the real drawing-room,
need only with company of consequence. It was
very noble, very grand, very charming, was all
that Catherine had to say, for her indiscriminating

e Icarcely discerned the colour of the satin; and
al minute-nets of raise, all praise that had much
ming, was supplied by the General: the costli-
nese or elegance of any room'shiitting up could be
nothing tuber; she cared ror no furniture of a more

! 74 NORTHANGER ABE“.

modern date than the ﬁfteenth century. When the
General had misﬁed his own curiosity, in a doc
examination of every well-known ornament, they pm-
ceeded to the library, an apartment, in its my, of equal
magniﬁcence, exhibiting a collection of books, on which
an humble man might have looked with pride. Cather-
ine heard, admired, and wondered with more genuine
feeling than before, gathered all that she could from this
storehouse of knowledge, by running over the titles of
half: shelf, and was ready to proceed. But suites of
apartments did not spring“? with her wishes. Large
as was the building, she already visited the greatest
part; though, on being told that, with the addition of
the kitchen, the six or seven rooms the had now seen
surrounded three sides of the court, she could scarcely
believe it, or overcome the suspicion of there being many
chambers secreted. It was some relief, however, that
they were to return to the rooms in common use, by
passing through a few of less importance, looking into
the court, which, with occasional passages, not wholly
unintricate, connected the different sides; and the was
further soothed in her progress by being told that she
was treading what had once been a Cloister, having
traces of cells pointed out, and observing several doors
that were neither opened nor explained to her; by ﬁnd-
ing herself successively in a billiard-room and in the
General’s private apartment, without comprehending their
connexion, or being able to turn aright when she left
them; and lastly by passing through a dark little room,
owning Henry‘s authority, and screwed with his litter of
books, guns, and great-coats.

From the dining-room, of which, though already
seen, and always to be seen at ﬁve o’clock, the General
could not forego the pleasure of pacing out the length,
for the more certain information of Miss Morland, as
to what she neither doubted nor cared for, they pro-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 75

ceeded by quick communication to the kitchen—the
ancient kitchen of the convent, rich in the massy walls
and smoke of former do and in the stoves and hot
closets of the present. he Genenl’s improving hand
had not loitered here : every modern invention to
facilitate the labour of the cooks had been adopted
within this their spacious theatre; and, when the genius
of others had failed, his own had often produced the
perfection wanted. His endowments of this quot alone
might at any time have placed him high among the
benefactors of the convent.

With the walls of the kitchen ended all the antiquity
of the Abbey; the fourth side of the quadrangle having,
on account of its decaying state, been removed by the
General’s father, and the present erected in in; place.
All that was venerable ceased here. The new building
was not only new, but declared itself to be an; intended
only for ofﬁces, and enclosed behind by stable-yards, no
uniformity of architecture had been thought necesmry.
Catherine could have raved at the hand which had swept
away what must have been beyond the value of all the
zest, for the purposes of mere domestic economy; and
would willingly have been spared the mortiﬁcation of a
walk through scenes so fallen, had the General allowed
it: but ifhe had a vanity, it was in the arrangement of
his oﬂices; and as he was convinced, that, to a mind
like Miss Morland’s, a view of the accommodations and
comforts by which the labours of her inferior! were
softened, must always be gratifying, he should make no
apology for leading her on. They took a slight survey
of all; and Catherine was impressed, beyond her ex-

ctation, by their multiplicity and their convenience.

he purposes for which a few shapeless pantries, and a
comfortleu scullery, were deemed suﬂicient at Fullerton,
were here carried on in appropriate divisions, commodi-
ous and roomy. The number of servants continually

r 76 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

appearing, did not strike her In. than the number of
their oﬂices. Wherever they went, some pattened girl
stopped to curtsey, or some footrnan in dishahille
meaked o5. Yet this was an Abbey! How inexpres-
sihly diﬁ'erent in these domestic arrangement: from such
as she had read about: from abhe and castles, in
which, though certainly larger than orthanger, all the
dirtyworkofthehousewastobedone hytwo ir of
{male hands at the utmost. How they could get
through it all, had often amazed Mrs Allen; and, when
Catherine saw what was necessary here, she began to
be amazed herself.

They returned to the hall, that the chief staircase
might be ascended, and the beauty of its wood and
ornaments of rich carving might be pointed out: having
gained the top, they turned in an opposite direction from
the gallery in which her room lay, and shortly entered
one on the same plan, but superior in length and
breadth. She was here shewn successively into three
large bed-chambers, with their dressing-rooms, most
completely and handsomely ﬁtted up: everything that
money and taste could do, to give comfort and elegance
to apartments, had been bestowed on these; and,
being furnished within the last ﬁve years, they were
perfect in all that would be generally pleasing, and
wanting in all that could give pleasure to Catherine.
As they were surveying the last, the General, after
slightly naming a few of the distinguished characters by
whom they had at times been honoured, turned with a
smiling countenance to Catherine, and ventured to hope
that henceforward some of the earliest tenants might be
“ our friends from Fullerton.” She felt the unexpected
compliment, and deeply regretted the impossibith of
thinking well of a man so kindly di towards her-
self, and so hill of civilin to all her amily.

The gallery was terminated by folding doors, which

. I. I. . ._. .4

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 71

Miss Tilney, advancing, had thrown open, and passed
through, and seemed an the point of doing the same by
die ﬁrst door to the left, in another long reach of gallery,
when the General, coming forwards, called her hastily,
and, as Catherine thought, rather angrily back, demand-
ing whither the were going? And what was there
more to be seen? Had not Miss Morland already
seen all that could be worth her notice? And did she
not sup her friend might be glad of some refresh-
ment r so much exercise? Miss Tilney drew hack
directly, and the heavy doors were closed upon the
mortiﬁed Catherine, who, having seen, in a momentary
glance beyond them, a narrower pamge, more numer-
onr openings, and symptoms of a windin staircase,
believed herself at last within the reach 0 something
worth her notice; and felt, as she unwillingly paced
back the gallery, that she would rather be allowed to
examine that end of the house than see all the ﬁnery of
all the rest. The General’s evident desire of revent-
ing such an examination was an additional stimulant.
Something was certainly to be concealed: her fancy,
though it had trespassed lately once or twice, could not
mislead her here; and what that something was, a short
sentence of Miss Tilney’s, as they followed the General
at some distance down stairs, seemed to point out :—H I
was going to take you into what was my mother’s room,
the room in which she died ” were all her words ;
but few as they were, they conveyed pages of intelli-
gence to Catherine. It was no wonder that the General
should shrink from the sight of such objects as that
room must contain.—a room, in all probability, never
entered by him since the dreadful sce had
which released his suffering wife, and left him to the
stings of conscience.

She ventured, when next alone with Eleanor, to ex-
press her wish of being permitted to see it, as well as all

 

1 78 HORWGKR ABBEY.

therettof that side of the house; and Eleanor pro-
mised to attend her there, whenever they should have a
convenient hour. Catherine understood her : the Gen-
eral must be watched from home, before that room
could be entered. “ It remains as it was, I wppose?”
aid she, in a tone of feeling.

“ Yes, entirely."

“And how long ago may it he that your mother
died P ”

“She haabeen dead these nine yarn." And nine
years, Catherine knew, was a triﬂe of time, compared
with what generally elapsed after the death of an in-
jured wife, before her room was put to rights.

“ You were with her, I suppose, to the last i "

“ No,” said Miss Tilney, sighing; “ I was unfor-
tunately from home. Her illness was sudden and short ;
and before I arrived, it was all over.”

Catherine’s blood ran cold with the horrid suggestions
which naturally sprang from these words. Could it be
possible? Could Henry’s father—? And yet how
many were the examples to justify even the blackest
suspicions ! And when she saw him in the evening, while
she worked with her friend, slowly pacing the drawing-
room for an hour together in silent thoughtfulness, with
downcast eyes and contracted brow, she felt secure from
all podbility of wronging him. It was the air and atti-
tude of a Monmni! What could more plainly speak
the gloomy workings of a mind not wholly dead to
every sense of humanity, in its fearful review of past
scenes of guilt? Unhappy man ! And the anxious-
ness of her spirits directed her eyes towards his ﬁgure
so repeatedly, as to catch Miss Tilney's notice. “ My
father,” she whispered, “ often walks about the room in
this way; it is nothing unusual.”

“ So much the worse! " thought Catherine: such
ill-timed exercise was of a piece with the strange un-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. r 79
seasonahleness of his morning walks, and boded nothing

Aﬂer an evening, the little variety and seeming
length of which made her peculiarly sauible of Henry’s
impomnoe among them, she was heartily glad to be
dismissed; though it was a look from the General not
designed ﬁsr her observation which sent his daughter to
the belL When the butler would have lit his master's
candle, however, he was forbidded The latter was not
going to retire. ' “ I have many pamphlets to ﬁnish,"
said he to Catherine, “ before I can close my eyes; and
perhaps may be poring over the affairs of the nation for
hours after you are asleep. Can either of us be more
meetly employed? My eyes will be blinding for the
good of others; and your: preparing by rest for future
mischief.”

But neither the business alleged, nor the magniﬁcent
compliment, could win Catherine from thinking that
some very different object must occasion so serious a
delay of roper repose. To be kept up for hours, after
the fam' y were in bed, by stupi pamphlets, was not
very likely. There must be some deeper cause: some-
thing was to be done which could be done only while
the household slept ; and the probability that Mrs Til-
ney yet lived, shut up for causes unknown, and receiving
from the pitiless hands of her husband a nightly supply
of ooarse food, was the conclusion which necessarily
followed. Shocking as was the idea, it was at last
better than a death unfairly hastened, as in the natural
course of things, she must ere long be released. The
suddenness of her reputed illness, the absence of her
daughter, and probably of her other children, at the
time, all favoured the supposition of her imprisonment.
Its origin—jealousy, perhaps, or wanton cruelty—was
yet to be unravelled.

in revolving these matters while sheundressed, it

18° uonrnsnczn slam.

suddenly struck her as not unlikely, that the might
that morning have passed near the my spot of
this unfortunate woman’s conﬁnement; might have
heenwithinafewpacesofthe cell in which she lan-
guished out her days ; for what part of the Abbey could
be more ﬁtted for the purpose than that which yet bore
the traces of monastic division? In the high-arched
pauge, paved with stone, which already she had trod-
den with peculiar awe, she well remembered the doors
of which the General had given no account. To what
might not these doors lead? In support of the plausi-
hility of this conjecture, it further occurred to her, that
the forbidden gallery, in which lay the apartments of
the unfortunate Mrs Tilney, must be, as certainly as her
memory could guide her, exactly over this suspected
range of cells; and the staircase by the side of those
apartments of which she had caught a transient glimpse,
communicating by some secret means with those cells,
might well have favoured the harbarmu proceedings of
her husband. Down that staircase the had perhaps
been conveyed in a state of well-prepared insensibility.

Catherine sometimes started at the boldness of her
own sunnises, and sometimes hoped or feared that she
had gone too far; but they were supported by such
appearances as made their dismissal impossible.

The side of the quadrangle, in which she supposed
the guilty scene to be acting, being, according to her be-
lief, just opposite her own, it struck her that, if judi.
ciously watched, some rays of light from the Geneml’s
lamp might glimmer through the lower windows, as he
passed to the prison of his wife; and, twice before she
stepped into bed, she stole gently from her room to the
corresponding window in the gallery, to see if it
appeared, but all abroad was dark, and it must yet he
too early. The various ascending noises convinced her
that the servants mutt still be up. Till midnight, the

non-manorm man. 181

supposed it would be in vain to watch ; but then, when
the clock had struck twelve, and all was quiet, she
would, if not quite appalled by darkness, steal out and
look once more. The clock struck twelve, and Cath-
erine had been half an hour asleep.

than“: 5%317.

HE next day afforded no opportunity for the pro-
posed examinaan of the mysterious apartments.
It was Sunday, and the whole time between
morning and afternoon service was required by the
General in exercise abroad or eating cold meat at home;
and great as was Catherine’s curiosity, her courage was
not equal to a wish of exploring them alter dinner,
either b the fading light of the sky between six and
seven o clock, or by the yet more partial though stronger
illumination of a treacherous lamp. The day \vns un-
marked, therefore, by anything to interest her imagina-
n'on beyond the sight of a very elegant monument to
the memory of Mrs Tilney, whieh immediate! fronted
the family pew. By that her eye was instan y caught
and long retained ; and the perusal of the highly-strained
epitaph, in which every virtue was ascribed to her by
the inconsolable husband, who must have been in some
wa or other her destroyer, aﬂ‘ected her even to tears.
hat the General, having erected such a monument,
should be able to face it, was not perhaps very strange,
and yet that he could sit lo boldly collected within its
view, maintain so elevated an air, look so fearlme
around, nay, that he should even enter the church,
seemed wonderful to Catherine. Not, however, that
many inmnoes of beings equally hardened in guilt
mightnot be produced. She could remember dozens

r82 NORTHANGER Anew.

who had persevered in every possible vice, going on from
crime to crime, murdering whomever they chose,
without any feeling of humanity or remorse, till a violent
death or a religious retirement closed their black career.
The erection of the monument itself could not in the
smallest de affect her donbu of Mrs Tilney’s actual
decease. ﬁre the even to descend into the family
vault where her ashes were supposed to slumber, were
she to behold the coffin in which they were said to be
enclosed, what could it avail in such a case? Cathe-
rine had read too much not to be perfectly aware of
the ease with which a waiten ﬁgure might be introduced,
and a supposititious funeral carried on.

The succeeding morning prode something better.
The General’s early walk, ill-timed as it was in every
other view, was favourable here; and when she knew
him to be out of the house, the directly proposed
to Miss Tilney the accomplishment of her promise.
Eleanorwas readyto oblige her; and Catherine remind-
ing her as they went of another promise, their ﬁrst visit
in consequence was to the rtrait in her bed-chamber.
It represented a very Iov y woman, with a mild and
pensive countenance, justifying so far, the expectations
of its new observer; but they were not in every respect
anrwered, for Catherine had depended upon meeting
with features, ‘air, complexion, that should be the very
counterpart, the very image, if not of Henry’s, of
Eleanor’s; the only maits of which she had been in
the habit of drinking, ring always an equal resemblance
of mother and child. A face once taken was taken for
generations. But here‘she was obliged to look, and
consider, and study for a likeness. She contemplated
it, however, in Kite of this drawback, with much emo-
tion; and, but r I yet stronger interest, would have
left it unwillingly.

Her agitation, as they entered the great gallery, was

NORTHANGER ABBEY. :83

too great for any endeavour at discourse; she could
only look at her companion. Eleanor’s counmnance
was dejected, yet sedate; and its composure spoke her
enured to all the gloomy objects to which they were
advancing. Again she passed through the folding-doors,
again her hand was upon the important lock, and Cath-
erine, hardly able to breathe, was turning to close the
former with frful caution, when the ﬁgure, the dreaded
ﬁgure of the General himself, at the further end of the
gallery, stood before her! The name of “Elmer "
at the me moment, in his loudest tone, resounded
through the building, giving to his daughter the ﬁrst in-
timation of his presence, and to Catherine terror u n
terror. An attempt at concealment had been her rst
instinctive movement on perceiving him, yet she could
scarcely hope to have escaped his eye; and when her
friend, who with an apologizing look darted hastily by
her, had joined and disappeared with him, she ran for

to her own room, and,loc|ting herself in, believed
that she should never have courage to go down again.
She remained there at least an hour, in the greatest
agitation, deeply commiserating the state of her poor
friend, and expecting a summons herself from the angry
General, to attend him in his own apartment. No
summons, however, arrived; and at last, on seeing a
carriage drive up to the Abbey, she was emboldened to
descend and meet him under the protection of visitors
The breakfast-morn was gay with compan ; and she
was named to them by the General as the 'end of his
daughter, in a complimentary style, which so well con-
cealed his resentful ire, as to make her feel secure at
lest of life for the present. And Eleanor, with a
command of cormtensnce which did honour to her con-
cern for his character, taking an early occasion of saying
to her, " My fsther only wanted me to answer a note,”
shebegsn whopethstshehad either been unseenby

184 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

the General, or that from some consideration of glicy
she should be allowedto suppose herself so. pon
this trust she dared still to remain in his presence after
the company left them, and nothing occurred to disturb
it.

In the course of this moming’s reﬂections, she came
to a resolution of making her next attempt on the for-
bidden door alone. It would be much better in every
respect that Eleanor should know nothing of the matter.
To involve her in the danger of a second detection, to
court her into an apartment which must wring her hart,
could not be the oﬂice of a friend. The Genenl’s
utmost anger could not be to herself what it might be to
a daughter, and besides, she, thought the examination
itself would be more satisfactory if made without any
companion. It would be impossible to explain to
Eleanor the suspicions, from which the other had, in all
likelihood, been hitherto happily exempt ; nor could she
therefore, in La- resence, search for those proofs of
the General's crue ty, which, however they might yet
have esca discovery, she felt conﬁdent of somewhere
drawing orth, in the shape of some fragmented journal,
continued to the last gasp. 0f the way to the apart-
ment she was now perfectly mistress, and as she wished
to get it over before Henry’s return, who was ex
on the marrow, there was no lime to be loan The day
was bright, her courage high; at four o’clock the sun
was now two hours above the horizon, and it would be
only her retiring to dress half an hour earlier than
usual.

It was done; and Catherine found herself alone in
the gallery before the clocks had ceased to strike. It
was no time for thought: she hurried on, slipped with
the least possible noise through the folding doors, and
without stopping to look or breathe, rushed forward to
the one in question. The lock yielded to her hand, and

NORTHANGER ABBEY. r85

luckily with no sullen sound that could alarm a human
being. On tipwe the entered: the room was before
her: but it was some minutes before the could advance
another step. She beheld what fixed her to the spot,
and agitated every feature. She saw a large, well-pro-
portioned apartment, an handsome dimity bed, arranged
at unoccupied, with an hounemaid’s care, a bright Bath
stove, mahogany wardrobe! and neatly-painted chairs, on
which the warm beams of a western tun gaily poured
through two sash windows Catherine had expected to
have her feelings worked, and worked they were.
Amiahment and doubt first seized them, and a shortly
tucceeding my of common ten-e added some bitter
emotiont of shame. She could not be mistaken as to
the room; but how grossly mistaken in everything else,
in Mint Tilney'a meaning, in her own calculation !
Thit apartment, to which the had given a date so
ancient, a tition so awful, proved to be one end of
what the eneral’a father had built. There were two
other doon in the chamber, leading probably into dress-
ing-closets, but the had no inclinatron to open either.
Would the veil in which Mrt Tilney had last walked,
or the volume in which the had laot read, remain to tell
what nothing elte was allowed to whitper? No; what.-
cver might have been the General'a crimes, he had
certainly too much wit to let them sue for detection.
She was rick of exploring, and desired but to be safe in
her own room, with her own heart only privy to its
folly, and the waa on the point of retreating at softly as
the had entered, when the sound of footsteps, she could
hardly tell where, made her pause and tremble. To be
found there, even by a tenant, would be unpleasant, but
by the General (and he seemed always at hand when
la“ wanted) much wane. She listened, the sound
had seated, and retolving not to lose a moment she
patted through and cloned the door. At that instant I
N

l
I
'l
i

 

186 NORTHANGER assay.

door underneath was hastily opened, some one seemed
withswifts toascendthestairs,bythehead of
which she h yet to pass before she could gain the
gallery. She had no power to move. With a feeling
of terror not very deﬁnable, she ﬁxed her eyes on the
uaircase, and in a few moments it gave Henry to her
view. l‘Mr Tilney!” she exclaimed, in a voice of
more than common astonishment. He looked astonished
mo. “ Good God! " she continued, not attending to
his address, “ how came you here? How me you up
that staircase?”

“ How came I up that mircase ? " he replied, greatly
surprized. “Because it is my nearest way from the
stable-yard to my own chamber; and why should I not
come up it ? "

Catherine recollecsed her-self, blushed deeply, and
could say no more. He seemed to be looking in her
countenance for that explanation which her lips did not
afford. She moved on towards the gallery. “And
may I not, in my turn,” said he, as he pushed back the
folding doors, “ask how you came here? This passage
is at least as extraordinary a road from the breakfast-
porlour to your apartment, as that staircase can be from
the stables to mine.”

“I have been,” said Catherine, looking down, “to
see your mother’s room."

" My mother’s room! Is there anything extraor-
dina to be seen there?”

“ 0, nothing at all. I thought you did not man
to come back till to-mormw.”

“I did not expect to be able to return sooner, when
I went away; but. three hours ago I had the yleanrre
of ﬁnding nothing to detain me. You look pale. I am
afraid I alarmed you by running so fast up those stain.
Perhaps you did not know—you were not aware oftlreir
leading from the ofﬁces in common use .’ "

\
r

NORTHANGER ABBEY; I 87

“ No, I was not. You have had a very ﬁne day for
your ride.”

“ Very; and does Eleanor leave you to ﬁnd your
way into all the rooms in the house by yourself? "

“ Oh, no! she shewed me over the greatest part on
Saturday, and we were coming here to these rooms, but
only,” (dropping her voice,) “ your father was with us.”

“And that prevented you,” said Henry, earnestly
regarding her. “Have you looked into all the rooms
in that passage ? "

“No; I only wanted to see— Is not it very late?
I must go and dress."

“ It is only a quarter past four,” (thawing his watch ;)
“and you are not now In Bath. No theatre, no room
to prepare for. Half an hour at Nonthanger must be
enough.”

She could not contradict it, and therefore suﬁ'ered
herself to be detained, though her dread of further
questions made her, for the ﬁrst time in their acquain-
mnce, wish to leave him. They walked slowly up the
gallery. “ Have you had any letter from Bath since I
saw on?”

“ o, and I am very much sunnized. Inbella pro-
mised so faithfully to write direc y.”

“ Promised so faithfully! A faithful promise! That
puzzles me. I have heard of a faithful performance;
but a faithful pmmise-—the ﬁdelity of promising! It is
a power little worth knowing, however, since it can de-
ceive and pain you. My mother’s room is very com-
modious, is it not? Large and cheerful looking, and
the dressing-closets so well disposed. It always strikes
me as the most comfortable apartment in the house; and
I rather wonder that Eleanor should not take it for her
own. She sent you to look at it, I uppese?"

“ No.”

“ It has been your own doing entirely ? ” Catherine

r88 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

said nothing. After a short silence. during which he
had closely observed her, he added: “ As there is
nothing in the room in itself to raise curiosity, this must
have proceeded from a sentiment of respect for my
mother’s character, as described by Eleanor, which does
honour to her memory. The world, I believe, never
saw a better woman. But it is not often that virtue can
boast an interest such as this. The domestic, unpre-
tending merits of a person never known, do not often
create that kind of fervent, venenting tenderness which
would mm a visit like ours. Eleanor, I so ,
has tallihd ofther a great deril 2” "me
“Yes, a great deaL That is——no, not much, but
what she did say, was interesting. Her dying so
suddenly,” (slowly, and vnth hesitation it was spoken,)
“ and you—none of you being at home ; and your father,
I thought, perhaps, had not been very fond of her.”
“And from these circumstances,” he replied, (his
quick eye ﬁxed on here.) “you infer, rha s, the pro-
bability of some negligence—some—" fierrvo untarily she
shook her head), “ or it may be, of something still less
pardonable.” She raised her eyes towards him more
fully than she had ever done before “ My mother’s
illness," he continued, “the seizure which ended in her
death, wa: sudden. The malady itself one from which
she had often suffered : a bilinns fever: its cause there-
fore constitutional. 0n the third day, in short, as soon
as she could he prevailed on, a physician attended her ;
a very respectable man, and one in whom she had
alwa I placed great conﬁdence. Upon his opinion of
her nger, two others were called in the next day, and
remained in almost constant attendance for four-and-
twenty hours. On the ﬁfth day she died. During the
progress of her disorder, Frederick and I (we were
both at home) saw her repeatedly; and from our own
observation can bear witness to her having received

NORTHANGER sunny. 189

every possible attention which could spring from the
aEection of those about her, or which her situation in
life could command. Poor Eleanor an: absent, and at
such a distance as to return only to see her mother in
her cofﬁn."

“ But your father,” said Catherine, “was be
afﬂicted?"

" For a time, greatly so. You have erred in sup-
posing him not attached on her. He loved her, I am

rsuaded, as well as it was possible for him to
6e have not all, you know, the same tenderness of
disposition; and I will not pretend to say that while
she lived, the might not often have had much to bear ;
but though his um r injured her, his judgment never
did. His value or her was sincere; and, if not per-
manently, he was truly alllicted by her death."

“I am very glad of it,” said Catherine; “ it would
have been we Ihocking—"

“If I un emand you rightly, you had formed a
surmise of such horror as I have hardly words ro—
Dear Miss Morland, consider the dreadful nature of
the suspicious on have entemined. What have you
been judging flom? Remember the country and the
age in which we live. Remember that we are Eng-
lish: that we are Christians. Consult your own under-
standing, your own sense of the probable, ur own
observation of what is passing around you. oes our
education prepare us for such atrocities? Do our laws
connive at them? Could they be perpetrated without
being known in a country like this, where social and
literary intercourse is on such a footing; where every
man is surrounded by a neighbourhood of voluntary

ice; and where roads and ne pen lay e thin
:Jppen? Dearest Miss Morlanmat ideas if": yoE
been admitting 9"

They had reached the end of the gallery, end with
tears o shame she ran all" to her own room.

 

[90 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

chant" ﬁﬁﬂ‘.

HE visions of romance were over. Catherine
was completely awakened. Henry’s address,
short as it had been, had more thoroughly

opened her eyes to the extravagance of her late fancies
than all their several disappointments had done. Most
grievoust was she humbled. Most bitterly did the
cry. It was not on] with herself that shewas sunk,
but with Henry. I-{er folly, which now seemed even
criminal. was all exposed to him, and he must despise
her for ever. The liberty which her imagination had
dared to take with the character of his father, could he
ever forgive it? The absurdity of her curiosity and
her fears, could they ever be forgotten? She hated
herself more than she could express. He had, she
thought he had, once or twice before this fatal mom-
ing, shewn something like aEecﬁon for her. But now
—in short, she made herself as miserable as He for
about half an hour, went down, when the c ock struck
ﬁve, with a broken heart, and could scarcely give an
intelligible answer to Eleanor's in uiry if she was well.
The formidable Henry soon fo owed her into the
room, and the only difference in his behaviour to her
was, that he paid her rather more attention than usual.
Catherine had never wanted comfort more, and he
looked as if he was aware of it.

The evening wore away with no abatement of this
soothing politeness; and her spirits were gradually raised
to a modest tranquillity. She did not learn either to
forget or defend the past; but she learned to hope that
it would never transpire farther, and that it might not
cost her Henry’s entire regard. Her droughts being
still chieﬂy ﬁxed on what she had with such causeless
terror felt and done, nothing could shortly be clearer,

—._.A_ _.. ___.__‘ ,

NORTHANGIR sneer. xgr

than that it had been all a voluntary, self-created de-
luaion, each triﬂing circumstance receiving importance
from an imagination resolved on alarm, and everything
forced to bend to one pu ose by a mind which, before
she entered the abbey, had) been craving to be frightened.
She remembered with what feelings she had prepared
for a knowledge of Northanger. She saw that the
infatuation had been created, the mischief settled, long
before her quitting Bath, and it seemed as if the whole
might be traced to the inﬂuence of that sort of reading
which she had there indulged.

Charming as were all Mrs Radcliﬂ'e’s works, and
charming even as were the works of all her imimors, it
was not in them perhaps that human nature, at least in
the midland counties of England, was to be looked for.
Of the Alps and Pyrenees, with their pine forests and
their vioes, they might give a faithful delineation; and
Ital , Switzerland, and the South of France, might be
as 'tful in horror- as they were there represented.
Catherine dared not doubt beyond her own country,
and even of that, if hard pressed, would have yielded
the northern and western extremities. But in the
central pm of England there was surely some security
for the existence even of a wife not beloved, in the
laws of the land, and the manners of the age. Murder
was not tolerated, servants were not slaves, and neither

ison nor s1 'ng 'ons to be procured, like rhubarb,
Ebro every d?ggisthmong the Alps and Pyrenees,
perhaps, there were no mixed characters. There, such
aswerenotas essasanangel,mihthavethe
dispositions of s end. But in Englandrt was notso;
among the English, she believed, in their hearts and
habiu, there wss a general though unequal mixture of
good and bad. Upon this conviction, she would not
be surprised if even in Henry and Eleanor Til some
slight imperfection might hereafter appear; an upon

’ 192 NORTHA'NGER ABBEY.

this conviction she need not fear to acknowledge some
actual specks in the character of their father, who, though
cleared from the grossly injurious suspicions which she
must ever blush to have entertained, she did believe,
upon serious consideration, to be not perfectly amiable.

Her mind made up on these several poinu, and her
resolution formed, of always judging and acting in
future with the greatest good sense, she had nothing to
do but to forgive herself and be bap ier than ever; and
the lenient hand of time did much fbr her by insensible
gradations in the course of another day. Henry’s
astonishing generosity and nobleness of conduct, in never
alluding in the slightest way to what had passed, was of
the greatest assistance to her; and sooner than she
could have supposed it possible, in the beginning of her
distress, her spirits became absolutely comfortable, and
capable, as heretofore, of continual improvement by
anything he said. There were still some subjects,
indeed, under which she believed they must always
tremble; the mention of a chest or a cabinet, for
instance, and she did not love the sight of japan in any
shape: but even :5: could allow that an ocmrional
memento of past folly, however painful,'might not be
without use.

The anxieties of common life began soon to succeed
to the alarms of romance. Her desire of hearing from
linbella grew every day greater. She was quite im-
patient to know how the Bath world went on, and how
the Rooms were amended; and especially was she
anxious to be assured of Ibella’s having matched some
ﬁne netting cotton, on which she had left her intent;
and of her continuing on the best terms with James.
Her only dependence for information of any kind was
on Isabella. James had protested against writin
her till his return to Oxford; and Mrs Allen had given
her no hopes of a letter till she had got back to

' t -.A,,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 193

Fullerton. But Isabella had promised and promited
again; and when she promised a thing she was so
scrupulous in performing it; this made it so particularly
strange!

For nine niece-sin mornings Catherine wondered
over the repetition of s disappointment which each
morning became more severe; but on the tenth, when
she entered the breakfast-room, her ﬁrst object was a
letter, held out by Henry’s willing hand. She thanked
him as heartily as if he had written it himself. “ 'Tis
only from James, however,” an she looked at the direc-
tion. She opened it: it was from Oxford; and to this

purpose :—

“Dm Currants—Though, God knows, with
little inclination for writing, I think it my duty to tell
you, that everything is at an end between Miss Thorpe
and me. I left her and Bath yenerday, never to Ice
either again. I shall not enter into particulan, they
would only pain you more. You will soon hear enough
from another uaner to know where lies the blame;
and I hope w' l acquit your brother of everything but
the folly of too essily thinking his affection returned.
Thank God! I am undeceived in time! But it is a
heavy blow! After my father's content had been so
kindly 'ven—but no more of this. She hat made me
miserab e for ever! Let me soon hear from you, dear
Catherine; you are my only friend; your love I do
build upon. I wish your visit at Northanger may be
over before Captain Tilney makes hit engagement
known, or you will be uncomfortably cirtumstanced.
Poor Thorpe is in town : I dread the sight of him;
his honest heart would feel so much. I have written
to him and my father. Her duplicity hurts me more
than all; till the very last, if I reasoned with her, she
declared herself as much attached to me u ever, and

[94 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

laughed at my fears. I am ashamed to think. how long
Iborewithit; but ifeverman hadreason to believe
himself loved, I was that man. I unnot undermnd,
even now, what she would be at, for there could be no
need of my being played off to make her secure of
Tilney. We parted at last by mutual consent. Happy
for me had we never met! I can never expect to
know such another woman I Dearest Catherine, beware
how you give your heart—Believe me, 8m.”

Catherine had not read three lines before her sudden
change of countenance, and short exclamations of
narrowing wonder, declared her to be receiving un-
pleasant news; and Henry, earnestly watching her
through the whole letter, aw plainly that it ended no
better than it began. He was prevented, however,
from even looking his surprize, by his father’s enhance.
They went to breakfast directly; but Catherine could
hardly eat anything. Tears ﬁlled her eyes, and even
ran down her cheeks as the t. The letter was one
moment in her hand, then in her lap, and then in her
pocket; and she looked as if she knew not what she
did. The General, between his cocoa and his news-
paper, had luckily no leisure for noticing her; but to
the other two her distress was equally visible. As soon
as she dared leave the table, she hurried away to her
own room ; but the housemaids were busy in it, and she
was obliged to come down again. She turned into the
drawing-room for privacy, but Henry and Eleanor had
likewise retreated thither, and were at that moment
d in consultation about her. She drew back, trying
to g their pardon, but was, with gentle violence,
forced to return ; and the others withdrew, after Eleanor
had aﬁectionately expressed a wish of being of use or
comfort to her.

After half an hour’s free indulgence of grief and

NORTHANGER ABBEY. l 9 5

reﬂection, Catherine felt equal to encountering her
friends; but whether she should make her distress
known to them was another consideration. Perhaps,
if particularly anemioned, she might give an idea—
just distantly hint at it—but not more. To expose a
friend, such a friend as Isabella had been to her; and
then their own brother so closely concerned in it!
She believed she must wave the subject altogether.
Henry and Eleanor were by themselves in the break-
fast room; and each, as she tered it, looked at her
anxiously. Catherine took her place at the table, and,
aﬁer a short silence, Eleanor said, “ No bad news from
Fnllerton, I hope? Mr and Mrs Morland, your
brothers and sisters, I hope they are none of them ill ? ”

“ No, I thank you,” (sighing as the spoke ;) “they
are all very well. My letter was from my brother at
Oxford."

Nothing further was said for a few minutes ; and th,
faking through her tears, she added, “I do not think

shall ever wish for a letter again! ”

" I am sorry,” aid Henry, closing the book he had
just opened; “if I had the lemr of contain-
ing anything unwelcome, should have given it with'
very different feelings.”

“ It contained something wane than anybody could
suppose! Poor James is so unhappy! You wrll soon
know why.’ ’

“ To have so kind-hearted, so alfectionate a sister,"
replied Henry, warmly, “ must be a comfort to him
under any distress.” -

“ I have one favour to beg," said Catherine, shortly
afterwards, in an agitated manner, “ that, if your brother
Ihouldhe coming here, you will give me notice of it,
that I may go away."

“ Onr brother! Frederick! ”

“Yes; 1 am sure I should he very sorrytolenveyou

r96 NORTHANGER ssnzv.

so soon, but something has happened that would make
it very dreadful for me to be in the same house with
Captain Tilney."

Eleanor’s work was suspended while she gazed with
incrmsing astonishment; hut Henry began to Inspect the
truth, and something in which Miss Thorpe’s name was
included, passed his lips.

“ How quick you are! ” cried Catherine; “ you
have guessed it, I declare! And yet, when we talked
about it in Bath, you little thought of its ending so.
Isabella—no wonder now I have not heard from her—
Isabella has deserted my brother, and is to marry yours!
Could you have believed there had been such incon-
stancy, and ﬁcldeness, and everything that is bad in the
world 9 ”

“I hope, so far as concerns my brother, you are mis-
informed. I hope he has not had any material share in
brin ing on Mr Morland's dippoiutment. His marry.
ing iii“ Thorpe is not probable. I think you must be
deceived so far. I am very sorry for Mr Morland:
sorry that any one you love should be unhappy; but
my surpiize would be greater at Frederick’s marrying
her, than at any other part of the story.”

“It is very true, however; you shall read Jamee’s
letter yourself. Stay, there is one part—3’ recollecting.
with a blush, the last line. '

" Will you take the trouble of reading to us the
passages which concern my brother?"

“ No, read it yourself,” cried Catherine, whose
second thoughts were clearer. “ I do not know what I
was thinking 0 ,” (blushing again that the had blushed
before). “ James only means to give me good advice.”

He gladly received the letter; and, having read it
through with close attention, returned it, saying, “ Well,
if it is to be so, I can only my that 1 am sorry for it.
Frederick will notbe the ﬁrst man who has chosen a

NORTHANGER ABBEY, [97

Wife with less sense than his family expecud. I do
not envy his situation, either as a lover or a son.”

Miss Tilney, at Catherine’s invitation, now read the
letter likewise ; and, having expressed also her concern
and surprise, began to inquire into Miss Thorpe’s con-
nexions and fortune.

“ Her mother is a very good sort of woman,” was
Catherine’s answer.

“ What was her father?”

“ A lawyer, I believe. They live at Pumey.”

“ Are they a wealthy family 2 ”

“No, not very. I do not believe Isabella has any
fortune at all; but that will not signify in your family.
Your father is so very liberal! He told me the other
day, that he only valued money as it allowed him to
promote the happiness of his children.” The brother
and sister looked at each other. “ But,” said Eleanor,
after a short pnuoe, “would it be to promote his happi-
ness to enable him to many such a girl ? She must be
an unprincipled one, or she could not have used your
brother so. And how strange an infatuation on
Frederick’s side! A girl, who, before his eyes, is
violating an engagement voluntarily entered into with
another man! Is not it inconceivable, Henry?
Frederick, too, who always wore his heart so mudly!
who found no woman good enough to be lo ”

"That is the most unpromixing circumstance, the
strongest presumption against him. When I think of
his past declarations, I give him up. Moreover, I have
too good an opinion of Miss Thorpe's prudence, to
suppose that she would port with one gentleman before
the other was secured. It is all over with Frederick,
indeed! He is a deseased man; defunct in under-
standing. Prepre for your sister-in-law, Eleanor; and
such a u'ster-in-law as you must delight in. Open,
candid, artless, guileless, with affections strong. but

l 98 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

simple, forming no pretensions, and knowing no dis-
guilt"

“Such a sister-in-law, Henry, I should delight in,”
said Eleanor, with a smile.

“But, perhaps,” obmved Catherine, " though she
has behaved so ill by our family, she may behave better
by yours. Now she has really got the man she likes,
the may be constant.”

“Indeed, I am afraid she will,” replied Henry; “ I
am afraid she will he very constant, unless a baronet
should come in her way ; that is Frederick’s only chance.
I will get the Bath paper, and look over the an'ivals.”

“ You think it is all for ambition, then? And upon
my word, there are some things that seem very like it.
I cannot forget that, when she ﬁrst knew what my
father would do for them, she seemed quite dippointed
that it was not more. I never was so deceived in any
one’s character in my life before."

“ Among all the great variety that you have known
and studie ."

“ My own disappointment and loss in her is ve
great; but, as for poor James, I suppose he will hardly
ever recover it.”

“ Your brother is certainly very much to he pitied at
present; but we must not, in our concern for his suffer-
ings, undigalue yours. You feel, I suppose, that, in
losing Isa Ia, you lose half yourself: you feel a void
in your heart which nothing else can occupy. Society
is becoming irksome; and as for the amusement. in
which you were wont to share at Bath, the very idea of
them without her is abhoan You would not, for
instance, now go to a ball for the world. You feel that
you have no longer any friend to whom you can speak
with unreserve; on whose regard you can place depend-
ence; or whose counsel, in any difﬁculty, you could
rely on. You feel all this?"

NORTHANGER sunny. r99

“ No,” said Catherine, after a few moments’ reﬂec-
tion, “I donot: ought I? To say the truth, though
I am hurt and grieved that I cannot still love her, that
I am never to hear from her, perhaps never to see her
again, I do not feel so very, very much afﬂicted as one
would have thought.”

“You feel, as you always do, what is most to the
credit of human nature. Such feelings ought to be in-
vestigated, that they may know themselves.”

Catherine, by some chance or other, found her spirits
so very much relieved by this conversation, that she
could not regret her being led on, though so unac-
countably, to mention the circumstance which had
produced it.

chum #373.

ROM this time the subject was frequently canvassed

F by the three young people; and Catherine found,
with some surprize, that her two young friends

were perfectly agreed in considering Isabella’s want of
consequence and fortune as likely to throw great diﬂi-
culties in the way of her marrying their brother. Their
persuasion that the General would, upon this ground
alone, independent of the objection that might be missed
against her character, oppose the connexion, turned her
feelings moreover with some alarm towards herself. She
was as insigniﬁcant, and perha’is as portionless as Isa-
bella; and if the heir of the ilney property had not
grandeur and wealth enough in himself, at what point
of interest were the demands of his younger brother to
rest ? The very painful reﬂections to which this thought
led, could only be by a dependence on the
effect of that panic ar partiality, which, as she was
given to understand by his words as well as his acu'ons,

20° NORTHANGER ABBEY.

she had from the ﬁrst been so fortunate as to excite in
the General; and by a recollection of some most gener-
ous and disinterested sentiments on the subject of money,
which she had more than once heard him utter, and
which tempted her to think his disposition in such
matters misundeer by his children.

They were so hilly convinced, however, that their
brother would not have the courage to a ply in person
for his father’s consent, and so repea y assured her
that he had never in his life been less likely to come to
Northanger than at the present time, that she suEemd her
mind to be at ease as to the necessity of any sudden
removal of her own. But as it was not to be supposed
that Captain Tilney, whenever he made his application,
would give his father any idea of Isabella's conduct,
it occumd to her as highly eXpedient that Henry should
lay the whole business before him as it really was, en-
abling the General by that means to form a cool and
impartial opinion, and p his objections on a fairer
ground than inequality 0 situations. She proposed it
to him accordingly; but he did not catch at the measure
so eagerly as she had expected. “ No," said he; “my
father’ s hands need not be strengthened, and Frederick’s
confession of folly need not be forestalled. He must
tell his own story."

“ But he will tell only half of it.”

“A quarter would be enough.”

A day or two passed away and brought no tidings of
Captain Tilney. His brother and sister knew not what
to think. Sometimes it appeared to them as if his
silence would be the namral result of the suspected en-
gagement, and at others that it was wholly incom atible
with it. The General, mean while, though 0 ded
every morning by Frederick’s remissness in writing, was
free from any real anxie about him; and had no more
pressing solicimde than that of making Miss Morland’s

 

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 20!

time at Northanger pass pleasantly. He often expressed
his uneasiness on this head, “feared the sameness of every
day’s society and employments would disgust her with
the place, wished the Lady Frasers had been in the
country, mlked every now and then of having a large

to dinner, and once or twice began even to cal-
culate the number of young dancing people in the neigh-
bourhood. But then it was such a dead time of year,
no wild-fowl, no game, and the Lady Fnsers were not
in the country." And itallended, at last, in his telling
Henry, one morning, that when be next went to Wood-
ston, they would take him by surprize there some day
or other, and eat their mutton with him. Henry was
greatly honoured and very happy, and Catherine was
quite delighted with the scheme. “ And when do you
think, sir, I may look forward to this pleasure? I must
be at Woodston on Monday to attend the meet-
ing, and shall probably be obliged to stay two or three
d3 n

ys.

“Well, well, we will take our chance some one of those
days. Thereis no needto ﬁx. You are not to put
yourself at all out of your way. Whatever on may
happen to have in the house will be enough. think I
can answer for the young ladies making allowance for a
bachelor’s table. Let me see; Monday will be a busy
day with you; we will not come on Monday; and
Tuesday will be a busy one with me. I expect my
surveyor from Brockham with his report in the mom-
ing; and afterwards I cannot, in decency, fail attending
the club. I really could not face my acquaintance if I
staid awny now; for, as I am known to be in the
country, it would be taken exceedingly amiss; and it it
a rule with me, Miss Morland, never to give offence to
any of my neighbours if a small sacriﬁce of time and
attention can prevent it. They are a set of very worthy
men. They have half a buck from Northanger twine a

o

202 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

year; and I dine with them whenever I can. Tuesday,
therefore, we may say, is out of the question. But on
Wednesday, I think, Henry, you may expect us; and
we shall be with you early, that we may have time to look
about us. Two hours and three-quarters will carry us to
Woodston, I suppose; we shall be in the carriage by
ten ; so, about a quarter before one on Wednesday, you
may look for us.”

A ball itself could not have been more welcome to
Catherine than this little excursion, so strong was her
desire to be acquainted with Woodston; and her heart
was still bounding with joy, when Henry, about an
hour afterwards, came booted and great-coated into the
room where she and Eleanor were sitting, and said, “I
am come, young ladies, in a very moralizing strain, to
observe that our pleasures in this world are always to
be paid for, and that we often purchase them at a great
disadvantage, giving ready-monicd, actual hap iness for
a draft on the future that may not be honou Wit-
ness myself at this present hour. Because I am to
hope for the satisfaction of seeing you at Woodman on
Wednesday, which bad weather, or twenty other causes
may prevent, I must go away directly, two days before
I intended it.”

“Go away,” said Catherine, with u very long face,
“ and why ? ’

“ Why! How can you ask the question? Because
no ﬁrm is to be lost in frightening my old housekeeper
out of her wits: because I must go and prepare a
dinner for you, to be sure.”

“ Oh! not seriously ! ”

“Ay, and sadly too; for I had much lather stay.”

“ But how can you think of such a thing after what
the General said? When he so articularly desired

not to give yourself any troub e, because anything
would do."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 203

Henry only smiled. “I am me it is quite un-
necessary upon your sister’s account, and mine. You
must know it to be so; and the General made such a
point of your providing nothing extraordinary; besides,
if he had not said half so much as he did, he has always
such an excellent dinner at home, that sitting down to
a middling one for one day could not signify. ’ ’

“I wish I could reason like you, for his sake and
my own. Good-bye. As m-morrow is Sunday,
Eleanor, I shall not return.”

He went; and, it being at any time a much simpler
o ration to Catherine to doubt her own 'udgment than

enry’s, she was very soon obliged to give him credit
for being right, however disagreeable to her his going.
But the inexplicability of the General’s conduct dwelt
much on her thoughts. That he was very particular in
his eating, she had, by her own unassisted observation,
already discovered; but why he should as one thing
so positively, and mean another all the whi e, was most
unaccountable! How were people, at that rate, to be
understood? Who but Henry could have been aware
of what his father was at?

From Saturday to Wednesday, however, th were
now to be without Hen . This was the sad nale of
every reﬂection ; and sprain Tilney’s letter would
certainly come in his absence, and Wednesday, she
was very sure, would be wet. The st, present, and
future, were all equally in gloom. er brother so un-
happy, and her loss in Isabella so t; and Eleanor's
spints always affected by Henry s absence ! What
was there to interest or amuse her? She was tired of
the woods and the shrubberies, always so smooth and
so dry; and the abbey in itself was no more to her now
than any other house. The painful remembrance of
the folly it had helped to nourish and perfect was the
only emotion which could spring from a consideration

204 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

of the building. What a revolution in her ideas!
She, who had so longed to be in an abbey. Now,
there was nothing so charming to her imagination as
the unpretending comfort of a well-connected parson-
age, something like Fullerton, but better. Fullerton
had its faults, hut Woodston probably had none. If
Wednesday should ever come!

It did come, and exactly when it might be reason-
ably looked for. It came; it was ﬁne, and Catherine
trod on air. By ten o’clock the chaise-and-four con-
veyed the two from the abbey, and, after an agreeable
drive of almost twenty miles, they entered Woodman,
a large and populous village, in l situation not un-
pleannt. Catherine was ashamed to say how pretty
she thought it, as the General segned to think an

o necessary for the ﬂatness o the coun , and
wage of the village; but‘ in her heart she pi-Sl'erred
it to any place she had ever been at, and looked with
great admiration at every neat house above the rank of
a cottage, and at all the little chandler’s shops which
they paned. At the further end of the village, and
tolera 1y disengaged from the rest of it, stood the
parsonage, a new-built substantial stone house, with its
semi-circular sw and green gum; and, as they
drove up to the nor, Henry, with the friends of his
solitude, a large Newfoundland puppy and two or three
terriers, was ready to receive and make much of them.

Catherine’s mind was too full, as she entered the
house, for her either to observe or to lay a great deal;
and, till called on by the General for her opinion of it,
she had very little idea of the mom in which she was
sitting. Upon looking round it then, she perceived in
a moment that it was the most comfortable room in the
world; but the was too guarded to say so, and the
coldness of her praise disappointed him.

“We are not calling it a good house,” said he.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 205

“We are not comparing it with Fullerton and North-
anger. We are considering it an a mere parsonage,
mall and conﬁned we allow, but decent perhapa and
habitable; and altogether not inferior to the generality;
or, in other words, I believe there are few country par-
tonaget in England half so good. It may admit of
improvement, however. Far be it from me to say
otherwiae; and Inything in remn—a bow thrown out,
perhapl; though, between ourselves, if there in one
thing ,more than another my aversion, it il a patched-on
bow.’ '

Catherine did not hear enough of this speech to
understand or be pained by it; and other lobjecta
being otudioully brought forward and lupported by
Henry, at the name rim that a my full of refresh-
ment: wan introduced by hi. tenant, the General was
shortly restored to ill! complacency, and Catherine to
all her ulual cue oi Ipiritt.

The room in question wu of a commodionl. well-
p rtioned lize, and handaomely fitted up u a dining
par our; and on their quitting it to walk round the
grenade, Ihe was thewn, ﬁrst into a mller apartment
belonging peculiarly to the matter of the house, and
made unusually tidy on the occasion; and afterwards
into what wan to be the drawing-room, with the
appearance of which, though unfurnished. Catherine
was delighmd enough even to satisfy the GeneraL It
was a pretdly-ahaped room, the window reuhing to
the ground, and the view from them pleasant, though
only over green meadow; and the expreumi her ad-
miration at the moment with all the honest Iimplicity
with which the felt it. “Oh! why do not you lit up
thia room, Mr Tilney? What a pity not to have it
ﬁttedupl Itiatheprem'eat roomI everuw;itiathe
prettieu room in the world! "

“I trim," aid the General, with I moot Iatilﬁod

206 NORTHANGBR ABBEY.

smile, “ that it will very speedily he ﬁrrnished: it waits
only for a lady’s tame.’

“ Well, if it was my house, I should never sit any—
where else. Oh what a sweet little cottage there is
among the trees ; apple trees too! It is the prettiest
oottage—"

“ You like it : you approve it as an object: it is
enough. Henry, remember that Robinson is spoken to
about it. The cottage remains."

Such a compliment recalled all Catherine’s conscious-
ness, and silenced her directly ; and, though pointedly
applied to by the Genenl for her choiCe of the prevail-
ing colour of the paper and hangings, nothing like an
opinion on the subject could be drawn from her. The
inﬂuence of fresh objects and fresh air, however, was of
great use in dissipating these embarrassing associations;
and, having reached the ornamental part of the premises,
consisdng of a walk round two sides of a dow, on
which Henry’s genius had begun to act about half a
year ago, she was mﬂiciendy recovered to think it
prettier than any pleasure-ground she had ever been in
before, though there was not a shrub in it higher than
the green bench in the corner.

A saunter into other meadows, and through part of
the village, with a visit to the stables to examine some
improvements, and a charming game of play with a litter
of puppies just able to roll about. brought them to four
o’clock, when Catherine scarcely thought it would be
three. At four they were to dine, and at six to set off
on their return. Never had any day passed so quickly!

She could not but observe that the abundance of the
dinner did not seem to create the smallest astonishment
in the General ; nay, that he was even looking at the
side-table for cold meat which was not there. His son
and daughter’ I observations were of a different kind.
They had seldom seen him eat so heartily at any table

ﬁ—W_AA _ . ,, .__

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I 07

but his own; and never before known him so little dis-
concerted by the melted butter’s being oiled.

At six o’clock, the General having taken his coffee,
the carriage again received them; and so gratifying had
been the tenor of his conduct throughout the whole
visit, to well assured was her mind on the subject of his
expectations, that, could she have felt equally conﬁdent
of the wishes of his son, Catherine would have quitted
Woodston with little anxiety as to the How or the
When she might return to it.

than: $11-73].

HE next morning brought the following very un-
expected leaer from Isabella :—
“ Bath, April
“ MY Dunn Cannons—I received your two
kind letters with the greatest delighl, and have a thou-
sand a logies to make for not answering them sooner.
I real y am quite ashamed of my idleness; but in this
horrid place one can ﬁnd time for nothing. I have had
my pen in my hand to begin a letter wyou almost every
day since you left Bath, but have always been prevented
by some silly triﬂer or other. Pray write to me soon,
and direct to my own home. Thank God! we leave
this vile place to-morrow. Since you went away I
have had no pleasure in it; the dust is beyond any-
thing ; and everybody ane cares for is gone. I believe
if I could no you I should not mind the rest, for you
are dearer to me than anybody can conceive. I arri
uite uneasy about your dear brother, not having hard
20m him since he went to Oxford ; and am fearful of
some misunderstnding. Your kind ofﬁces will set all

 

908 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

right: he is the only man I ever did or could love, and
I that you will convince him of it. The spring
ﬁahiona are partly down, and the hata the most frightful
you can imagine. I hope you spend your time pleasantly,
butamafnidyouneverthinkofme. Iwill not-ayall
thatIoouldofthefamilyyouere with,becau.seI
would not be ungenerous, or set you against those you
esteem; but it in very diﬂicult to know whom no truat,
and young men new ltnow their minds two days tn-
gether. I rejoice to say, that the young man whom, of
all others, I particularly abhor, has left Bath. You will
know, from this description, I must mean Ca tain Til-
ney, who, as you may remember, was amazing y '

to follow and tease me, before you went away. After-
wards he got were, and became quite my shadow.
Many girls might have been taken in, for never were
wch attentions; but I knew the ﬁckle nex too well.
He went away to his regiment two days ago, and I trnu
I shall never be plagued with him again. He in the
greateatooxcomh I ever saw, and amazingly disagree-
able. The last two dayl he was always by the ride of
Charlotte Davin: I pitied his late, but took no notice
of him. The lag time we met was in Bath Street, and
I turned directly into a shop that he might not speak to
me: I would not even look at him. He went into the
Pum morn afterwards, but I would not have followed
him r all the world. Such a contrast between him and
your brother! Pray send me tome news of the latter;
I am quite unhappy about him; he seemed so uncom-
fortable when he went away, with a cold, or somethin
dutaﬁ'eeted his spirits. I wouldwriteto himm ,
but have mislaid hi- directio'n ; and, as I hinted above,
am afraid he tool: something in my conduct amiss.
Pny explain everything to hit eatiafaclion ; or,ifhe etill
harbour! any doubt, a line from himself to me, or a call
at Putney when next in town, might set all to rights.

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 209

I have not been to the Rooms this age, nor to the Play,
except going in Int night with the Hodget’e, for a frolic,
at half-price: they learned me into it; and I was deter-
mined they allould not my I chat myself bemuee
Tilney was gone. We happened to sit by theHEIitchells,
and they pretended to be quite surprized to see
me out. I knew their rpite: at one nme could
not be civil to me, but now they are all ﬁiEMthp; but
I am not each a fool to be when in by them. You
know I have a pretty good epirit of my own. Anne
Mitchell had tried to put on a turban like mine, as I
wore it the week before at the Concert, but made
wretched work of it. It happened to become my odd
ﬁce, I believe, at Ieut Tiluey told me so at the time,
undeaideve eyewuupon me;butheitthelaetman
whose word would take. I wear nothing but purple
now: I know I look hideous in it, but no matter; it is
your dear brother’s favourite colour. Lone no time, my
dearest, .tweeneet Catherine, in writing to him and to
me.—Who ever am, Sec.”

Such a urain of shallow artiﬁce could not impoae
even u n Catherine. Its inconsistencies, contradictionr,
and hood, struck her from the very ﬁrst. She wan
ashamed of Inabella, and ashamed of having ever loved
her. Her pmﬁeﬁonl of attachment were now an dia-

lling in her excuses were empty, and her demande
Impudeut. “Write to Jamel on her behalf! No!
Jamel should never hear Inabella’l name mentioned by
her again.”

On H ’I arrival from Woodmn ahe made known
to him and leanor their brother's nfety, congratulating
them with ainoerity on it, and leading aloud die moot
material paragon of her letter with Itrong indignation.
When the had ﬁniehed it :—“ So much for Inbella,”
the cried, “and for all our intimacy! She muet think

2 I O NORTHANGER ABBEY.

me an idiot, or she could not have written so; but per-
haps this has served to make her character better known
to me than mine is to her. I see what she has been
about. She is a vain coquetse, and her tricks have not
answered I do not believe she had ever any regard
either for James or for me, and I wish I had never
known her.”

“ It will soon be as if you never had,” said

Henrly.

“ here is but one thing that I cannot understand.
I see that she has had designs on Captain Tilney which
have not succeeded; but I do not understand what
Captain Tilney has been about all this time. Why
should he pay her such attentions as to make her quarrel
with my brother, and then ﬂy of himself ? "

“ I have very little to say for Frederick’s motives,
such as I believe them to have been. He has his
vanities as well as Miss Thorpe, and the chief differ-
ence is, that having a stronger head they have not yet
injured himself. If the {ﬂirt of his behaviour 'does not
justify him with you, we had better not seek after the
cause.”

“Then you do not suppose he ever really cared
about her ? ” .

“ I am persuaded that he never did.”

“And only made believe to do so for mischief’s
lake ? ”

Henry bowed his assent.

" Well, then, I must say that I do not like him at
all. Though it has turned out so well for us, I do
not like him at all. As it happens, there is no great
harm done, because I do not think Isabella has any
heart to lose. But suppose he had made her very
much in love with him i ’

“ But we must ﬁrst suppose Isabella to have had a
heart to lose, consequently to have been a very different

MAI...

 

mu

 

 

th

LIT

at
{as
n -
:le
of

lty

no

ed
eft
35-
H‘-
dy
eir
le-
exr
:ry
, -
ed ,
I'm!
.08:

the

NORTHANGER ABBEY. I! I

creature; and, in that case, she would have met with
very different treatment.” ’

“It in very right that you should stand by your
brother." ’

“ And if you would mud by yaw-’4’, you would not
be much distressed by the disappointment of Mina
Thorpe. But your mind it warped by an innate prin-
ciple of general integrity, and. therefore, not accessible
to the cool reasoninge of family partiality, or a desire of
revenge." ‘

Catherine was complimented out of further hitter-
nesst Frederick could not he unpardonably guilty
while Henry made him-elf so agreeable. She resolved
on not answering Isabella’s letter, and tried to think no
more of it.

Chm" If”!!!

OON after this, the General found himself obliged
to go to London for a week; and he left
Northanger, earneetly regretting that any neces-

sity thould rob him, even for an hour, of Mir: Mor-
land'n company, and anxiously recommending the study
of her comfort and amusement to his children, an their
chief object in his absence. His departure gave Cathe-
rine the ﬁnt experimental conviction that a lost my he
sometimes a gain. The happiness with which their
time now passed, every employment voluntary, every
laugh indulged, every meal a Icene of ease and good-
humour, walking where they liked and when they liked,
their hours, pleasures, and Fatigue at tha'r own com-
mand, made her thoroughly aensihle of the restraint
which the General's presence had impoeed, and men
thankfully feel their preterit releale from it. Such ease
and such delighta made her love the place and the

2 I 2 NORTHAN GER ABBEY.

people more and more every day; and had it not been
for a dmd of its soon becoming expedient to leave the
one, and an apprehension of not being equally beloved
by the other, she would at mob moment of each day
have been perfectly happy; but she was now in the
fourth week of her visit; before the General came
home, the fourth week would be turned, and perhaps it
might seem an intrusion if she staid much longer. This
was a painful consideration whenever it occurred; and
eager to get rid of such a weight on her mind, the very
soon resolved to speak to Eleanor about it at once,
propose going away, and be guided in her conduct by
the manner in which her proposal might be taken.

Aware that if she gave herself much time, the might
feel it diﬁicult to bring forward so unpleasant a subject,
she took the ﬁrst opportunity of being suddenly alone
with Eleanor, and of Eleanor’s being in the middle of
a speech about something very diﬁerent, to start forth
her obligation of going away very soon. Eleanor
looked and declared herself much concerned. She had
“hoped for the pleasure of her company for a much
longer time—had been misled (perhaps by her wishes)
to suppose that a much longer visit had been promised,
and could not but think that if Mr and Mrs Morland
were aware of the pleasure itwas to have her there,
they would be too generous to hasten her return.”
Catherine explained. “ Oh! as to that, papa and
mamma were in no hurry at all. As long as she was
happy, they would always be satisﬁed.”

“ Then wh , might she ask, in such a hurry herself
to leave them . ”

“ Oh! because she had been there so long.”

“Nay, ifyou can use such a word, I can urge you
no farther. If you think it long—”

“Oh no! 1 do not, indeed. For my own leasure,
I could stay with you as long again.” An it was

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 I 3

directly settled that, till she had, her leaving them was
noteventobethou htof. Inhavingthismuseofun-
canines so pleasan y removed, the force of the other
was likewise weakened. The kindness, the earnestness
of Eleanor’s manner in pressing her to stay, and
Henry's gratified look on being told that her stay was
determined, were such sweet proof: of her importance
with them, as left her only so much solicitude as
the hurmn mind can never do comfortably without
She did, almost always, believe that Henry loved her,
and quite always that hia father and sister loved and
even wished her to belong to them; and believing so
far, her doubts and anxieties were merely sportive
Irritation;

Henry was not able to obeyhis father's injunction of
remaining wholly at Northanger, in attendance on the
ladies, during his absence in London; the engagements
of his some at Woodston ohliging him to lve them
on Saturday for a couple of nights. His loss was not
now what it had been while the General was at home;
it lessened their gaiety, but did not ruin their comfort;
and the two girls, agreeing in occupation, and improving
in intimacy, found themselves so well-milicient for the
time to themlelveo, that it was eleven o’clock, rather a
late hour at the , before they quitted the en r-
room on the day of enry’s depamne. They ha just
reached the head of the stairs, when it seemed, as far as
the thickness of the walls would allow them to judge,
that a carriage was driving up to the door, and the next
moment conﬁrmed the idea by the loud noise of the
house-bell. After the ﬁrst perturbation of surprize had
pamed away, in a “Good Heaven! what can he the
matter?" it was quickly decided by Eleanor to be her
eldest brother, whose arrival was often as sudden, if not
quite so nuseasonahle, and accordingly she hurried down
to welcome him.

2 I’ 4 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Catherine walked on to her chamber, making up her
mind, as well as she could, to a further acquaintance
with Captain Tilney, and comforting herself under the
unpleasant impression his conduct had given her, and
the penuasion of his being by far too fine a gentleman
to approve of her, that at least they should not meet
under such circumstances as would make their meeting
materially painful. She tmsned he would never speak
of Miss Tho , and, indeed, as he must by this time
be ashamed o the part he had acted, there could be no
danger of it; and as long as all mention of Bath scenes
were avoided, she thought she could behave to him very
civilly. In such considerations time passed away, and it
was certainly in his favour that Eleanor should he so
glad to see him, and have so much to say, for half an
hour was almost gone since his arrival, and Eleanor did
not come up.

At that moment Catherine thought she heard her
step in the gallery, and listened for its continuance, but
all was silent. Scarccly, however, had she convicted
her fancy of error, when the noise of something moving
close to her door made her start; it seemed as if some
one was touching the very doorway, and in another
moment a slight motion of the lock proved that some
hand must he on it. She trembled a little at the idea
of anyone’s approaching so cautiously, but resolving not
to be again overcome by trivial appearances of alarm, or
misled by a raised imagination, she stepped uietly for-
ward, and opened the door. Eleanor, and on y Eleanor,
stood there. Catherine’s spirits, however, were tmn-
quillized but for an instant, for Eleanor’s checks were
pale, and her manner greatly agitated. Though
evidently intending to come in, it seemed an effort to
enter the room, and a still greater to speak when there.
Catherine, supposing some uneasiness on Captain
Tilney’s account, could only express her concern by

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 I 5

silent attention, obliged her to be seated, rubbed her
temples with lavender water, and hung over her with
affectionate solicitude. “ My dear Catherine, you must
not, you mun not, indeed—” were Elmnor’s ﬁrst
connected words. “I am quite well. This kindness
distracts me. 1 cannot hear it. I come to you on such
an errand! ”

“ Errand! to me! ”

“How shall I tell you? Oh! how shall I tell
yo“ ? 1’

A new idea now darted into Catherine’s mind, and
turning as e as her friend, she exclaimed, “’Tis a
messenger mWoodston! ”

“ You are mistaken, indeed," returned Eleanor,
looking at her most compassionately, “it is no one from
Woodston. It in my father himself." Her voice
ﬁltered, and her eye: were turned to the ground as she
mentioned his name. His unlocked-for return was
enough in ibelf to make Catherine’s heart rink, and for
a few moments the hardly supposed there were any thing
worse to be told.

She said nothing; and Eleanor, endeavouring to
collect herself and speak with ﬁrmness, but with eyes
still cast clown, soon went on. “ You are too good, I
am sure, to think the worse of me for the part I am
obliged to perform. I am, indeed, a most unwilling
messenger. After what has so lately pasted, no lately
been settled between us, how joyfully, how thankfully,
on my side! at to your continuing here, as I hoped, for
many, many weeks longer, how can I tell you that your
kindness is not to be accepted, and that the happinelt your
company has hitherto given ua is to be d
but I must not trust myself with words. My dear
Catherine, we are to part. My father has recollected
an engagement that takes our whole family away on
Monday; we are going to Lord Longtown’s, near

 

216 nonmsncnn assay.

Hereford, for a fortnight. Explanation and apology
are equally impossible. I cannot attempt either.”

“M dear Elor,” cried Catherine, suppreuing
herfee'ngsaswell II she could, “do not be I0 dis-
trewed. A second engagement must give way to a
ﬁrst. Iamvery,verysorrywearetopartsosoon,
and so suddenly mo, but I am not oilended, indeed
I am not. I can ﬁnish my visit here, you know, at any
time; or I hope you will come to me. Canyon, when
you return from this lord’s, come to Fullerton?"

“ It will not be in my power, Catherine.”

“ Come when you can, then."

Eleanor made no answer; and Catherine’s thoughts
recurring to something more directly interesting, she
added, thinking aloud, “ Monday ; so soon as
Monday; and you a] go! Well, I am certain of—
I shall be able to take leave, however. I need not go
ill just before you do, you know. Do not be distressed,
Eleanor; I can go on Monday very well. My father
and mother‘s having no notice of it is of very little con-
sequence. The General will send a servant with me, I
dare say, halfthe way; and then I shall soon be at
Salisbury. and then I am only nine miles from home.”

“Ah, Catherine! were it settled so, it would be
somewhat less intolerable; though in ouch common
attentions, you would have received but half what you
ought. But, how can I tell you? To-morrow mom-
ing is ﬁxed for your leaving us, and not even the hour
is left to your choice; the very carriage is ordered, and
will be here at seven o’clock, and no servant will he
offered you."

Catherine sat down breathless and speechless. “I
could hardly believe my senses when I heard it; and
no displeasure, no resentment that you can feel at this
moment, however justly great, can be more than I my-
lelf—but I must not talk of what I felt. Oh, that I

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 I 7

could suggest anything in extenuation! Good God!
what will your fathu' and mother my? After courting
you from the protection of real friends to this, almost
double dimnCe from your home, to have you driven out
of the house, without the considerations even of decent
civility! Dear, dear Catherine, in being the bearer of
such a message, I seem guilty myself of all its insult;
yet I trust you will acquit me, for you must have
been long enough in this house to seethat I am but
a nominal mistress of it, that my real power is
nothing.”

“ ave I offended the General 2 ” said Catherine, in
a faltering voice.

“Alas! for my feelings as a daughter, all that I
know, all that I answer for is, that you an have given
him no just cause of offence. He certainly is greatly,
very greatly discomposed ; I have seldom seen him more
so. His temperis not happy, and something has now
occurred to rulﬂe it in an uncommon degree; some dis-
appointment, some vexation, which just at this moment
seems important; but which I can hardly suppose you
to have any concern in ; for how is it possible?"

It was with painthnt Catherine could speak at all;
and it was only for Elmor’s sake that she attem ted it.
“I am sure,” said she, “I am very sorry if have
offended him. It was the last thing I would willingly
have done. But do not be unhappy, Eleanor. An en-
gagement, you know, must he kept. I am only sorry it
was not recollected sooner, that I might have written
home. But it is of very little consequence.”

“I hope, I earnestly hope that to your real safety it
will he of none; but to everything else it is of the
greatest consequence ; to comfort, appearance, pro-
priety, to your family, to the world. Were your
friends, the Allens, still in Bath, you might go to them
with comparative ease; a few hours would take you

P

2 18 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

there; but a journey of seventy miles, to be taken post
by you, at your age, alone, unattended! ”

“ Oh! the 'ourney is nothing. Do not think about
that. And we are to part, a few hours sooner or
later, you know, makes no difference. I can be ready
by seven. Let me be called in time.” Eleanor saw
that she wished to be alone ; and believing it better for
each that they should avoid any further conversation,
now left her with, “ I shall see you in the morning.”

Catherine’s swelling heart needed relief. In Eleanor’s
presence friendship and pride bad equally restrained
her tears, but no sooner was she gone than they burst
forth in torrents. Turned from the house, and in
such a way! Without any reason that could justify,
any apology that could atone for the abruptness, the
rudeness, nay, the insolence of it. Henry at a distance;
not able even to bid him farewell. Every hope, every
expectation from him suspended, at least, and who
could say how long? Who could say when they might
meet again? And all this by such a man as General
Tilney : so polite, so well-bred, and heretofore so par-
ticularly fond of her! It was as incomprehensible as it
was mortifying and From what it could arise,
and where it would end, were considerations of equal
perplexity and alarm. The manner in which it was
done so grosdy uncivil: hurrying her away without any
reference to her own convenience, or allowing her even
the appearance of choice as to the time or mode of her
travelling; of two days, the earliest ﬁxed on, and of
that almost the earliest hour, as if resolved to have her
gone before he was stirring in the morning, that he
might not be obliged even to see her. What could all
this mean but an intentional affront? By some means
or other she must have had the misfortune to offend him.
Eleanor had wished to sparé her from so painﬁrl a
notion, but Catherine could not-believe it possible that

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 l 9

any injury or any misfortune could provoke such ill-will
against a person not connected, or, at least, not sup-
posed to be connected with it.

Heavily passed the night. Sleep, or repose that de-
served the name of sleep, was out of the question. That
room, in which her disturbed imagination had tormented
her on her ﬁrst arrival, was again the scene of agitated
spirits and unquiet slumbers. Yet how different now
the source of her inquietude from what it had been
then; how mournfully superior in reality and substance!
Her anxiety had foundation in fact, her fears in pro-
bability; and with a mind so occupied in the contem-
plation of actual and natural evil, the solitude of her
situation, the darkness of her chamber, the antiquity of
the building, were felt and considered without the
smallest emotion: and though the wind was high, and
often produced strange and sudden noises throughout
the house, she heard it all as she lay awake, hour after
hour, without curiosity or terror.

Soon after six Eleanor entered her room, eager to
show attention, or give assistance where it was possible ;
but very little remained to be done. Catherine had not
loitered; she was almost dressed, and her packing
almost ﬁnished. The pouibility of some conciliatory
message from the General occurred to her as his
daughter appeared. What so natural, as that anger
should pass away and repentance succeed it? and she
only wanted to know how far, after what had ,
an apology might properly be received by her. ut the
knowledge would have been useless here, it was not
called for ; neither clemency nor dignity was put to the
trial ; Eleanor brought no message. Very little passed
between them on meeting: «ch found her greatest
safetyin silence; and few and trivial were the sen-
tences exchanged while they remained upstairs; Catherine
in busy agitation completing her dress, and Eleanor, with
more good-will than experience, intent upon ﬁlling the

2 20 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

mink. When everything was done, they left the room,
Catherine lingering only half a minute behind her friend
to throw a parting glance on every well-known cherished
object, and went down to the breakfast-parlour, where
breakfast was prepared. She tried to eat, as well to save
herself from the pain of being urged, as to make her
friend comfortable; but she had no appetite, and could
not swallow many mouthﬁils. The contrast between
this and her last breakfast in that room gave her fresh
misery, and strengthened her distaste for everything
before her. It was not four-and-twenty hours ago
since they had met there to the same repast, but in cir-
cumstances how different! With what cheerful ease,
what happy, though false security, had she then looked
around her, enjoying everything present, and fearing
little in future, beyond Henry’s going to Woodston for
a day! Happy, happy breakfast! for Henry had been
there; Henry had sat by her and helped her. These
reﬂections were long indulged undisturbed by any address
from her companion, who sat as deep in thought as her-
self; and the appearance of the carriage was the ﬁrst
thing to startle and recall them to the present moment.
Catherine’s colour rose at the sight of it; and the in-
dignity with which she was treated striking, at that
instant, on her mind with peculiar force, made her for

'a short time sensible only of resentment. Eleanor

seemed now impelled into resolution and speech.

“ You mun write to me, Catherine,” she cried; “ you
mu! let me hear from you as soon as possible. Till I
know you to be safe at home, I shall not have an hour’s
comfort. For one letter at all risks all hazards, I must
entreat. Let me have the utisfaction of knowing that
you are safe at Fullerton, and have found your family
well ; and then, till I can ask for your cor ndenee
as I ought to do, I will not expect more. irect to
me at Lord Longtown’s, and, I mnst ask it, under cover
to Alice."

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 22 I

“No, Eleanor, if you are not allowed to receive
aletser from me, Iarnsure I hadbetternot write.
There can be no doubt of my getting home
safe.”

Eleanor only replied, “I cannot wonder at your
feelings. I will not importune you. I will trust to
your own kindness of heart when I am at a dimuce
from you." But this, with the look of sorrow
accompanying it, was enough to melt Catherine’s pride
in a moment, and she instantly said, “ 0h ! Eleanor, I
will write to you, indeed! ”

There was yet another point which Miss Tilney was
anxious to settle, though somewhat embarrassed in speak-
ing of. It had occurred to her, that after so long an
absence from home, Catherine might not be provided
with money enough for the expenses of her journey,
and, upon suggesting it to her with most aﬁectionate
oﬂ'ers of accommodation, it proved to he exactly the
case. Catherine had never thought on the subject till
that mommt ; but, upon examining her purse, was con-
vinced that but for this kindness of her friend, she might
have been turned from the house without even the means
of getting home; and the distress in which she must
have been thereby involved ﬁlling the minds of both,
scarcely another word was said by either during the
time of their remaining together. Short, however, was
that time. The carriage was soon announced to be
ready ; and Catherine instantly rising, a long and affec-
tionate embrace supplied the place of language in bidding
ach other adieu; and, as they entered the hall, unable
to leave the house without some mention of one whose
name had not yet been spoken by either, she paused a
moment, and with quivering lips made it intelligible
that she left “her kind remembrance for her absent
friend." But with this approach to his name ended all
possibility of restraining her feelings; and, hiding her

:22 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

face as well as she could with her handkerchief, she
darted across the hall, jumped into the chaise, and in a
moment was driven from the door.

chant" ﬁﬁjﬁ.

ATHERINE was too wretched to he fearful.
The journey in itself had no terrors for her ; and
she began it without either dreading its length, or

feeling its solitariness. Leaning back in one corner of
the mniage, in a violent burst of tears, she was conveyed
some miles beyond the walls of the abbey before she
raised her head; and the highest point of ground within
the park was almost closed from her view before she
was capable of turning her eyes towards it. Unfortun-
ately, the road she now travelled was the same which
only ten days ago she had so happily passed along in
going to and from Woodston; and, for fourteen miles,
every bitter feeling was rendered more severe by the
review of objects on which she had ﬁrst looked under
impressions so different. Every mile, as it brought her
nmrer Woodston, added to her sufferings; and when
within the dismce of live, she passed the turning which
led to it, and thought of Henry, so near, yet so uncon-
scious, her grief and agitation were excessive.

The day which she had nt at that place had been one
of the hap iest of her life. t wasthere, it was on that day
that the (general had made use of such expressions with
regard to Henry and herself, had so spoken and so looked
as to give her the most positive convrction of his actually
wishing their marriage. Yes, only ten days ago had he
"l.':[€d. her by his pointed regard—had he even confused
llL'l’ by his too signiﬁcant reference! And now, what
Jud she done, or what had she omitted to do, to merit
MlL'h a change?

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 2 3

The only oﬁ'ence against him, of which she could
accuse herself, had been such as was scarcely possible to
reach his knowledge. Henry and her own heart only
were privy to the shocking suspicions which she had so
idly entermined; and y safe did she believe her
secret with each. Designedly, at least, Henry could
not have betrayed her. If, indeed, by any strange mis-
chance his father should have gained intelligence of
what she had dared to think and look for, of her cause-
less fancies and injurious examinations, she could not
wonderat any degreeof his indignation. If aware of
her having viewed him as a murderer, she could not
wonder at his even turning her from his house. But a
justiﬁcation so full of torture to herself she trusted would
not be in his power.

Anxious as were all her conjectures on this int, it
was not, however, the one on which the dwet most.
There was a thought yet nearer; a more prevailing,
more impetuous concern; how Henry would think, and
feel, and look, when he returned on the marrow to
Northanger, and heard of her being gone, was a ques-
tion of force and interest to rise over every other, to be
never-ceasing, alternately irritating and soothing : it
sometimes suggested the dread of his calm acquiescence,
and at others was answered by the sweetest conﬁdence
in his regret and resentment. To the General, of course,
he would not dare to ; but to Eleanor, what
might be not say to Eleanor about her?

In this unceasiug recurrence of doubts and inquiries,
on any one article of which her mind was incapable of
more than momentary repose, the hours passed away,
and her journey advanced much faster than she looked
for. The pressing anxieties of thought which prevanted
her from noticing anything before her, when once beyond
the neighbourth of Woodston, saved her at the same
lime from watching her progress; and though no object

2 24 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

on the road could engage a moment’s attention, she found
no stage of it tedious. From this she was preserved,
too, by another cause; by feeling no eagerness for her
journey’s conclusion; for to return in such a manner to
Fullerton was almost to destroy the leasure of a
meeting with those she loved best, even r an absence
such as hers: an eleven weeks’ absence. What had
she to say that would not humble herself and pain her
family; that would not increase her own grief by the
confession of it ; extend an useless resentment, and
perhaps involve the innocent with the guilty in undis-
tinguishing ill-will? She could never do justice to
Henry and Eleanor’s merit : she felt it too strongly for
expression, and should a dislike be taken against them,
should they be thought of unfavourath on their father’s
account, it would cut her to the heart.

With these feelings, she rather dreaded than sought
for the ﬁrst view of that well-known spire which would
announce her within twenty miles of home. Salis-
bury she had known to be her point on leaving North-
anger, but after the ﬁrst stage, she had been indebted to
the post-masters for the names of the places which were
then to conduct her to it; so great had been her
ignorance of her route. She met with nothing, how-
ever, to distress or frighten her. Her youth, civil
manners and liberal pay, procured her all the attention
that a traveller like herself could require; and stopping
only to change horses, she travelled on for about eleven
hours without accident or alarm, and between six and
seven o’clock in the evening found herself entering
Fullerton.

A heroine returning at the close of her mreer, to her
native village, in all the triumph of recovered reputation,
and all the dignity of a countess, with a long train of
noble relations in their several phaetons, and three
waiting-maids in a travelling chaise-and-four behind

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 2 5

her, is an event on which the pen of the contriver may
well delight to dwell; it gives credit to every con-
clusion, and the author must share in the glory she so
liberally bestows. But my affair is widely different:
I bring back my heroine to her home in solitude and
disgrace, and no sweet elation of spirits an led me
into minuteness. A heroine in a hack post-chaise is
such a blow upon sentiment as no attempt at grandeur
or pathos can withstand. Swiftly, therefore, shall
her post-boy drive through the village, amid the
gaze of Sunday groups, and speedy shall be her
descent from it.

But whatever might be the distress of Catherine's
mind as she thus advanced towards the parsonage, and
whatever the humiliation of her biographerin relating it,
she was preparing enjoyment of no every-day nature for
those to whom she went; ﬁrst, in the appearance of
her carriage, and secondly, in herself. The chaise of a
traveller being a rare sight in Fullerton, the whole
family were immediately at the window; and to have
it stop at the sweep-gate was a pleasure to brighten
every eye, and occupy every fancy; a pleasure quite
unlocked for by all but the two youngest children,
a boy and girl of six and four years old, who expected
a brother or sister in every can-iage. Ha the
glance that ﬁrst distinguished Catherine! PE'lappy
the voice that proclaimed the discovery ! But whether
such happiness were the lawful property of George or
Harriet, could never be exactly understood.

Her father, mother, Sarah, George, and Harriet, all
assembled at the door, to welcome her with affectionate
eagerness, was a sight to awaken the best feelings of
Catherine’s hem; and in the embrace of each, as she
stepped from the carriage, she found herself soothed
beyond anything that she had believed possible. So
surrounded, so caressed, she was even happy! In the

226 110ka3! ABBEY.

joyfuan of family love, anything, for a short ﬁne,
was subdued; and the plmre of seeing her, laving
them at ﬁn little leisure for calm curiosity, they were
all seated round the m-table, which Mn Morland had
hurried for the comfort of the poor traveller, whose pale
and jaded looks soon caught her notice, before any
inquiryso directas to demand a positive answerwas
addressed to her.

Reluctantly, and with much hesitation, did the then
begin what might, perhaps, a the end of half an hour,
he termed by the courtesy of herhearers an eilghnation;
but scarcely, within that time, could they at discover
the cause, or collect the particulars of her mdden
return. They were far from being an irritable race;
ﬁr from an quickness in catching, or bitterness in
resenting nts; but here, when the whole was
unfolded, was an insult not m be overlooked, nor, for
the ﬁrst half hour, to be easily pardoned. Without
suffering any romantic alarm in the consideration of their
daughter's long and lonely journey, Mr and Mrs
Morland could not but feel that it might have been
productive of much unpleasantness to her; that it was
what they could never have voluntarily suffered; and
that, in forcing her on such a measure, General Tilney
had acted neither honourany nor feelingly, neither an a
gentleman nor as a parent. Why he had done it. wint
could have provoked him to such a breach of hospitality,
and so suddenly turned all his regard for their
daughter into actual ill-will, was a matter which they
were at least as far from divining as Catherine herself:
but it did not oppress them by any means so long; and,
after a due course of useless conjecture, that “ it was a
strange business, and that he must be a very strange
man,” grew enough for all their indignation and wonder ;
though Sarah, indeed, still indulged in the sweets of
incomprehensibility, exclaiming and conjecturing with

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 2 7'

youthful ardour—“ My dear, you give yourself a great
deal of needles trouble,” said her mother at last ;
“ depend upon it, it is something not at all worth under-
standing.”

“ I can allow for his wishing Catherine away when
he recollected this engagement," said Sarah; “but why
not do it civilly 2 ”

“I am sorry for the young people,” returned Mn
Morland; “ they must have a sad time of it ; but as for
anything else, it is no matter now: Catherine is safe at
home, and our comfort does not depend upon General
Tilney.” Catherine sighed. “Well,” continued her
philosophic mother, “ I am glad I did not know of
your journey at the time; but now it is all over, per-
haps there is no great harm done. It is always good
for young people to be put upon exerting themselves;
and you know, my dear Catherine, you always were a
sad little shatter-brained creature: but now you must
have hem forced to have your wits about you, with so
much changing of chaises and so forth; and I hope it
will appar that you have not left anything behind you
in any of the pockets."

Catherine hoped so too, and tried to feel an interest
in her own amendment, but her spirits were quite worn
down; and to be silent and alone becoming soon her
only wish, she agreed to her mother's next
counsel of going early to bed. Her parents Ieeing
nothing in her ill-looks and agimtion but the natural
consequence of mom'ﬁed feelings, and of the unusual
exertion and fatigue of such a journey, parted from her
without any doubt of their being soon slept away; and
though, when they all met the next morning, her re-
covery was not equal to their hopes, they were still per-
fectly unruspicioua of there being any deeper evil. They
never once thought of her heart, which, for the parents
of a young lady of seventeen, returned from her ﬁrst
excursion from home, was odd enough!

228 NORTHANGER anon.

Asmn asbreakfastwasover,nhesatdownto fulﬁl
her promise to Miss Tilney, whose trust in the eﬁ'ect of
time and distance on her friend’s disposition was already
justiﬁed, for almdy did Catherine reproach herself with
having parted from Eleanor coldly; with having never
enough valued her merits or kindness; and never
enough commiserated her for what she had been yester-
day left to endure. The strength of these feelings,
however, was far from assisting her pen; and never had
it been harder for her to write than in addressing
Eleanor Tilney. To compose a letter which might at
once do justice to her sentiments and her situation, convey
gratitude without senile regret, be guarded without
coldness, and honest without resentment; a letter which
Eleanor might not be pained by the perusal of; and,
above all, which the might not blush herself, if Henry
should chance to see, was an undertaking to frigth
away all her powers of performance; and, after long
though: and much perplexity, to be very brief was all
that she could determine on with any conﬁdence of
safety. The money, therefore, which Eleanor had
advanced, was encloud with little more than grateful
thanks, and the thousand good wishes of a most affec-
tionate heart.

“This has been a. strange acquaintance,” observed
Mn Morland, as the letter was ﬁnished; “ soon made
and soon ended. I am sorry it happens so, for Mrs Allen
thought them very pretty kind of young people; and
you were sadly out of luck too, in your Isabella. Ah,
poor James! Well, we must live and learn; and the
next new friends you make I hope will be better worth
k in .”

atlgierine coloured as she warmly answered, “No
friend can be better worth keeping than Eleanor.”

“ If so, my dear, I dare My you will meet again some
time or other ; do not be uneasy. It is ten to one but

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 z 9

you are thrown together again in the course of a few
years; and then, what a pleasure it will he! ”

Mrs Morland was not happy in her attempt at con-
solation. The hope of meeting again in the course of
a few years could only put into Catherine’s head what
might happen within that time to make a meeting
dreadful to her. She could never forget Henry Tilney,
or think of him with less tendemeu than she did at
that moment, but he might forget her, and in that case
to meet—! Hereyeeﬁlledwithtanas she pictured
her acquaintance no renewed; and her mother perceiving
her comfortable suggestions to lag» had no good effect,

ro an another 'ent r renorin her irin,
ham should call 3% Allen. ‘ "’

Thetwo homes were onlyaquarterofamilenpart;
and, an they walked, Mn Morlnnd quickly despatched
all that the felt on the more of James a disappointment
“ We are lorry for him,” said the; “ but otherwise
there is no harm done in the match going of; for it
could not he a desirable thing to have him engaged to a
girl whom we had not the smalleat vauainlance with,
and who wan so entirely without fortune; and now after
such behaviour, we cannot think at all well of her.
June at present it comes hard to poor James, but that
will notlaet for ever; and I dare ea hewill he a die-
creetermanallhie life,for the {00' en of hi: ﬁm
choice.”

This wujuat rucha summary View of the affair as
Catherine could listen to: another sentence might have
endangered her complainnce, and made her reply lean
rational ; for noon were all her thinking power: rwallowed
up in the reﬂection of her own change of feelings and
spirits dnce lat: Ill: had trodden that well-known road.
It who not three months ago since, wild with joyful
expectation, the had there run backwards and {onwards
none In times 3-day, with on heart light, gay, and in-

23o NORTHANGER ABBEY.

dependent; looking forward to pleasures untamed and
unalloyed, and as free from the apprehension of evil as
from the knowledge of it. Three months ago had seen
her all this, and now, how altered a being did she
return!

She was received by the Allens with all the kindness
which her unlooked-fnr appearance, acting on a steady
affection, would naturally call forth; and great was
their surprize, and warm their displeasure, on hearing
how she had been treated, though Mrs Morland’s
account of it was no inﬂated representation, no studied
appﬂl to their passions. “ Catherine took us quite by
surprize yesterday evening,” said she. “ She travelled
all the way post by herself, and knew nothing of coming
till Saturday night; for General Tilney, from some odd
fancy or other,-all of a sudden grew tired of having her
there, and almost turned her out of the house. Very
unfriendly, certainly; and he must be a very odd man;
but we are so glad to have her amongst us again!
And it is a great comfort to find that she is not a poor
helpless creature, but can shift very well for herself."

Mr Allen expressed himself on the occasion with the
reasonable resentment of a sensible friend; and Mrs
Allen thought his expressions quite good enough to be
immediately made use of again by herself. His wonder,
his conjectures, and his explanations, became in succes-
sion hers, with the addition of this single remark: “ I
really have not patience with the General,” to ﬁll up
every accidental pause; and “I really have not patience
with the General," was uttered twice after Mr Allen
left the room, without any relaxation of anger, or any
material digression of thought. A more considerable
degree of wandering attended the third repetition ; andI
after completing the fourth, she immediately added,
“ Only think, my dear, of my having got that frightful
great rent in my belt Mechlin so charmingly mended,

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23 1

before I left Bath, that one can hardly see where it
was. I must mew it you some day or other. Bath is
a nice place, Catherine, after all. I assure you I did
not above half like coming away. Mrs Thorpe’s being
there was such a comfort to us, was not it? You know,
you and I were quite forlorn at ﬁrst.” >

“ Yes, but that did not last long,” said Catherine, her
eyes brightening at the recollection of what had ﬁrst
given spirit to her existence.

“Very true: we soon meet with Mrs Thorpe, and
then we wanted for nothing. My dear, do not you
think these silk gloves wear very well? I put them on
new the ﬁrst time of our going to the Lower Rooms,

On know, and I have worn them a great deal since.
lDO you remember that evening?’ ’

“ Do 1! Oh! perfectly.’

“It was very agreeable, was not it? Mr Tilney
drank tea with us, and I alwa s thought him a great
addition ; he is so very agreeah . I have a notion you
danced with him, but am not quite sure. I remember
I had my favourite gown on."

Catherine could not answer; and, after a short trial
of other subjects, Mrs Allen again returned to—“I
really have not patience with the General! Such an
agreeable worthy man as he seemed to he! I do not
suppose, Mrs Morland, you ever saw a better-bred man
in your life. His lodgings were taken the day
after he left them, Catherine. But. no wonder ; ilsom
Street, you know."

As they walked home again, Mrs Morland en-
deavoured to impress on her daughter’s mind the ha pi-
ness of having such steady well-wishers as Mr and Kira
Allen, and the very little consideration which the neglect
or unkindness of slight acquaintance like the Tilneys
ought to have with her, while she could preserve the
good opinion and affection of her earliest friends. There

23 2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

waaagrmtdealofgoodaenaeinallthia; butthereare
tome situations of the human mind in which good sense
has very little power; and Catherine’s feelings conuap
dined almost every position her mother advanced. It
was upon the behaviour of these very‘elight acquaint;
anoe that all her present happineu depended; and
while Mr: Morland was moesafully conﬁrming her own
opinions by the jusurua of her own representations,
Catherine was silently reﬂecting that new Henry mun
have arrived at Northanger; am he must have heard
of her departure; and new, the were all
setting of for Hereford. Perm y

chum: iiﬁ.

ATHERINE’S disposition was not naturally
epdenlary, nor had her habits been ever very
industrious; but, whatever might hirhem have

been her defects of that ran, her mother could not but
perceive them now m be greatly increased. She could
neither sit still nor employ herself for ten minutes
together; walking round the garden and orchard again
and again, as if nothing but motion was voluntary ; and
it aeerned as if she could even walk about the home
rather than remain ﬁxed for any time in the parlour.
Her loan of spirit: was a yet gmner alteration. In her
rambling and her idlenen,ahe might only be a mricature
of herself; but in her silence and sadness, she was the
very reverie of all that she had been before.

For two days Mr: Morland allowed it to pass even
without a hint; but when a third night's rm had
neither remred her cheerfuluess, improved her in Ineﬁil
acu'vity, nor her a greater Inclination for needle—
work, she could no longer refrain from the gentle re-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 2 3 3

proof of, “My dear Catherine, I am afraid you are
growing quite a ﬁne lady. I do not know when poor
Richard’s cravau would be done, if he had no friend
but you. Your head runs too much upon Bath; but
there is a time for everythin —a time for balls and
plays, and a time for work. on have had a long run
of amusement, and now you must try to be useful.”

Catherine took up her work directly, caying, in a
dejected voice, that “ her head did not run upon Bath
—much."

“Then you are fretting about General Tilney, and
that is very simple of you ; for ten to one whether you
ever see him again. You should never fret about
triﬂes." After a short silence: “I hope, my Cathe-
rine, you are not getting out of humour with home,
because it is not so gmdu Northnnger. That would be
turning your visit into an evil, indeed. Wherever you
are, you should always be contented, but especially at
home, because there you must spend the most of your
time. I did not quite like, at breakfaat, to hmr you
talk so much about the French bread at Northanger.”

“I am sure I do not care about the bread. It is all
the same to me what I eat.”

“There is a very clever essay inone of the book: up
stairs upon much such a subject, about young girls who
have been spoilt for homehy gmt acquaintance: ‘ The
Minor,’ I think. I will look it out for you some day
orother,becauselammreitwilldoyongood.”

Catherine said no more; and, with an endmvour to
do right, applied to her work; but, after a few minutes,
sunk again, without knowing it herself, into languor and
lidessness ; moving herself in her chair, from the
irritation of weariness, much oftener than she moved
her needle. Mrs Morland watched the rogrul of this
relapce; and seeing, in her daughter’s absent and die-
utisiied look, the full proof of that repining spirit to

Q

234 norm-muons assay.

which she had now begun to attribute her want of
cheerfulness, hastily left the room to fetch the book in
uestion. anxious to lose no time in attacking so dread-

a malady. It was some time before she could ﬁnd
what she looked for; and other Earnin matters occurring
to detain her,a quarter ofan hourhad elapsed ere she re-
turned down mire with the volume from which so much
was hoped. Her avocaﬁons above having shut out all
noise but what she created herself, she knew not that a
visitor had arrived within the last few minutes, till, on
entering the room, the ﬁrst object she beheld was a
young man whom she had never seen before. With a
look of much respect, he immediately rose, and being
inmduced to her by her conscious daughter as “ Mr
Henry Tilney,” with the embarrassment of real sensi-
bility, began to apologise for his appearance there,
acknowledging that after what had passed he had
little right to expect a welcome at Fullerton, and
stating his impatience to be assured of Miss Morland’s
having reached her home in safety, as the cause of
his intrusion. Hedid not address himself to an un-
candid judge or a resentful heart. Far from compre-
hending him or his sister in their father’s misconduct,
Mrs Morland had been always kindly disposed towards
each ; and instantly, pleased by his appearance, received
him with the simple professions of unaffected benevol-
ence; thanking him for such an attention to her
daughter; assuring him that the friends of her children
were always welcome there, and intreating him to say
not another word of the past.

He was not ill inclined to obey this request; for
though his heart was greatly relieved by such unlocked-
for mildness, it was not, just at that moment, in his power
to say anything to the purpose. Retuming in silence
to his seat, therefore, he remained for some minutes
most civilly answering all Mrs Morland’s common re-

NORTHANGER ABBEY. a 3 5

marks about the weather and roads. Catherine, mn-
while, the anxious, agitated, happy, feverish Catherine,
said not a word: but her glowing cheek and brightened
eye made her mother m that this good-natured visit
would, at least, set her heart at ease for a time; and
gladly, therefore, did she lay aside the lint volume of
“ The Mirror ” for a future hour.

Desirous of Mr Morland’s assistance, as well in giving
encouragement as in ﬁnding conversation for her guest,
whose embarrassment on his father‘s account due earnestly
pitied, Mrs Morland had very early despatched one of
the children to summon him; but Mr Morland was
from home, and being thus without any support, at the
end of a quarter of an hour she had nothing to say.
After a couple of minutes’ unbroken silence, Henry,
turning to Catherine for the ﬁrst time since her mother’s
entrance, asked her, with sudden alacrity, if Mr and
Mrs Allen were now at Fullerton? and on developing,
from amidst all her perplexity of words in reply, the
meaning, which one short syllable would have given,
immediately expressed his intention of paying his respects
to them, and with a rising colour, asked her if she would
have the goodness to shew him the way. “ You may
see the house from this window, sir,” was information,
on Sarah’s side, which roduced only a bow of acknow-
ledgment from the gentleman, and a silencing nod from
her mother : for Mrs Morland, thinking it probable, as
a secondary consideration in his wish of waiting on their
worthy neighbours, that he might have some explanation
to give of his father’s behaviour, which it must be more
pleasant for him to communicate only to Catherine, would
not, on any account, prevent her accompanying him.
They began their walk, and Mrs Morland was not entirely
mistaken in his object in wishing it. Some explanation
on his father’s account he had to give ; but his ﬁrst pur-
pose was to explain himself; and before thev reached

2 35 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

Mr Allen's grounds he had done it so weﬂ that Cath-
erine did not think it could ever be repeated too often.
She was assured of his affection ; and that heart in return
was solicited, which, perhaps, they pretty equally knew
was alrmdy entirely his own; for, though Henry was now
sincerely attached to her—though he felt and delighted
in all the excellencies of her character, and truly loved
her society—I must confess that his affection originated
in nothing better than gratitude; or, in other words,
that a persuasion of her partiality for him had been the
only cause of giving her a serious thought. It is a new
circumstance in romance, I acknowledge, and dreadfully
derogatory of an heroine’s dignity ; but if it be as new
in common life, the credit of a wild imagination will at
least be all my own.

A very short visit to Mrs Allen, in which Henry
talked at random, without sense or connection, and
Catherine, wrapt in the contemplation of her own un-
utterable happiness, scarcely opened her lips, dismissed
them to the extasies of another téte-‘a-tétc; and before
it was sutiered to close, she was enabled to judge how
far he was sanctioned by parental authority in his present
application. On his return from Woodston, two days
before, he had been met near the abbey by his impatient
father, hastily informed in angry terms of Miss Morland’s
departure, and ordered to drink of her no more.

Such was the permission upon which he had now
offered her his hand. The aﬂiighted Catherine, amidst all
the tenors of expectation, as she listened to this account,
could not but rejoice in the kind mution with which
Henry had saved her from the necessity of a conscientious
rejection, by engaging her faith before he mentioned the
; and as he proceeded to give the particulars, and
explain the motives of his father’s conduct, her feelings
soon hardened into even a triumphant delight. The
General had had nothing to accuse her of, nothing to

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23 7

lay to her charge, but her being the involuntary, uncon-
scious object, of a decep 'on which his pride could not
pardon, and which a r pride would have been
ashamed to own. She was guilty only of being less
rich than he had supposed her to be. Under a mistaken
persuasion of her possessions and .claims, he had courted
her acquaintance in Bath, solicited her company at
Northanger, and designed her for his daughter-in-law.
0n discovering his error, to turn her from the house
seemed the best, though to his feelings an inadequate
proof, of his resentment towards herself, and his con-
tempt of her ﬁmily.

John [Thorpe] had ﬁrst misled him. The General
perceiving his son one night at the theatre, to be paying
considerable amenﬁon to Miss Morland, had accidentally
inquired of Thorpe if he knew more of her than her
name. Thorpe, most ha py to be on speaking terms
with a man of General ilney's importance, had been
joyfully and proudly communicative ; and being at that
time not only in daily expecmtion of Morland’s engag-
ing Isabella, but likewise pretty well resolved upon
marrying Catherine himself, his vanity induced him to
represent the family :3 yet more walthy than his vanity
and avarice had made him believe them. With whom-
soever he was, or was likely to be connected, his own
consequence alwayl required that their! should be great;
and as his intimacy with any acquainmnoe grew, so
regularly grew their fortune. The expectations of his
friend Morland, therefore, from the lint over-rated, had,
ever since his introduction to Isabella, been gradually
increasing; and by merely adding twice as much for
the grandeur of the moment, by doubling what he chose
to think the amount of Mr Morland’s preferment,
uebling his private fortune, bestowing a rich aunt, and
linking half the children, he was able to represent the
whole Emily to the General in a most respectable light.

2 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

For Catherine, however, the peculiar object or the
General’s curiosity and his own speculations, he had
yet something more in reserve; and the ten or fifteen
thousand pounds which her father could give her, would
be a pretty addition to Mr Allen’s estate. Her in-
timacy there had made him seriously determine on her
being handsomely legacied hereafter; and to speak of
her, therefore, as the almost acknowledged future heiress
of Fullerton, naturally followed. Upon such intelli-
gence the General had proceeded, for never had it
occurred to him to doubt its authority. Thorpe’s
interest in the family, by his sister’s approaching con-
nection with one of its members, and in! own views on
another (circumstances of which he boasted with almost
equal openness), seemed sufﬁcient vouchers for his truth ;
and to these were added, the absolute facts of the Allens
being wealthy and childless, of Miss Morland’s being
under their care, and, as soon as his acquaintance allowed
him to judge, of their treating her with parental kind-
ness. His resolution was soon formed. Already had
he discerned a liking towards Miss Morland in the
countenance of his son; and, thankful for Mr Thorpe’s
communication, he almost instantly determined to spare
no pains in weakening his boasted interest, and mining
his dearest hopes. Catherine herself could not be more
ignorant at the time of all this than his own children.
Henry and Eleanor, perceiving nothing in her situation
likely to engage their father’s 'cular respect, had
seen with astonishment the su denness, continuance,
and extent of his attention; and though latterly, from
some hints which had accompanied an almost positive
command to his son, of doing everything in hispower
to attach her, Henry was convinced of his father’s
believing it to be an advantageous connection, it was not
till the late explanadon at Northanger that they had the
smallest idea of the false calculations which had hurried

NORTHANGER user. a 39

him on. That they were false, the General had learned
from the very person who had suggested them, from
Thorpe himself, whom he had chanced to meet again
in town; and who, under the inﬂuence of exactly
opposite feelings, irritated by Catherine’s refunl, and
yet more by the failure of a very recent endeavour to
accomplish a reconciliation between Morland and
Isabella, convinced that they were separated for ever,
and spanning a ﬁ'iendship which could be no longer
serviceable, hastened to contradict all that he had said
before to the advantage of the Morlands: confessed
himselfto have been totally mistaken in his opinion of
their circumstances and character, misled by the
rhodomontade of his friend to believe his father a nun of
substance and credit, whereas the transactions of the two
or three last weeks proved him to be neither ; for, after
coming eagerly forward on the ﬁrst overture of a marriage
between the families, with the most liberal propomls, he
had, on being brought to the point, by the shrewdness
of the relator, been constrained to acknowledge himself
incapable of giving the young people even a decent
support. They were, in fact, a necessitous family; '
numerous too, almost beyond example; by no means
respected in their own neighbourhood, as he had lately
ha particular opportunities of discovering; aiming at a
style of life which their fortune could not warrant; leek-
ing to better themselves by wealthy connexions; a for-
ward, bragging, scheming race.

The terriﬁed General pronounced the name of Allen
with an inquiring look; and here, too, Thorpe had
learnt hie error. The Allen», he believed, had lived
near them too long, and he knew the young man on
whom the Fullerton eute must devolve. The General
needed no more. Enraged with almovt everybody in
the world but himself, he set out the next day for the
abbey, where his performances have been teen.

240 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

I leave it to my reader’s ugacity to determine how
much of all this it was ' for Henry to communi-
cate at this ﬁrm to therine; how much of it he
could have learnt from his father, in what point his own
conjectures might assist him, and what portion must yet
remain to be told in a letter from James- I have united
for their ease what they must divide for mine. Catherine,
at any me,heard enough to feel, that, in suspecting
General Tilney of either murdering or shutting up his
wife, she had scarcely sinned again; his character or
magniﬁed his cnielty.

Henry, in having such things to relate of his father,
was almost as pitiable as in their ﬁrst avowal to himself.
He blushed for the narrow-minded counsel which he was
obliged to expose. The conversation between them at
Nonhanger had beenof the mostunfriendly kind. Henry’s
indignation on hearing how Catherine had been treated,
on comprehending his father’ s views, and being ordered
to acquiesce in them, had been open and bold. The
General, accustomed on every ordinary occasion to give
the law in his family, prepared for no reluctance but of
' feeling, no opposin desire that should dare to clothe
itself in words, can d ill brook the opposition of his son,
steady as the sanction of reason and the dictate of con-
science could make it. But, in such a cause, his anger,
though it must shock, could not intimidate Henry, who
was sustained in his purpose by a conviction of its
justice. He felt himself bound as much in honour as
in affection to Miss Morland, and believing that hurt
to be his own which he had been directed to gain, no
unworthy retraction of a tacit consent, no reversing
decree of unjustiﬁable anger, could shake his ﬁdelity, or
inﬂuence the resolutions it prompted.

He steadily refused to accompany his Father into
Herefordshire, an engagement formed almost at the
moment, to promote the dismissal of Catherine, and as

NORTHANGhK ABBEY. 24 l

steadil declared his intention of offering her his hand.
The (general was fin-ions in his anger, and they parted in
dreadful disagreement. Henry, in an agitation of mind
which many solitary hours were required to compose,
had returned almost instantly to Woodwon; and on the
afternoon of the following day had begun his journey to
Fullerton.

that" Sit}.

R and Mn Morland’s surprize on being applied
to by Mr Tilney for their consent to his marry-
ing their daughter, was, for a few minutes,

considerable; it having never entered their heads to

t an attachment on either side; but as nothing,

after all, could be more natural than Catherine’s being
beloved, they won learnt to consider it with only the
happy agitation of gratiﬁed pride; and, as far as they
alone wee concerned, had not a single objection to
start. His pleasing manner. and good sense were self-
evident recommendations; and having never heard evil
of him, it was not their way to uppose any evil could be
told. Good-will lupplying the place of experience, his
character needed no attestation. “Catherine would
make a sad, heedlesn young housekeeper, to be sure,”
was her mother's foreboding remark; but quick
waa the consolation of there being nothing like
practice.

There was but one obstacle, in short, to be men-
tioned; but till that one wan removed, it must be
impossible for them to auction the engagement. Their
tempers were mild, but their principles were steady;
and while hie parent so express] forbad the con-
nexion, they could not allow themselves to encourage it
That the General should come forward to solicit the

242 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

alliance, or that he should even very heartin approve it,
they were not reﬁned enough to make any parading
stipulation, but the decent appearance of consent must
be yielded, and that once obtained, and their own hearts
made them trust that it could not be very long denied,
their willing approbation was instantly to follow. His
amen! was all that they wished for. They were no
more inclined than entitled to demand his money. Of
a very considerable fortune, his son was, by marriage
settlements, eventually secure; his resent income was
an income of independence and co on, and under every
pecuniary view it was a match beyond the claims of their
daughter.

The young people could not be surprized at a decision
like this. They. felt and they deplored, but they could
not resent it; and they parted, endeavouring to hope
that such a change in the General, as each believed
almost impossible, might speedily take place, to unite
them again in the fullness of privileged aﬂecﬁon.
Henry returned to what was now his only home, to
watch over his young plantations, and extend his
improvements for her ﬁlm, to whose share in them he
looked anxiously forward; and Catherine remained at
Fullerton to cry. Whether the torments of absence
were softened by a clandestine correspondence, let us
not inquire. Mr and Mrs Morland never did; they
had been too kind to exact any promise, and when-
ever Catherine received a letter, as at that time
happened pretty often, they,always looked another
way.

The anxiety which in this state of their anachment
must he the portion of Henry and Catherine, and of all
who loved either, as to its ﬁnal event, can hardly extend,
I fear, to the bosom of my readers, who will see in the
tell-tale compression of the pages before them, that
we are all hastening together to perfect felicity. The

 

NORTHANGE-R ABBEY. 243

mean! by which their early man-iage wan effected can
be the only doubt: what probable circumstance could
work upon a temper like the General’s? The circum-
stance which chieﬂy availed was the, marriage of his
daughter with a man of fortune and consequence, which
took place in the course of the comet: an accession
of dignity that threw him into a ﬁt of good humour,
from which he did not recover till after Eleanor had
obtained his fo 'venese of H , and bin inion
for him “ to beaglfool ifhe likeiimii." m

The marriage of Eleanor Tiln , her removal from
all the evils of Inch 3 home a: orthangerhadbeen
made by Henry‘- baninhmmt, to the home of her
choice and the man of her choice, in an event which
I exyect to give general satisfaction among all her
acquaintance. My own joy on the occasion in very
sincere. I know no one more entitled by unpretending
merit, or better prepared byhabitunl rulfering, to receive
and enjoy felicity. Her partiality for this gentleman
was not of recent origin,and he had been long withheld
only by inferiority of situation from addressing her.
Hie unex cted accession to title and fortune had
removed 1 his dilliculﬁEl; and never had the General
loved hi: da hter so well in all her hours of com-
Eanionahip, u ' 'ty, and patient endurance, u when he

rut hailed her, “Your Ladyehipl” Her hulband
wan really delerving of her, independent of his peerage,
hi. wealth, and his amchment, being to a precin'oo the
most charming young man in the wnrid. Any further
deﬁnition of hie merits must he unneceaury: the most
charming young man in the world in inetandy before the
imaginan‘on of us all. Concerning the one in question,
therefore, I have only to add (aware that the rules of
composition forbid the introduction of a character not
connected with my fable) that this was the very gende-
man whose negligent servant left behind him that

244 NORTHANGER ABBEY.

collection of rushing-bills, resulting from a long vin't at
Northanger, by which my heroine was involved in one
of her most alarming adventures.

The inﬂuence of the Viscount and Viscountesl in
their brother‘s behalf was assisted by that right under-
standing of Mr Morland’s circummneea, which, as soon
as the General would allow himself to be informed,
they were ualiﬁed to give. It taught him that he had
been scare y more misled by Thorpe’s ﬁrst boast of
the famil wealth than by his subsequent malicious over-
throw a it; that in no sense of the wordwerethey
necessitons or poor, and that Catherine would have
three thousand pounds. This was so material an amend-
ment of his late expectations, that it greatly contributed
to smooth the descent of his pride; and by no means
without its effect was the private intelligence which
he was at some pains to procure, that the Fullerton
estate, being entirely at the disposal of its present
proprietor, was consequently open to every greedy
speculation.

On the strength of this the General, soon after
Eleanor’s marriage, his son to ieturn to
Nonhanger, and thence made him the bearer of his
consent, very courteoust worded in a page full of
empty professions, to Mr Morland. The event which
it authorized soon followed: Henry and Catherine
were married, the bells rang and everybody smiled;
and, as this took place within a twelvemonth from the
ﬁrst day of their meeting, it will not appear, after all
the dreadful delays occasioned by the General’s cmelty,
that theywere essentially hurt by it. To begin perfect
happiness at the respective ages of twenty-six and
eighteen is to do pretty well; and professing myself,
moreover, convinced that the General’s unjust inter-
ference, so far from being really injurious to their
felicity, was perhaps rather conducive to it, by improv-

 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 245

. ing their knowledge of each other, and adding strengd'l
to their attachment, I leave it to be settled by whom-
wver it may concern, whether the tendency of this
work be altogether to recommend parental tymnny or
reward ﬁlial disobedience.