IR WALTER ELLIOT, of Kellynch Hall,
in Somersetshirc, was a man who, for his own
amusement, never took up any book but the

Baronetage; there he found occupation for an idle hour
and consolation in a distressed one; there his faculties
were roused into admiration and respect, by contem-
plating the limited remnant of the earliest patents ; there
any unwelcome sensations, arising from domestic affairs,
changed naturally into pity and contempt. As he
turned over the almost endless creations of the last cen-
tury, and there, if every other leaf were powerless, he
could read his own history with an interest which never
failed: this was the page at which the favourite volume
always opened :—

“ELLIOT 0F KEY-LYNCH HAL!»

“ Waller Elliot, born March I, r760, married July
rg, 1784. Elizabeth, daughter of James Stevenson,
Esq. of South Park, in the county of Gloucester; by
which lady (who died r800) he has issue, Elizabeth,
born June I, 178 ; Anne, born August 9, 1787;
u nill-bom son, ovember 5, I789; Mary, born
November 10, r79r."

2 PERSUASION.

Precisely such has! the pangra h originally Rood
from the rinter’s hands; but Sir alter had improved
it by ad ing, for the infortnau'on of himself and his
family, these words, after the date of Mary’s birth :—
“ Married, December 16, 18w, Charles, son and heir
of Charles Musgmve, Esq. of Uppercmss, in the
county of Somerset," and by inserting most accurately
the day of the month on which he had lost his wife.

Then followed the history and rise of the ancient
and respectable famil in the usual tenns; how it had
been ﬁrst settled in heshire, how mentioned in Dug-
dale, serving the ofﬁce of high sheriff, representing a
borough in three successive parliaments, exertions of
loyalty, and dignity of baronet. in the ﬁn year of
Charles II. with all the Marys and Elizabeth: they had
married; forming altogether two handsome duodecimo
pages, and concluding with the arms and motto :—
“ Principal seat, Kellynch Hall, in the county of
Somerset,” and Sir Walter’s handwriting again in this
ﬁnale :—

“ Heir presumptive, William Walter Elliot, Esq., V
great grandson of the second Sir Walter."

Vanity was the beginning and end of Sir Walter
Elliot’s character: vanity of person and of situation.
He had been remarkably handsome in his youth, and
at ﬁfty-four was still a very ﬁne man. Few women
could think more of.their personal appearance than he
did, nor could the valet of any new made lord be more
delighted with the place he held in society. He con-
sidered the blessing of beauty as inferior onl to the
blessing of a baronetcy; and the Sir Walter El iot, who
united these gifts, was the constant object of his warmest

ect and devotion.
is good looks and his rank had one fair claim on
his attachment, since to them he most have owed a wife

 

PERSUASION. 3

of very auperior character to anything deeerved by hi:
own. Lady Elliot had been an excel ent woman, acn-
Iible and amiable, whose judgment and conduct, if they
might be pardoned the youthful infatuation which made
her Lady Elliot, had never required indulgence after-
wards. She had humoured, or softened, or concealed
his failings, and promoted his real respectability for
seventeen yearn; and though not the very happiest
being in the world herself, had found enough in her
duties, her friends, and her children, to atuch her to
life, and make it no matter of indiﬂ'erence to her when
she was called on to quit them. Three girll, the two
eldest sixteen and fourteen, was an awful legacy for a
mother to bequeath, an awful charge rather, to conﬁde
to the authority and guidance of a conceited, tilly
father. She had, however, one very inu'mate friend, a
sensible, deaerving woman, who had been brought, by
strong attachment to herself, to settle close by her, in
the village of Kellynch; and on her kindness and
advice Lady Elliot mainly relied for the best help and
maintainance of the good principles and instmction
which she had been anxiously giving her daughters.

This friend and Sir Walter did not marry, whatever
might have been anticipated on that head by their ac-
quaintance. Thirteen years had pasted away since
Lad Elliot’s death, and they were still near neighbours
and intimate friends, and one remained a widower, the
other a widow.

That Lady Russell, of steady age and character, and
extremely well provided for, should have no thought of
a second marriage, needs no apology to the public,
which is rather apt to be unreasonably discontented
when a woman doe: marry again, than when she does
Ml; but Sir Walter’s continuing in singleneas requires
explanation. Be it known, then, that Sir Walter. like
a good father (having met with one or two private dis-

4 PERSUASION.

a pointments in very unreasonable applications), prided
himself on remaining single for hit dear daughter’s sake.
For one daughter, hil eldest, he would really have given
up anything, which he had not been very much tempted
to do. Eliubeth had succeeded at sixteen to all that
was possible of her mother’s rith and consequence;
and being very handsome, and very like himself, her
inﬂuence had always been great, and they had gone on
together moat happily. His two other children were of
very inferior value. Mary had acquired a little artiﬁcial
importance by becoming Mn Cbarlea Musgrove; but
Anne, with an elegance of mind and sweets)": of char-
acter, which must have placed her high with as people
of real understanding, was nobody with either {other or
sister; her word had no weight, her convenience was
always to give way—the was only Anne.

To Lady Russell, indeed, she was a most dear and
highly valued god-daughter, favourite, and friend.
Lady Russell loved them all, but it was only in Anne
that she could fancy the mother to revive again.

A few years before Anne Elliot had been a very
pretty girl, but her bloom had vanished early; and as,
even in its height, her father had found little to admire
in her, so totally different were her delicate features
and mil dark eyes from his own). there could be no-
thing in them, now that uhe was faded and thin, to excite
his esteem. He had never indulged much hope, he
had now none, of ever reading her name in any other
page of his favourite work. All equality of alliance
must rest with Elizabeth, for Mary had merely con-
nected herself with an old country family of respecta-
bility and large fortune, and had, therefore, given all the
honour and received none: Elizabeth would, one day
or other, marry mitably.

-It sometimes happens that a woman is handsomer at
twenty-nine than the was ten years before ; and,

PERSUASION. 5

generally speaking, if there has been neither ill halth
nor anxiety, it is a time of life at which scarcely any
charm is lost. It was so with Elizabeth, still the same
handsome Miss Elliot that she had begun to be thirteen

ears ago, and Sir Walter might be excused, therefore,
In forgetting her age, or, at least, be deemed only half a
fool, for thinking himself and Eliubeth as blooming as
ever, amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody
else; for he could plainly see how old all the rest
of his family and acquaintance were growing. Anne
haggard, Mary course, every face in the neighbourhood
worstin , and the npid increase of the crow’s foot about
.Lady ﬁussell's temples had long been a distre- to
him.

Elizabeth did not quite equal her father in personal
contentment. Thirteen years had seen her mistreu of
Kellynch Hall, presiding and directing with a self-pos-
seuicn and decision which could never have given the idea
of her being younger than she was. For thirteen years
had she been doing the honours, and laying down the
domestic law at home, and leading the 'way to the chaise
and four, and walking immediately after Lady Russell
out of all the drawing-rooms and dining-rooms in the
country. Thirteen winters’ revolving frosts had seen
her opening every ball of credit which a scanty neigh-
bourhood aﬂ'orded, and thirteen springs shewn their
blossoms, as she travelled up to London with her father,
for a few weeks’ annual enjo ment of the great world.
She had the remembrance 0 all this, she had the con-
scioumess of being nine-and-twenty to give her some
regrets and some apprehensions; she was fully satisﬁed
of being still quite as handsome as ever, but she felt her
ap roach to the years of danger, and would have
YEJOiCEd to be certain of being properly solicited by
baronet-blood within the next twe vemonth or two.
Then might she again take up the book of books with

6 PERSUASION.

:- much enjoyment an in her early youth, but now the
liked it not. Alway- to be pretented with the date of
her own birth and lee no marriage follow but that of a
youngest litter, made the book an evil; and more than
once, when her father had left it o n on the table nar
her, had the cloned it, with ave eyea, and pushed it
away.

She had had a disappointment, moreover, which that
book, and elpecially the hittory of her own family,
must ever present the remembrance of. The heir pre-
Iumptive, the very William Walter Elliot, th., whoa:
righu had been IO generoully tupponed by her father,
had dinppointed her.

She had, while a very young girl, at noon as the had
known him to be, in the event of her having no brother,
the future baronet, meant to marry him, and her father
had alwayn meant that she ehould. He had not been
known to them as a boy ; but soon after Lady Elliot’l
death, Sir Walter had sought the acquaintance, and
though his overture. had not been met with any warmth,
he had persevered in seeking it, making allowance for
the modest drawing-back of youth ; and, in one of their

ring excursiom to London, when Elizabeth wan in her

rat bloom, Mr Elliot had been forced into the intro-
duction.

He was at that time a very young man, just engaged
in the rtudy of the law; and Elizabeth found him ex-
tremely agreeable, and every plan in hit favour wan con-
ﬁrmed. He was invited to Kellynch Hall; he wan
talked of and expected all the rest of the year; but he
never came. The following Ipring he was teen again
in town, found equally agreeable, again encouraged,
invited, and expected, and again he did not come; and
the next tidings were that he wan man'ied. Inmd of v
pushing his fortune in the line marked out for the heir
of the house of Elliot, he had purchaaed independence

PIRSUASION. 7
by uniting himaelf to a rich woman of inferior

Sir Walter had relenled it. An the head of the
houee, he felt that he ought to have been conaulte‘d,
eqzecially after taking the young man to publicly by the
hand; “ For they mud have been Ieen together, ’ he
obeerved, “ once at Tattenal’s, and twice in the lobby
of the Houae of Commune.” Hi- diaapprobation waa
exlpreeeed, but apparently very little regarded. Mr
E iot had attempted no apolo , and Ihewn himself an
unoolicitoul of being longer noticed by the family,aa Sir
Walter conridered him unworthy of it: all acquaintance
between them had ceaaed.

Thia very awkward history of Mr Elliot wu ttill,
after an interval of ecveml yearn, felt with angerﬁy
Elizabeth, who had liked the man for himself, and ' l
more for being her father’s heir, and whose strong family

ride could see only in [rim 3 pro r match for Sir

alter Elliot’s eldelt daughter. here was not a
baronet from A to Z whom her feelin a could have no
willingly acknowledged III an equal. ct so miserably
had he conducted himaelf, that though she was at this pre-
Ient timvedgthe summer of 1814) wearin black ribbon
for hi- ' e, she could not admit him to worth think-
ing of again. The diugraoe of his lint marriage might,

rha s, u there was no reuon to mppoee it perpetuated
E; ring, have been got over, had he not done wane ;
but he had, as by the accustom: intervention of kind
friends. t had been inform ken moat diure-
epectfull them all, most ulighn'ng y and contemptu-
oully o the very blood he belonged to, and the honour.
which were hereafter to be hit own. Thin could not
be ardoned.

uch were Elizabeth Elliot’a oentimenta and tenu-
tiont ; euch the cares to alloy, the agitation: tom}, the
tameneu and the elegance, the prosperity an the

heavy hill- of his endemic, and the nucleon: hint:
oer Shepherd,hi|agen¢,fmmhinlhough¢s The
Kellynch property vaa good, but not equal m Sir
Waltefl ehenu'onof the we required in in pal-
nenor. hile Lady Elliot lived, there had bun method,
moderation, and economy, which had jun him
wiihin his income; but with he! had did all lid! right-
mindedneu. and from that period he had been manly
exceeding is. I: had not hem poliblefor hinnn

lea: he had done nothing but what Sir Walter llioe
wan impaioualy called on Io do; but blamele- a he
wn, he wu not only growing dradfully in debt, bu:
wn herring of it so often, that it became vain to attempt
concealing it longer, even paniall , from his daughter.
He had given her some hinu o it the last Ipring in
lawn; he had gone so far even an m nay, “Can we
Mrench l Doe. it occur In you Ihat there in any one
article in which we cnn wrench l" and Elizabeth, to do
her junice. had, in the ﬁrst ardour of female alann, net
nerlomly to think what could be done, and had ﬁnally
propoud lhue two branch” of economy, to cut off
Dome unneceuary clinritiel. and to refrnin from new fur-
nllhlnn the drnwing-momi to which ex ienu she
Illerwnnll milled the happy thought of their taking no
pmem down to Anne, u had been the uml yearly
mum“. llm than men-um, however good in them-
Inlru. \me lnlulllrienl for die real exam of the evil,

rensussron. 9

the whole of which Sir Walter found himself obliged
to confess to her soon afterwards. Eli:;rl;eth hapdf
nothin to roposeofd reﬂiuc . She et herse

ill-meg and, unfomlnatzpzs did hzr father; and they
were neither of them able to devise any means of lessen-
ing their expenses without compromising their dignity,
or relinquishing their comforts in a way not to be home.

There was onlya small part of his estate that Sir
Walter could dispose of ; but had every acre been alien-
able, it would have made no difference. He had con-
descended to mortgage as far as he had the power, but
he would never condescend to sell. No; he would
never disgrace his name so far. The Kellynch estate
should be transmitted whole and entire, as he had
received it.

Their two conﬁdential friends, Mr Shepherd, who
lived in the neighbouring market town, and Lad Russell,
were called on to advise them; and both ather and
daughter seemed to expect that something should be
Itmck out by one or the other to remove their embar-
rassments and reduce their expenditure, without involv-
ing the loss of any indulgence of taste or pride.

1:01pm I].

R SHEPHERD, a civil, cautious lawyer, who,
whatever might be his hold or his views on Sir
Walter, would rather have the diagram“:

prompted by anybody else, excused himself from oEer-
ing the slightest hint, and only begged leave to recom-
mend an implicit reference to the excellent judgment of
Lady Russell, from whose known good sense he fully
expected to have just such resolute measures advised as
he meant to see ﬁnally adopted.

IO PEISUASION.

Lady Rmell wu moat mximuly zealou- on the
abject, end gave it much Ierioul consideration. She
um: woman rather of aound than of quick abilities,
whoee diﬂicultiel in coming to any decieion in thin in-
mnce were great, from the opponition of two leading
principles She wail of urict integn'ty herself, with I
delicate eenee of honour; but 8h: win an deuiroul of
nving Sir Walter’l feelingl, a: nolicitoul for the credit
of the family, at ariltocratic in her idea. of what war
due to them, an anybody of eenle and honesty could well
be. She war a benevolent, charitable, good woman,
and capable of strong attachment, moet correct in her
conduct, nrict in her notion: of decorum, and with
manner: that were held a ntandard of good-breeding.
She had a cultivated mind, and win, generally speaking,
rational and continent; but the had prejudices on the
ride of anceetry; she had a value for rank and conse-
quence, which blinded her a little to the iiiqu of thoee
who poueued than. ‘Heroelf the widow of only a
knight, the gave the dignity of I baronet all in due;
and Sir Walter, independent of his claim at an old
ac unintance, an attentive neighbour, an obliging land-
lord, the husband of her very dear friend, the father of
Anne and her sisters, was, ll being Sir Walter, in her
a rehention, entitled to a great deal of compassion and
conridenition under hllprclent difﬁculties.

They mull retrench ; that did not admit of I doubt.
But .he wa. very anxious to have it done with the lent

‘5]; pain to him and Elizabeth. She drew up plan:
of economy, the made exact calculationl, and she did
what nobody elee thought of doing : the consulted Anne,
who never seemed comidercd by the other: a haying
In interert in the question. She contulted, rind in a
.1 me war inﬂuenced by her in marking out the scheme
of “mud,an which was at last submitted to Sir
Walter. Every emendation of Anne’s had been on the

 

PERSUASION. l l

Iide of honth ageing importance. She wanted more
vi omu- meuum, a more complete reformation, a quicker
re cue from debt, a much higher tone of indiﬂ'erence for
everything but justice and equity. ’

“If we can pemade your father to all thin,” Hid
Lady Rue-ell, looking over her paper, " much my be
done. If he will adopt then regulationn, in seven yean
he willbeclenr; andl hopewe me he nhle to con-
vince him and Elizabeth that Kelynch Hall ha- a
:zrectzhility in iuelf which cannot be aﬂ'ected b thece

uctionl; end that the true dignity of Sir alter
Elliot will he very far from leuened in the eyes at
tendble people, by hi- acting like a man of principle.
What vull he be doing, in fact, but what very many
of our lint familiel have done, or ought to do P There
will be nothing singular in hie cane; and it ll singularity
which often lnakel the worn! part of our luﬂ'ering. a it
alwayl doel of our conduct. I have great hope of our
prevailing. We mutt be serioue and decided; for after
all, the pemn who hat contracted dehu must pay them;
and though a t deal in due to the feelingl of the
gentlemen, an the head of a home, like your father,
therenil Itill more due to the character of an honest
man.

Thil via: the principle on which Anne wanted her
father to he pmeeding. hie friend- !» be urging him.
She considered it a an act of indkpennhle dutyto clear
away the claim of creditors with all the expedition
which the moat comprehend" retrenchment: could
Iecure, and aw no dignity in an thing than of it. She
wanted it to be preocribed, an felt as a duty. She
rated Lady Ruuell’e inﬂuence highly; and a: to the
revere degree of self-denial which her own conlcience
prompted, Ihe believed there might be little more difﬁ-
culty in pervuading them to a complete, than to half a
reformation. Her knowledge of her father and Eliza-

n

I I PERSUASION.

beth inclined her to think that the aacrilioe of one pair
of hornet would he hardly lea: painful than of both, and
In on, through the whole lint of Lady Runell'l too
gentle mductionr.

How Anne'l more rigid requiaitiona might have been
taken in of little consequence. Lady Runell'a had no
Iucceaa at all: could not be put up with, were not to be
borne. “What! every comfort of life knocked off!
Journeyt, London, aervanta, bones, table—contraction!
and renrictiona everywherel To live no longer with
the decenciel even of a private gentleman! No, he
would Iooner quit Kellynch Hall at once, than remain
in it on auch diagraceful term."

“ Quit Kell nch Hall l ” The hint wan immediately
taken up by r Shepherd, whoa: intereat wan involved
in the reality of Sir Walter’s retrencbing, and who
was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done
without a change of abode. “ Since the idea had been
started in the very quarter which ought to dictate, he
had no scnlple,” he said, “ in confusing his judgment
to be entirely on that aide. It did not appear to him
that Sir Walter could materially alter his atyle of living
in a home which had such a character of harpitality and
ancient dignity to support. In any other place Sir

' Walter might judge for himself; and would be looked
up to, aa regulating the modea of life in whatever way
he might choooe to model his household.”

Sir Walter would quit Kcllyncli Hall; and after a
very few days more of doubt and indecision, the great

ucation of whither he should go wan settled, and the
2m outline of this important change made out.

'There had been three alternatives, London, Bath, or
another house in the country. All Anne's wishes had
been for the latter. A small house in their own neigh-
bourhood, where th might still have Lady Russell’s
society, still be near%ary, and still have the pleasure of

 

PERSUASION. I3

sometimes seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch, was
the of her ambition. But the usual fate of Anne
attended her, in having something very oppocite from
her inclination ﬁxed on. She disliked Bath, and
did not think it agreed with her; and Bath was to be
her home.

Sir Walter had at ﬁrst thought more of London; but
Mr Sh herd felt that he could not be truned in Lon-
don, an had been skilful enough to dissuade him from'
it, and make Bath preferred. It was a much safer
place for a gentleman in his predicament: he might
there be important at comparativer little expense. Two
material advantages of Bath over London had of course
been given nll their wci lit: its more convenient distance
from Kellynch, only Ifty miles, and Lady Russell’s
spending some part of every winter there; and to the
very great satisfaction of Lady Russell, whose ﬁrst
views on the projected change had been for Bath, Sir
Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe that they
should lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by
settling there.

Lady Russell felt obliged to oppose her dear Anne’s
known wishes. It would be too much to expect Sir
Walter to delcend into a small house in his own neigh-
bourhood. Anne herself would have found the moni-
ﬁcations of it more than she foresaw, and to Sir Walter’s
feelings they must have been dreadful. And with re-
gard to Anne’s dislike of Bath, she considered it as a
prejudice and mistake arising, ﬁrst, from the circumstanCe
of her having been three years at school there, after her
mother’s death; and secondly, from her happening to
be not in rfectly good spirits the only winter which
she had rewards spent there with herself.

Lady Russell was fond of Bath, in short, and dis-
posed to think it must suit them all ; andas to her young
riend's health, by passing all the warm months with her

I 4 PBRSUASION.

It Kellyuch Lodge, every danger would be avoided;
and it was in fact, a change which rnuat do both health
and lpirits good. Anne had been too little from home,
too little seen. Her spirit: were not high. A larger
society would improve them. She wanted her to be
more known.

The undeairahleness of any other house in the ume
neighbourhood for Sir Walter was certainly much
strengthened by one part, and a very material part of
the scheme, which had been happily engrafted on the
beginning. He waa not only to quit his home, but to
see it in the hand: of others: a trial of fortitude which
monger head: than Sir Walter’s have found too much.
Kellynch Hall wan to be let. This, however, waa a
profound secret, not to be breathed beyond their own
circle.

Sir Walter could not have borne the degradation of
being known to detign letting his house. Mr Shepherd
had once mentioned the word “advertise,” but never
dared approach it again. Sir Walter spurned the idea
of ita being oﬁered in any manner; forbad the llighteﬁ
hint being dropped of his having tuch an intention ; and
it waa only on the Iuppouition of his being ntaneoualy
solicited by some moat unexceptionable app icant, on his
own team, and at a great favor, that he would let it at
all.

How quick come the reamns for ap roving what we
like] Lady Russell had another excel cut one at hand,
for being extremely glad that Sir Walter and hit family
were to remove from the country. Elizabeth had been
lately forming an intimacy, which the wilhed to see in-
terrupted. It wan with a daughter of Mr Shepherd,
who had returned, after an unprorperous marriage, to
her fathth house, with the additional burden of two
children. She waa a clever young woman, who under-
stood the art of pleating—the art of pleasing, at least, at

PERSUASION. l 5

Kellynch Hall; and who had made herself an accent-
able to Miss Elliot, an to have been already nayln
there more than once, in lpite of all that Lady RunaelFI
who thought it a friendship quite out of place. could
hint of caution and relerve.

Lady Rune", indeed, had Icarcely any inﬂuence
with Elizabeth, and Ieemed to love her, rather became
Ihe would love her, than because Elizabeth deeerved it.
She had never received from her,rnore than outward
attention, nothing beyond the oblervancel of com-
plailance; had never Iucceeded in any point which the
wanted to carry, agninet previolll inclination. She had
been tedly very earnelt in trying to get Anne
inclum the visit to London, Ieneibl open to all the
injustice and all the dilcredit of the eel uh arrangements
which uhut her out, and on many leaner occasions had
endeavoured to give Eliubeth the advantage of her own
better judgment and experience; but alwayl in vain :
Eliuheth would go her own way; and never had Ihe
puruucd it in more decided opposition to Lady Rue-ell
than in thin selection of Mn Clay; turning from the
Incicty of no decerving a richer, to bestow her affection
and conﬁdence on one who ought to have been nothing
to her but the object of distant civilit .

From situation, Mn Clay wan, In Lady Rumil'e
estimate, a very unequal, and in her character, the
believed, a very dangerous companion; and a removal
that would leave Mn Clay behind, and bring a choice
of more irritable intimateu within Min Elliot'l reach,
was therefore an object of ﬁrst-rate impomnce.

16 PIRSUASION.

Chapter 3]].

“ WST~take leave to ohlerve, Sir Walter," laid
Mr Shepherd one morning at Kellynch Hall, I:
he laid down the newlpaper, “that the prenent

juncture in much in our favour. Thin peace will be

turning all our rich naval oﬂicen anhore. They will be
all wanting a home. Could not be a better time, Sir

Walter, for having I choice of tenantl, very reaponlihle

tenants. Many n noble fortune has been made during

the war. If a rich admiral were to come in our way,

Sir Walter—”

“ He would be a very lucky man, S herd," lied
Sir Walter; “ that ’I all I have to renhieali’k. Algiize,
indeed, would Kellynch Hall be to him; rather the
greateut prizejof all, let him have taken ever to many
before; hey, She herd?"

Mr Shepherd aughed, at he knew he mun, at this
wit, and then added-—

u I presume to observe, Sir Walter, that, in the way
of business, gentlemen of the navy are well to dnl with.
l have had a little knowledge of their method: of doing
busincu; and I am free to confess that they have very
liberal notionl, and are at likely to make desirable
tenant: at any net of people one should meet with.
Therefore, Sir Walter, what 1 would take leave to
Iuggen it, that if in consequence of any mmourl getting
abroad of your intention; which mutt be contemplated
an n poslible thing, became we know how difﬁcult
it ll to keep the action: and design- of one part of the
world from the notice and curioaity of the other ; con-
quuence has its tax ; I, John Shepherd, might conceal
any family-matters that I chose, for nobody would
think it worth their while to oboerve rue ; but Sir
Walter Elliot hal eyes upon him which it may he very

 

PERSUASION. l 7

diﬂicult to elude; and, therefore, thus much I venture
upon, that it will not greatly surprise me if, with all our
caution, some rumour of the truth should get abroad;
in the au 'tion of which, as I was going to observe,
since app ications will unquesﬁonably follow, I should
think any from our wealthy naval commanders particu-
larly worth attending to; and hug leave to add, that
two limits will bring me over at any time, to save you
the trouble of repl 'ng."

Sir Walter on y nodded. But soon afterwards,
rising and pacin the room, he observed sarcastically—

“There are ew among the gentlemen of the nav , I
imagine, who would not be eurprined to ﬁnd themselves
in I house of this description.”

“ They 'would look around them, no doubt. and bless
their good fortune,” said Mrs Clay, for Mrs Clay was
present: her father had driven her over, nothing being
of so much use to Mrs Clay’s health as a drive to
Kellynch: "but I quite agree with my father in think-
ing a sailor might be a very desirable tenant. I have
known a good deal of the profession ; and besides their
liherality, they are so neat and careful in all their ways I
These valuable pictures of yours, Sir Walter, if you
chose to leave them, would be Perfectly safe. Every-
thing in and about the house would be taken such ex-
cellent care of l The gardens and shrubberies would
he kept in almost as high order as they are now. You
need not be afraid, Miss Elliot, of your own sweet
ﬂower garden: being neglected.”

" As to all that," rejoined Sir Walter coolly, “ sup-
pou'ng I were induced to let my house, I have by no
means made up my mind as to the privileges to be
annexed to it. I am not particularly to favour
a tenant. The rk would be open to him of course,
and few navy o cers, or men of any other description,
can have had such a range; but what restrictions I

1 8 PIRSUASION.

might impole on the use of the plenum-ground. in
another thing. I am not fond of the idea of my uhrub-
beriee being alweyl Ip roach-hie; And I Ihould recom-
mend Miu Elliot to L on her guard with reepect to
her ﬂower garden. I am very little ' to grant
n temnt of Kellynch Hall uny extrao inury favour, I
qure you, be he tailor or Ioldler."

After I than pure, Mr Shepherd Prelumed to any—

“ In Ill thete care: there are etuhluhed uuget which
make eveqthing plain and en between landlord and
tenant. our interest, Sir alter, in in pretty cafe
hlﬂdl. Depend uPon me for taking care that no tenlnt
he more than hie Just right. I venture to hint. that
Sir Wnlter Elliot cannot be half» jealous for hil own,
M John Shepherd will be for him."

Here Anne Ite—

“ The nuvy, think, who have done I0 much for no,
have It lent an equal chim with any other net of men.
for Ill the comfom and all the privilege- which an
home can give. Snilors work hutd enough for their
comforts, we mutt all allow."

“ Very true. very true. What Min Anne ray- in
very true," wu Mr Shepherd’s rejoinder, and “Ohl
certainly," Wll hie daughter’e; but Sir Walter's remark
wu, noon afterwards-—

“ The profeuion hill in utility, but I Ihould be
lorry to see any friend of mine belonging to it."

“Indeed! ' war the reply, and with a look of tur-

rue.
“Yen; it ll in two point! offensive to me; I have
two Itrong ground: of objection to it. Fint, at being
the meanl of bringing pemnl ofoblcure birth into undue
dittinction, and raising men to honour: which their
father. and grandfathern never dreamt of ; and, Iecondly,
II it cut: up u man’s youth and vigour moet horribly; a
tailor grown old woner than any other man. I have

.__‘ ___.‘

PERSUASION. 1 9

observed it all my life. A man in in greater danger in
the nIvy of being intulted by the riIe of one whoee
father hil father might have drIdained to epeak to, and
of becoming premIturely an object of dilgun himeelf,
than in any other line. One day lavt ﬁring, in town, I
was in company with two men, Itrilung instances of
what I am talking of: Lord St Ivee, whoee father we
all know to have been I country curate, without breId
to eat: I vial to give place to Lord St Ives, and I
certain Adminl Baldwin, the ruoet deplorable-looking
personage you can imagine; hie face the colour of
mahogany, rough and rugged to the lan degree; all
lines and wrinklee, nine grey hair- of I side, and nothing
but I dab of wider at top. ‘In the name of heaven,
who in that o d fellow i ’ laid I to a friend of mine who
wul standing near (Sir Basil Marl ‘Old fellowl ’
cried Sir Bail, ‘ it il Admiral Bal win. What do m
take llll age to be? ' ‘ Sixty,’ aid 1, ‘or perhapu eixty-
two.’ ‘ Forty,’ replied Sir Basil, ‘fort ,and no more.’
Picture to youreelvet my Imazement : shall not easily
forget Admiral Blldwin. I never aw quite to wretched
Inexam leofvlhatlnea-faring life can do; but to I
degree, knowitia the lamewith them all: theyare
Ill knocked about. and expo-ed to every climate, and
everyweather,tilltheyarenotﬁtto be teen. It in I
pity they are not knocked on the head It once, before
they reach Admiral Baldwin’r age.”

“Nay, Sir Walter," cried Mr: Clay, “thin in being
severe indeed. Have a little mercy on the poor men.
We are not All born to be handeome. The Ie: ie no
beautiﬁer, certainly; nilora do grow old betimee; I
have often oboerved it; they noon lone the look of
youth. But then, in oot.it the note with many other
professionl, perhape moot other? Soldiera, in active
Iervice, are not It All better off; and even in the quieter
pure-ions, there in e toil and a labour of the mind, if

2 D PERSUASION.

not of the bod , which seldom leavee a man's looks to
the natural ect of time. The lawyer plodt, quite
care-worn: the physician is up at all hours, and
travelling in all weather; and even the clergyman—”
she stopt a moment to comider what might do for the
clergyrnan—“ and even the clergyman, you know, it
obliged to go into infected rooms, and expose ill! health
Ind loch to all the injury of a poisonous atmosphere.
In fact, as I have long been convinced, though every
profession is necessary and honourable in its turn, it is
only the lot of thooe who are not obliged to follow
any, who can live in a regular way, in the country,
choosing their own hours, following their own pursuits,
and living on their own pro rt , without the torment
of trying for more; it is on y t 'r lot, I ﬂy, to hold
the blessings of health and a good appearance to the
utmost: I know no other set of men but what lose
something of their personablenesl when they ceale to be
quite young." -

It seemed as if Mr Shepherd, in this anxiety to he-
rpeak Sir Walter's good will towards a naval oﬂicer as
tenant, had been gifted with foresight; for the very ﬁnt
application for the house was from an Admiral Croft,
with whom he shortly afterwards fell into company in
attending the quarter sessions at Taunton ; and, indeed,
he had received a hint of the Admiral from a London
correspondent. By the report which he huntened over
to Kellynch to make, Admiral Croft was a native of
Somersetshire, who having acquired a very haudaome for-
tune, waa within to settle in hit own country, and had
come down to aunton in order to look at some adver-
tised places in that immediate neighbourhood, which,
however, had not suited him; that accidentally hearing
--(it was just as he had foretold, Mr Shepherd
observed, Sir Walter’s concerns could not be lte t a
aecret,)—accidentally hearing of the possibility of el-

 

PERSUASION. 2 l

1 ch Hall being to let, and understanding his (Mr
giiepherd’s) connection with the owner, he had intro-
duced himself to him in order to make particular inquiries,
and had, in the ooune of a put? long conference, ex-
pressed as strong In inclination or the place an a man
who knew it on y by description could feel ; and given
Mr Shepherd, in hia explicit account of him-elf, every
proof of his being a mot responsible, eligible tenant

" And who in Admiral Croft?" wu Sir Walter’s
cold, auspicious inquiry.

Mr Sh herd anewered for his being of a gentle-
man's fami y, and mentioned a place) and Anne, after
the little pause which followed, added——

" He is rear-admiral of the white. He was in the
Trafalgar action, and has been in the East Indie! since;
he has been stationed there, I believe, several yearn."

“Then I take it for granted," obeerved Sir Walter,
“that his face is about as onnge as the cum and cape!
of my livery.”

Mr Shepherd hutened to assure him, that Admiral
le’t was a very hale, hearty, well-looking man, a little
weather-beaten, to be sure, but not much, and uite the
gentleman in all his notions and behaviour; not ikely to
make the smallest difﬁculty about terms, only wanted a
comfortable home, and to get into it as noon as possible ;
knew he must pay for his convenience; knew what rent
a ready-furnilhed houee of that consequence might
fetch ; should not have been aurprised if Sir Walter
had asked more; had inquired about the manor; would
be glad of the deputation, certainly, but made no great
point of it; said he sometimes took out a gun, but never
killed; quite the gentleman.

Mr Shepherd was eloquent on the tub‘ect, pointing
out all the circumstances of the Admiral’l arnil , which
made him peculiarly deeirable al a tenant. e wan I
married man, and without children ; the very state to be

a a PIISUASION.

wilhed for. A houte wat never taken good are of,
Mr Shepherdohterved,withoutalad :hedidnot
know whether furniture might not he in nger of suffer-
ing at much where there wat no lady, at where there
were many children. A lady, without a family waa the
very beat preterver of furniture in the world. He had
teen Mr: Croft too; the wat at Taunton with the
Admiral, and had been preterit almott all the time they
were talking the matter over.

'4 And a very well-tpokeu, genteel, threwd lady, the
teemed to he.’ continued he; “naked more quettiunt
about the houte, and termt, and taxes, than the Admiral
himtelf, and teamed more convenant with butineaa;
and, moreover, Sir Walter, I found the waa not quite
unconnected in thin country, any more than her huthand;
that ll to say, the ll litter to a gentleman who did live
among-t ut once; the told me to henelf; itter to the
gentleman who lived a few yearn back at Monkford.
Bless me! what wat hit name? At thin moment I
cannot recollect hit name, though I have heard it to
lately. Penelope, my dear, can you help me to the name
of the gentleman who lived at Monkford: Mn Croft’s
brother ? "

But Mr: Clay wat talking to eagerly with Mia-
Elliot that the did not hear the appeal.

“I have no conception whom you can mean, Shep-
herd; I remember no gentleman resident at Moultford
tince the time of old Governor Trent."

“ Blea me! how very odd! I thall forget my own
name noon, I tuppoae. A name that I amto very well
acquainted with ; knew the gentlean to well by tight;
teen him a hundred time; came to cuntult me once, I
remember, about a tretpata of one of hit neighboun;
fanner’a man breaking into hit orchard; wall torn
down; applet ttnlen; caught in the fact: and after-
wardt, contrary to my judgment, submitted to an amicable
compromite. Very odd, indeed! ”

L

PERSUASION. 2 3

After waiting another moment—

“ You mean Mr Wentworth, I euppoee i ” laid
Anne.

Mr Shepherd wan all gratitude.

“ Wentwnrth was the very name! Mr Wentvlorth
VII the ve man. He had the curacy of Monkford,
you know, gir Walter. tome time back, for two or three
yearn. Came there about the yeah—5, I take it You
remember him, I am cure."

“ Wentworth i Oh I l, Mr Wentworth, the curate
of Monkihrd. You m' ed me by the term gnu/m.
I thought on were king of me man of prope :
Mr Wentyworth WT nobody, I remember; date
unconnected; nothing to do with the Stnﬂ'ord family.
One wooden how the names of many of our nobility
become so common.”

AI Mr Shepherd perceived that thin connexion of
the Croft: did them no Iervice with Sir Walter, he
mentioned it no more; retuming, with all hi: zeal, to
dwell on the circumstance: more indiaputzhly in their
favour; their e, and number, and fortune; the high
idea they hadlﬁxrmed ol' Kellynch Hall, and extreme
Iolicitude for the advantage of renting it; making it
appear as if they ranked nothin beyond the happine-
o bdng the tenant: of Sir alter Elliot: an extra-
ordinary mte, certainl , could they have been luppoeed
in the secret of Sir alter’a estimate of the due: of a
tenant.

It succeeded, however; and though Sir Walter must
ever look with an evil eye on anyone intending to inhabit
that home, and think them inﬁnitely too well of in
being permitted to rent it on the higheet term, he was
talked into allowing Mr Shepherd to proceed in the
treaty, and authoriing him to wait on Admiral Croft,
who still remained at Taunton, and ﬁx a day for the
houle being leen.

24 PERSUASION.

Sir Walter war not very wine; but Itill he had
experience enough of the world to feel, that I more
unoh'ectionable tenant, in all euentialn, than Admiral
Cro bid fair to he, could hardly offer. So far went
hil undentanding; and bin vanity supplied I little addi-
tional loathing, in the Adminl’s duration in life, which
wan juut high enough, and not too high. “ I have let
my home to Admiral Croft," would Iound extraner
well ; very much better than to any mere Mr ; a
Mr (lave, perhapc, tome half dozen in the nation)
alwayl needa a note of explanation. An admiral Ipealu
hie own canaequence, and, at the ume time, can never
make a baronct look mall. In all their dealing: and
innsrcournc, Sir Walter Elliot mutt ever have the pre-
cedence.

Nothing could be done without a reference to Eliubeth :
but her inclination was growing to Atrong for a removal,
that she wan happy to have it ﬁxed and expedited by a
tenant at hand ; and not a word to nupend decision wan
uttered by her.

Mr Shepherd wag completely empowered to act;
and no aooner had ruch an end been reached, than
Anne, who had been a man attentive listener to the
whole, left the room, to seek the comfort of cool air
for her ﬂulhed cheelu; and as she walked Ilong I
favourite grove, raid, with a gentle nigh, “ A few months
more, and be, perhapl, may be walking here.”

 

cbnpnr 3}}.

E war not Mr Wentworth, the former curate
of Mankford, however anypicionl a raneu
may be, but a Captain Frederick entwonh,

hi: brother, who being made commander in conuequence

 

7 #77 _——»7_ .q

PERSUASION. 25

of the action of St Domingo, and not immediately
employed, had come into Somersetshire, in the summer
of I806; and having no parent living, found a home
for half a year at Monkford. He was, at that time, a
remarkably ﬁne young man, with a great deal of intdli-
gence, spirit, and brilliancy; and Anne an extremely
rett girl, with entleness, modesty, taste, and feeling.
Elsi the sum of attraction, on either side, might have
been enough, for he had nothing to do, and she had
hardly anybody to love ; but the encounter of such
lavish recommendations could not fail. They were
gradually acquainted, and when acquainted, rapidly and
deeply in love. It would be diﬁicult to say which had
seen highest perfection in the other, or which had been
the happiest : she, in receiving his declarations and pro-
posals, or he in having them scc red.
A short period of exquisite felicity followed, and but
a short one; troubles soon arose. Sir Walter, on
being applied to, without actually withholding his con-
sent, or so 'ng it should never he, gave it all the
negative 0 great astonishment, great coldness, great
silence, and a professed resolution of doing nothing for
his daughter. He thought it a very degrading alliance;
and Lady Russell, though with more temper and par-
donable pride, received it as a most unfortunate one.
Anne Elliot, with all her claims of birth, beauty, and
mind, to throw herself away at nineteen; involve her-
self at nineteen in an engagement with a young man,
who had nothing but himself to recommend him, and no
hopes of attaining allluenCe, but in the chances of a most
uncertain profession, and no connexions to secure even
his farther rise in that profession, would he, indeed, is
throwing away, which she grieved to think of l Anne
Elliot, so young; known to so few, to be snatched off
by a stranger without alliance or fortune; or rather sunk
by him into a state of most wearing, anxious, youth-

26 PERSUASION.

killin dependence! Itlnuat not be, if by any Fair
inte rence of friendship, any mpreaeutationa from one
who had almoat a mother'a love and mother’- righu, it
would be prevented.

Captain Wntwonh had no fortune. He had been
lucky in hia profeuion; but apending freely what had
come freely, had lealiud nothlng. But he wan con-
ﬁdent that he ahould soon be rich: full of life and
nrdour, he knew that he ohould soon have a chip, and
noon be on a nation that would lead to everything he
wanted. He had nlwaya been lucky; he knew he
Ihould he no atill. Such conﬁdence, powerful in in own
warmth, and bewitching in the wit which often ex-
giened it, mun lnve been enough for Anne; but Lady

uuell law it very differently. Hil languine temper,
and fearleuneu of mind, opeutcd very differently on
her. She aw in it but an aggravation of the evil. It
only added a dangerous character to him-elf. He wan
brilliant, he waa headstrong. Lady Rue-ell had little
taste for wit, and of anything approaching to imprud-
lence a horror. She deprecated the connexion in every
ight.

Such opposition, as these feelings produced, wan more
than Anne could combat. Young and gentle M the
was, it might ct have been ponible to withstand her
ﬁlthcr'a ill-wil , though untoftened by one kind word or
look on the part of her titter ; but Lad Rune", whom
the had alwaya loved and relied on, co d no; with luch
ueadinen of opinion, and such tenderness of manner, be
continually advising her in vain. She wan persuaded to
believe the engagement a wrong thing : indiscreet, im-
proper, hardly capable of success, and not deserving it.
But it was not a merely telﬁsh caution, under which she
acted, in putting an end to it. Had the not imagined
hemlf couaulting hit good, even more than her own,
she could hardly have given him up. The belief of

 

PERSUASION. I 7

being pmdent and self-denying, principall for Li: ad-
vantage, was her chief consolation under e misery of
a parting, a ﬁnal rting; and every consolation was
required, for the harm encounter all the additional pain
of opinions, on his side, totall unconvinced and unbend-
ing, and of his feeling himself ill used by so forced a
relinquishan He had left the country in con-
sequence.

A few months had seen the beginning and the end
of their acquaintance; but not with a few months ended
Anne’s share of suffering from it. Her attachment
and regrets had, for I lon time, clouded every enjoy-
ment of youth, and an eary loss of bloom and spirits
had been their lasting effect.

More than seven yearl were gone since this little
history of sorrowful interest had reached its close; and
time had softened down much, perhaps nearly all of
peculiar attachment to him, but she had been too de-
pendant on time alone ; no aid had been given in change
of place (except in one visit to Bath soon after the
rupture), or in any novelty or enlargement of society.
No one had ever come within the Kellynch circle, who
could bear a comparison with Frederick Wentworth, as
he stood in her memory. No second attachment, the
only thoroughly natuml, happy, and sulﬁcient cure, at
her time of life, had been possible to the nice tone of
her mind, the fastidiousness of her taste, in the small
limits of the society around them. She had been soli-
cited, when about two-and-twenty, to change her
name by the young man who not long afterwards
found a more willing mind in her youn er sister: and
Lady Russell had lamented her re a for Charles
Musgrove was the eldest son of a man, whose landed
property and general importance were second in that
country, only to Sir Walter’s, and of good character and
appearance; and however Lady Russell might have

C

:8 PIRSDASION.

naked yet for something more while Anne was nineteen,
ehe would have rejoiced to nee her at twenty-two an

bly removed from the and hjulice
of her father'a houae, and aettlcd so permanently near
henelf. But in thin cue Anne had left nothing for
advice todo; and though Lady Ruuell, u sad-lied u
ever with her own discretion, never winhed the past un-
done, she began now to have the anxiety which borders
on hopele-nesl for Anne's being tempted, by some man
of talents and independence, to enter a lute for which
the held her to be peculiarly ﬁtted by her warm affection:
and domestic hahita.

They knew not each othen’a opiuion,'either in con-
stancy or it. change, on the one leading' ‘nt of Anne’s
conduct, for the cubjeet waa never allzlded to: but
Anne, at seven-and-twenty, thought very diﬂ'erently
from what Ihe had been made to think at nineteen.
She did not blame Lady Russell, she did not blame
herself for having been guided by her; but ahe felt that
were any young penon in aimilar circummncea to apply '
to her for counsel, they would never receive an of such
certain immediate wretchednesa, luch uncertain future
good. She war penuadcd, that under every diaadvantage
of dis: probation at home, and every anxiety unending
his proFeuion, all their probable fears, delays, and dilap-

intmcnu, ahe should yet have been a happier woman
In maintaining the engagement, than she had been in the
sacriﬁce of it; and thia, ahe fully believed, had the usual
share, had even more than :1 ml share of all ouch soli-
citudes and a use been theirs, without reference to
the actual re to of their case, which, as it happened.
would have bestowed earlier prosperity than could be
mannany calculated on. All his annguine expecta-
tiona, all his conﬁdence, had been justiﬁed. His geniua
and ardour had aeemed to foresee and to command his
prosperous path. He had, very noon after their engage-

 

PERSUASION. 2 9

ment ceased, got employ: and all that he had told her
would follow had taken place. He had distinguiahed
himself, and early gained the other Itep in rank, and
molt now, by succeuive captures, have madeahandsorne
fortune. She had only navy lists and newspapers for
her authority, but she could not doubt his being rich 3
and, in favour of his constancy, she had no reason to
believe him married. .

How el uent could Anne Elliot have beenl how
eloquent, at east, were her wishes on the side of early
- warm attachment, and a cheerful conﬁdence in ﬁrturity,
againn that over-anxious caution which seem to inlult
exertion and distrult Providence! She had been
forced into pmdence in her youth, she learned romance
u she grew older: the natural aequel of an unnatural
beginning.

With all these circumstancee, recollections, and feel-
ings, she could not hear that Captain Wentworth’a
sister was likely to live at Kell ch without a revival of
former pain; and many 3 am) l, and many a sigh, were
necesaary to dispel the agitation of the idea. She often
told herself it was foll , before she could harden her
nerves sufﬁciently to fee the continual discussion of the
Crofts and their business no evil. She was assisted,
however, by that perfect indilference and apparent un-
consciousness, among the only three of her own friends
in the secret of the past, which seemed almoa to deny
any recollection of it. She could do justice to the
su ‘ority of Lad Russell’s motives in this, over those
0 her father and lizabeth; she could honour all the
better feelings of her calmness; but the general air of
oblivion among them was highly important from what-
ever it sprung; and in the event of Admiral Croft's
really taking Kellynch Hall, she rejoiced anew over the
conviction which had always been most grateful to her,
of the put being known to thoae three only among her

3O PBRSUASION.

connexion, by whom no ryllable, ohe believed, would
ever he whilpered, and in the truat that among hia, the
brother only with whom he had been redding had
received any information of their than-lived engagement.
That brother had been long removed from the country,
and being a aenaihle man, and, moreover, a tingle man
at the time, the had a fond dependnnce on no human
creature's havin heard of it from him.

The inter, hf" Croft. had then been out of England,
accompanying her huaband on a foreign nation, and her
own litter, Mary, had been at Ichool while it all occurred 3
and never admitted by the pride of name, and the deli-
cacy of otherv, to the smallen knowledge of it after-
wards.

With there aupporta, the hoped that the acquaintance
between herlelf and the Crol'u, which, with Lady
Ruuell, Itill reddent in Kellynch, and Mary ﬁxed only
three miles all, must be anticipated, need not involve
any particular uwkwardncu.

chant" 17.

N the mominga inted for Admiral and Mn
Croft’t seeing {ellynch Hall, Anne found it
moat natuml to take her almost daily walk to

Lady Ruuell’a, and keep out of the way till all was over ;
when she found it moat natural to be sorry that she had
mined the opportunity of seeing them.

Thia meeting of the two artiea proved highly satis-
factory, and decided the who e business at once. Each
lady was previously well diapoaed for an agreement, and
aw nothing, therefore, but good mannerl in the other ;
and with regard to the gentlemen, there war ouch an
hearty good humour, such an open, trutting liberality on

PEISVASION. 3 I

the Admiral’s side, as could not but inﬂuence Sir
Walter, who had besides been ﬂattered into his ve
best and most polished behaviour by Mr Shepherds
assurances of his being known, by report, to the Admiral,
as a model of good bleeding.

The house, and grounds, and furniture, were approved,
the Crofts were a proved, terms, time, every thing, and
every body, was nght; and Mr Shepherd’s clerks were
set to work, without there havin been a single re-
limiuary difference to modify of al that " This in en-
ture showeth."

Sir Walter, without hesitation, declared the Admiral
to be the best-looking sailor he had ever met with, and
went so far as to ﬂy, that if his own man might have
had the arranging of his hair, he should not be ashamed
of being seen with him any where; and the Admin],
with sympathetic cordiality, observed to his wife as they
drove back through the park, “I thought we should
soon come to a deal, my dear, in spite of what they told
us at Taunton. The Baronet will never set the Thames
on ﬁre, but there seems no harm in him:" reciprocal
comaplimeuts which would have been esteemed about
e u .

the Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas;
and as Sir Walter proposed removing to Bath in the
course of the preceding month, there was no time to be
lost in making every dependant arrangement. »
Lad Russell, convinced that Anne would not be
allowed to he of any use, or any importance, in the
choice of the house which they were going to secure,
was very unwilling to have her hurried away so soon,
and wanted to make it possible for her to stay behind
till she. might convey her to Bath herself after Christ-
mas; but having engagements of her own which must
take her from Kell nch for several weeks, she was
unable to give the fuﬁ invitation she wished, and Anne,

32 ’IISUASION.

though dreading the pol-‘ble hear: of Squire in all
thewhiteghnofnnﬁhandgrievingto foregoall the
inﬂuencesosweetnnd so sadoftbe annurnml month-
in the country, did not think that, everything oonidered,
shewilhedmremain. Itmmldbemnnrighyand
mwiqandtbereforemun involve lean IIIeringto
go with the others.

Something occurred, however, to give her a diﬂ'erent
duty. Mary, often a little unwell, and alwnys drinking
a great deal of her own complaints, and always in the
habit of claiming Anne when anything wan the matter,
was indilpoeed; and foreseeing that she should not have
a day’l health all the autumn, entreated, or rather re-
quired her, for it wan hardly entrenty, to come to
Uppercrou Cottage, sud bear her compnny u long II
Ihe thould want her, instead of gain to Bath.

“I cannot possibly do without one,” wan Mary’s
meaning; and Elizabeth’l reply was, “ Then I am
slam Anne had better stay, for nobody will want her in

a H

To be claimed as a good, though in an improper
Ityle, in at lent better than being rejected an no good at
all ; and Anne, glad to be thought of norm: use, glad to
have anything marked out II a duty, and certainly not
sorry to have the teen: of it in the country, and her own
dear country, readin a reed to any.

This invitation of nry't removed all Lady Russell's
difﬁculties, and it was consequently noon settled that
Anne should not go to Bath till Lady Russell took her,
and that all the intervening time should be divided
between U percrose Cottage and Kcllynch Lodge.

So far a lwat perfectly right; but Lady Russell was
almost Itartled by the wrong of am: part of the Kcllynch
Hall plan, when it burst on her, which war, Mrs Clay’-
being engaged to go to Bath with Sir Walter and Eliza-
beth, as a most important and valuable alaittant to the

PERSUASION. 33

latter in all the busineel before her. Lady Russell was
extremely sorry that such a mealure should have been
resorted to at all, wondered, grieved, and feared ; and
the affront it contained to Anne, in Mrs Clay’s being of
so much use, while Anne could he of none, was I very
sore aggravation.

Anne herself was become hardened to such affronu,
but she felt the impnldence of the arrangement nite at
keenly u Lady Russell. With a great deal 0 quiet
obeervation, and a knowledge, which she often wished
lens, of her father's character, she was sensible that
results the most serious to his family from the intimacy
were more than possible. She did not imagine that her
father had at present an idea of the kind. Mn Clay
had freckles, and a projecting tooth, and s clumsy wrist,
which he was continually making severe remarks u n
in her absence; but she was young, and certainly to-
gether well-lonking, and possessed, in an acute mind and
a-idnous pleasing manners, inﬁnitely more dangerous at-
tractions than any merelypersonal might have been. Anne
was so impressed by the degree of their danger, that she
could not excuse herself from trying to make it perc t-
ible to her sister. She had little hope of success, t
Elizabeth, who in the event of such a reverse would be
so much more to be pitied than herself, should never,
she thought, haw reason to reproach her for giving no
warning.

She spoke, and seemed only to oﬂend. Elizabeth
could not conceive how such an absurd suspicion should
occur to her, and indignantly answered for each party's
perfectly knowing their situation.

“ Mrs Clay," said she, warmly, " never forget: who
she in; and an I am rather better acquainted with her
sentiments than you can be, I can assure you, that upon
the of marriage they are particularly nice, and that
she reprobate: all inequality of condition and rank more

34 PBRS'UASI ON.

mneg than more people. And an to my father. 1
really ahould not have thought that he who hat kept
hiouelf Iin le I) long for our lakes need he Inspected
now. If ll Clay were a very beautiful woman, I
grant you it might be wrong to have her to much with
me; not that anytlu'ng in the world, I am mre, would
induce my father to make a degrading match, but he
might be rendered unhappy. But r Mn Cla , who
with all her rneriu, can never haw n reckon toler-
ath pretty, I really drink poor Mu Clay may be my-
ing here in perfect Iafety. One would imagine ou had
never hard my father epeak of her perional mi ortunea,
though I know you mun ﬁfty times. That tooth of
here and thoae frecklee. Frecklel do not dirguet me
to very much II they do him. I have known a face
not materially disﬁgured by a few, but he ahominatee
them. You mutt have heard him notice Mn Clay’-
freckles."

“ There it hardly any pereonal defect," replied Anne,
" which an agreeable manner might not gradually recon-
cile one lo."

“I think very diﬁ'erently," amwered Elizabeth,
nhortly; “an agreeable manner mayaet oﬁ' handlome
featuree, but can never alter plain ones. However, at
any rate, at I have a great deal more at atake on thin
point than anybody else can have, I think it rather un-
neceuary in you to he advising me."

Anne had done; glad that it was over, and not
abeolutely hopeleu of doing good. Elizabeth, though
resenting the mpicion, might yet be made observant by
n.

The lat: ofﬁce of the four curringe-horaea was to draw
Sir Walter, Min Elliot, and Mr: Clay to Bath. The
party drove off in very good Ipirita; Sir Walter pre-
pared with condescending how for all the aﬂlieted
tenantry and cottngerl who might have had a hint to

rnnsusswu. 35

show themselves, and Anne walked up at the same time
in a sort of desolate tranquillity to the Lodge, where she
was to spend the ﬁrst week.

Her friend was not in better spirits than herself.
Lady Runell felt this break-up of the family exceed-
ingly. Their respectability was as dear to her as her
own, and a daily intercourse had become recious by
habit. It was painful to look upon their deserted
grounds, and still worse to anticipate the new hands they
were to fall into ; and to escape the solitariness and the
melancholy of so altered svillage, and be out of the way
when Admin] and Mrs Croft first arrived, she had
determined to make her own absence from home begin
when she must give up Anne. According! their
mnoval was made together, and Anne was set own at
Uppercross Cottage, in the ﬁrst stage of Lady Russell’s
journey.

Uppercross was a moderate-sized village, which a
few years back had been completely in the old English
style, containing only two houses superior in appearance
to those of the yoemcn and labourers; the mansion of
the squire, with its high walls, great gates, and old trees,
substantial and unmodemiled, and the compact, tight
parsonage, enclosed in its own neat garden, with a vine
and a par-tree trained round its easements; but upon
the marriage of the young ’squire, it had received the
improvement of a farm-house, elevated into a cottage,
for his residence, and Uppercross Cottage, with its
viranda, French windows, and other prettinesses, was
quite as likely to catch the tnsveller’s eye as the more
consistent and considerable nspect and premises of the
Great House, about a quarter of a mile farther on.

Here Anne had often been stayin . She knew the
ways of Uppercrosr as well as those 0 Kellynch. The
two families were so continually meeting, so much in the
habit of mnning in and out of each other’s house at all

36 PBRSUASION.

hour-,tlutitwanatberantrprieeto her to ﬁndMary
alone; but being alone, her bdng unwell and out of
Ipirita wu almost a nutter of oourle. Though better
endowed than the elder liner, Mary had not Anne'l
underunding nor temper. While well, and happy,
and Inoperly attended to, the had great good humour
and excellent apiritu but any indi tition tunlt her
completely. She had no reaourcea or Iolitude; and,
inheriting a contiderable there of the Elliot aelf-import-
ance, \vu very prone to add to eve other diatreu that
offancying herqu neglected and il -used. In penon,
the wt. inferior to both linen, and had, even in her
bloom, only reached the dignity of being “a ﬁne girl."
She wan now lying on the faded tofu of the pretty little
drawing-room. the once elegant furniture of which had
been gradually growing thahby under the inﬂuence of
four tum'merl and two children; and, on Anne'n ap-
pearing, greeted her with—

“ So you are come at hm! I began to think I should
never tee you. I am to ill I can hardly tpeak. Ihave
not teen a creature the whole morning! "

“I am tarry to ﬁnd you unwell,” replied Anne.
“You sent me such a good account of yourself on
Thursday."

“Yea, I made the beat of it; I Ilwayt do: but I
was very far from well at the time; and I do not think
I ever was to ill in my life as I have been all this
morning: very unﬁt to he left alone, I am sure. Su
pose I were to be seized of a eudden in tome dread ul
way, and not able to ring the bell I So Lady Russell
would not get out. I do not think the ha: been in thin
house three timea thil oumrner.”

Anne said what was proper, and enquired after her
huthand. “Oh! Charles ll out shooting. I have not
seen him since even o'clock. He would go, though I
told him how ill I wan. He said he should not stay

 

, _ ﬁ--‘I

PERSUASION. 3 7

out long; but he has never come back, and now it is
almost one. Iassure you! have not seen a soul this
whole lung morning.”

" You have had your little boys with you i ”

“ Yes, as long as I could bear their noise; but they
are so unmanageable that they do me more harm than
good. Little Charles does not mind a word I lay, and
Walter is growing quite as bad."

" Well, you will soon be better now,” replied Anne,
cheerfully. “You know I always cure you when I
come. How are your neighbours at the Great House 2 "

"I can give you no account of them. I have not
seen one of them to-day, except Mr Musgrove, who
just stopped and spoke through the window, but without
getting off his horse; and though I told him how ill I
was, not one of them have been near me. It did not
happen to suit the Miss Musgrovel, I suppose, and they
neveryput themselves out of their way.”

“ ou will see them yet, perhaps, before the morning
is gone. It is early.’ ’

“I never want them, I assure you. The talk and
laugh a great deal too much {or me. Oh! Knne, I am
so very unwell! It was quite unkind of you not to
come on Thursday.”

" My dear Mary, recollect what a comfortable account
you sent me of yourself! You wrote in the cheerfulest
manner, and aid you were perfectly well, and in no
hurry for me; and that being the case, you must be
aware that my wish would be to remain with Lady
Russell to the last: and besides what I felt on her
acaount, l have really been so busy, have had so much
to do, that I could not very conveniently have left
Kell nch sooner."

“l3ear me! what can you possibly have to do?"

“A great many things, I assure you. More than I
can recollect in a moment; but I can tell you some. I

38 nnsuuron.

havebeen nukinga duplicate of the catalogue of my
father‘a book and I have been Ieveral timer
in the garden with Mackenzie, trying to underutand, and
make him undemand, which of Elizabeth’l plantl are
for Lady Rue-ell. I have had all my own little con<
eerna to arrange, books and music to divide, and all my
trunlu to repack, from not having undentood in time
what wnl intended as to the waggom : and one thing I
have had to do, Mary, of a more trying nature: going
to almoat every houae in the parish, an a non of take-
leave._ I was told that they wished it; but all these
thing: took up a great deal of time.”

“ Oh, well! " and after a moment'l pauac, “ but you
have never aaked me one word about our dinner at the
Poolee yelteiday."

“ Did you go, then? I have made no enquiries, be-
cauee I concluded you must have been obliged to give
up the party."

" Oh yea! I went. I was very well yesterday;
nothing at all the matter with me till this morning. It
would have been Itrange if I had not gone."

“ I am very glad you were well enough, and I hope
you had a pleuant party."

“Nothing remarkable. One always known before-
hand what the dinner will be, and who will be there;
nnd it it IO very uncomfortable not having a carriage of
one'e own. Mr and Mn Musgrove took me, and we
were In crowded! They are both so very large, and
take up no much room; and Mr Mungrove always lite
forward. So there qu crowded into the back seat
with Henrietta and Louisa; and I think it very likely
that my illneas today may be owing to it.”

A little farther perseverance in patience and forced
cheerfulneu on Annc’t aide Produced nearly a cure on
Mary’l. She could noon an upright on the sofa, and
began to hope the might be able to leave it by dinner-

," —— 7 _ ‘_‘4

nexsunsron. 39

time. Then, forgetting to drink of it, the was at the
other end of the room, beautifying a nosega ; then she
ate her cold meat; and then she was we enough to
propose I little walk.

“ Where shall we go?” said she, when they were
ready. “ I suppose you will not like to call at the
Great House before they have been to see you ? ”

“ I have not the smallest objection on that account,”
replied Anne. “1 should never think of standing on
such ceremony with people I know so well as Mn and
the Miss Musgroves. ’ '

“Ohl but they ought to call upon you as soon as
possible. They ought to feel what in due to you as my
sister. However, we may as well go and sit with them
a little while, and when we have got that over, we can
enjoy our walk.”

Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse
highly imprudent; but she had ceased to endeavour to
check it, from believing that, though there were on each
side continual subjects of offence, neither family could
now do without it. To the Great House accordingly
they went, to sit the full half hour in the old-fanhioned
square parlour, with a small carpet and shining ﬂoor, to
which the present daughters of the house were gradually
giving the proper sir of confusion by a grand piano-forte
and a harp, ﬂower-stands, and little tables laced in
every direction. 0h! could the originals o the por-
traits against the wainscot, could the gentlemen in
brown velvet and the ladies in blue satin have seen what
was going on, have been conscious of such an overthrow
of all order and neatness! The portraits themselves
seemed to be staring in astonishment.

The Musgroves, like their houses, were in a state of
alteration, perhaps of improvement. The father and
mother were in the old English style, and the young
people in the new. Mr and Mrs Musgrove were a

4

40 PERSUASION .

very good eort of ple; friendly and holpitahle, not
much educated, an not at all elegant. Their children
had more modern mind! and manners. There wan a
numeroul family; but the only two grown up, exe t-
ing Charlea, were Henrietta and Louiu, young 'ea
of nineteen and twenty, who had brought from a school
at Exeter all the urual stock of accomplirhmenta, nnd
were now, like thousands of other young ladier, living
to be faahinnahle, happy, and merry. Their dreu had
every advantage, their faces were rather pretty, their
spirit! extremely good, their manners unembamued and
pleasant; they were of consequence at home, and
favourites abroad. Anne alwayl contemplated them an
tome of the hippie-t creatum of her acquaintance: hut
etill, raved II we all are, by tome comfortable feeling of
ruperiority from withing for the pouibility of exchange,
the would not have given up her own more elegant and
cultivated mind for all their enjoymenu; and envied
them nothing but that Ieemingly perfect good under-
aunding and agreement together, that good-humoured
mutual nﬁ‘ection, of which she had known to little her-
Ielf with either of her sitters.

They were received with rest cordinlit . Nothing
neemed amiu on the side 0 the Great one family,
which was generally, as Anne very well knew, the
lean to blame. 'lhe half hour was chatted away
plemntly enough; and the was not at all surprised,
It the end of it, to have their walking party joined
by both the Min Mutgroveu, at Mary’l particular
invitation.

reasonsrou. 4 r

Chapter 17].

NNE had not wanted this visit to Up rcroas
to learn that a removal from one set 0 people
to another, though at a distance of only three

miles, will often include a total change of conversation,
opinion, and idea. She had never been staying there
before, without being struck by it, or without wiahing
that otherlElliots could have her udvantage in neejng
how unknown, or unconsidered there. were the aﬁ'aira
which at Kellynch Hall were tmted as of ouch eneral
publicity and pervading interest; yet, with al this
experience, she believed she must now submit to feel
that another lesson, in the an of knowing our own
nothiugnesa beyond our own circle, was become one“:
for her; for certainly, comin a she did, with a heart
full of the subject which had en completely occu ying
both houses in Kellynch for many weeks, she ex-
pected rather more curiosity and sympathy than Ihe
ound in the Ieparntc, but very similar [remarka of Mr
and Mrs Muagrove: “ So, Min Anne, Sir We ter and
your sister are gone; and what rt of Bath do you
think they will settle in?" .au this, without much
waiting for an answer; or in the young ladies addition
of, “I hope we shall be in Bath in the winter; but
remember, papa, if we do go, we must be in a good
situation: none of your Queen 8 uares for us! ” or in
the anxious supplement from Ida”, of—“ Upon my
word, I ahall be prett well off, when you are all gone
away to be happy at ath I "

She could only resolve to avoid such selfdelusiou in
future, and think with heightened gratitude of the extra-
ordinary hleuing of having one such tnrly sympathiring
friend as Lady Ruuell.

_ The Mr Musgmves had their own game In guard

4a PIRSUASION.

and to denmy, their own hornet, doga. and newepapen
to engage them, and the females were fully occupied in
all the other common luhjecu of houtekeeping. neigh-
bourl, dreu, dancing and munic. She acknowledged it
to he very fitting, that every little wcial commonwealth
thould dictate in own matter- of diaooune ; and hoped,
ere long, to become a not unworth member of the one
the war now tramplanted into. ith the prospect of
rpending at lean two month: at Uppercrou, it won
highly incumbent on her to clothe her ima 'nation, her
memory, and all her ideal in II much of ppercrou at
pouihle.

She had no dread of these two moudu. Mary wa-
not It) repulsive and uneimrly u Elizabeth, nor [0
imcceleible to all inﬂuence of hers; neither wan there
anything among the other com nent pom of the
cottage inimical to comfort. he wan alwayl on
friendly term- with her brother-in-law; and in the
children, who loved her nearly to well, and respected
her a great deal more than their mother, the had an
object of interelt, amusement, and wholeoome exertion.

Charles Mangrove was civil and agreeable; in tenee
and temper he was undoubtedly euperior to llll wife,
but not of powers, or comer-nation, or grace to malte the
part, at they were connected together, at all a dangerou-
contemplation; though, at the name time, Anne could
believe, with Lady Russell, that a more equal match
might have greatly improved him; and that a woman of
real undentanding might have given more consequence
to hit character, and more usefulness, rationality, and
elegance to hit habiu and pursuits. A: it was, he did
nothing with much zeal, but apart; and his time war
otherwise triﬂed away, without beneﬁt from booka or
anything elle. He had very good spirita, which never
seemed much affected by hi- wifc’l occaaional lowneu,
bore with her unrealonablenesa tometimea to Anne’s

 

PERSUASION. 43

admiration, and upon the whole, though there was very
often a little disagreement (in which she had sometimes
more share than she wished, being appealed to by both
parties), they might pass for a happy couple. They
were a ways perfectly agreed in the want of more money,
and a strong inclination for a handsome present from
his father; but here, as on most to 'cs, he had the
euperiority, for while Mary thought It a great shame
that such I present was not made, he always contended
for his father's having many other uses for -his money,
and a right to spend it Is he liked.

As to the management of their children, his theory
was much better than his wife’s, and his practice not so
bad. “ I could manage them very well, if it were not
for Mary’s interference," was what Anne often heard
him say, and had a good deal of faith in; but when
listening in turn to Mary’s reproach of, " Charles ill
the children so that I cannot get them into any 0 er,”
she never had the smallest temptation to say, “ Very
true."

One of the least agreeable circumstances of her resi-
dence there was her bein treated with too much confi-
dence by all pam'es, and 'ng too much in the secret of
the complaints of each house. Known to have some
inﬂuence with her sister, she was continually requested,
or at least receiving hints to exert it, biond what was

neticshle. “ I wish you could persua e Mary not to
always faneying herself ill,” was Charles’s language;
and, in an unhappy mood, thus spoke Mary: "I do
believe if Charles were to see me dying, he would not
think there was anything the matter With me. I am
sure, Anne, if you would, you might persuade him that
l really am very ill—a great deal worse than I ever
own."

Mary's declaration was, “ I hate sending the children

to the Great House, though their grandmamma is
n

4 4 PERSUASION.

alwaye wanting to lee them, for the humour: and in-
dulge: them to Inch a degree, and givel them :0 much
truh and sweet thinge, that the are cure to come back
lick and cruel for the rent 0! the day." And Mn
Musgrove took the ﬂat opportunity of being alone with
Anne, to tay, “ Oh I Mitt Anne, I cannot help with-
ing Mn Charla had a little of your method with thooe
children. They are quite different craturea with you!
But to be lure, in general, they are no spoilt! It il a
pity you cannot put your litter in the way of managing
them. They are u ﬁne healthy children at ever were
seen, poor little dearal without partinlity, but Mn
Charles know no more how they Ihould be treated—l
Blue me ! how troublesome they are tometimel. I
nature you, Mina Anne, it prevcnu my wiahing to tee
them at our houae to often at I otherwise Ihould. I
believe Mn Charles ll not quite pleased with my not
inviting them oftener; but you know it l| very bad to
have children with one that one is obliged to be check-
ing every moment; ‘don’t do thit,’ and ‘ don’t do
that; ’ or that one can only keep in tolerable order by
more cake than in good for them.” 1
She had this communication, moreover, from Mary.
“ Mrs Musgrove think: all her servants to eteady, that
it would be high treason to call it in question; but I am
lure, without exaggeration, that her upper house-maid
and laundry-maid, instead of being in their business, are
gadding about the village all day long. I meet them
wherever I go; and I declare I never go twice into my
nursery without aeeing something of them. If Jemima
were not the trustien, steadieet creature in the world, it
would be enough to spoil her; for the telll me
are alwaya tempting her to take a walk with them. ’
And on Mn Mutgrove't aide it was, “ I make a rule of
never interfering in any of my daughter-in-law’l con-
.cems, for I know it would not do; but I shall tell you,

 

PIRSUASION. ' 4 5

Miss Anne, because you may be able to set things to
righta, that I have no very good opinion of Mrs
Charles't nursery-maid: I hear strange ttoriet of her;
the it always upon the gad ; and from my own know-
ledge, I can declare, the it such a ﬁne-dressing lady,
that the is enough to ruin any servants the comet near.
Mrs Charles quite sweart by her, I know; but I just
've you this hint, that you may be upon the watch;
acute, if you see anything amiss, you need not be
afraid of mentioning it.”

Again, it was Mary’s complaint that Mrs Mutgrove
was very apt not to give her the precedence that was
her due, when they dined at the Great Home with
other families; and the did not tee any reason why the
was to be contidered to much at home a: to late her
place. And one day when Anne was walking with
only the Mist Musgrovet, one of them after talking of
rank, people of rank, and jealousy of rank, said, “I
have no temple of observing to you, how nonsensical
some persons are about their place, because all the world
knows how easy and indilTerent you are about it; but
I wish anybody would give Mary a hint that it would
be a great deal better if the were not so very tenacious,
especially if the would not be alwa t putting herself
forward to take place of mamma. Nlbbody doubts her
right to have precedence of mamma, but it would be
more becoming in her not to be alwayt intitting on it.
It is not that mammn caret about it the least in the
world, but I know it is taken notice of by many per—
sons.”

How was Anne to tet all these matters to rights?
She could do little more than listen patiently, soften
every grievance, and excuse each to the other; give
them all hints of the forbearance necessary between
such near neighbours, and make those hints broadest
which were meant for her sister’s beneﬁt.

46 msuaslon.

In all other relpeets, her visit began and proceeded
very well. Her own upiritn improved by change of
pllce and subject, by being removed three miles from
Kellynch; Mary's ailment: lestened by having I con-
stant com nion, and their daily intercourse with the
other famil; since there was neither uperior affection,
conﬁdence nor employment in the cottage to be inter-
rupted by it, was rather an advantage. It was certainly
carried nearly an far at pouible, for they met every
morning, and hardly ever spent an evening aeunder;
but she believed they thnud not have done to well
without the night of Mr and Mn Muagrove'l respect-
able form. in the usual placea, or without the talking,
lau hing, and tinging of their daughters.

ghe played a great deal better than either of the
Mist Musgroves, but having no voice, no knowledge of
the harp, and no fond parenu, to sit by and fancy
themselves delighted, her performance was little thought
of, only out of civility, or to refresh the others, as she
was well aware. She knew that when she played the
Wis giving pleasure only to herself; but this was no
new sention. Excepting one short period of her life,
she had never, since the age of fourteen, never since the
lost of her dear mother, known the happiness of being
listened to, or encouraged by any just appreciation or
real taste. In music she had been always used to feel
alone in the world; and Mr and Mrs Musgrnve’s fond

rtiality for their own daughters’ performance, and total
indiﬂ'erence to any other person’a, gave her much more
pleasure for their taket, than mortiﬁcation for her own.
The any at the Great House was sometimes in-
creased by other company. The neighbourhood wat
not large, but the Muagroves were visited by everybody,
and had more dinner-parties, and more callert, more
vilitors b invitation and by chance, than any other
family. ’vl‘hey were more completely popular.

 

msuuron; 47

Thegirlawerewild for dancing; and the evening:
ended, occasionally, in a unpremeditated little hall.
There van a family of eouainl within a walk of U r-
crou, in lean aﬂluent circumatancea, who depend on
the Muagmvea for their plea-urea: they would come
at any time, or help us play at anything, or dance any-
where; and Anne, very much preferring the ofﬁce of
munician to a more active poet, played country dance:
to them by the hour together; a kindneu which alw-
recommended her musical powen to the notice of r
and Mn Muegrove more than anything else, and often
drew thi- complimmt—“Well done, Mi- Anne!
ve well done, indeed! Lord blue me! how thole
li e linger: of your: ﬂy aboutl ”

So panned the lint three weeka. Michaelmaa came;
and now Anne’l heart mun he in Kellynch again. A
beloved home made over to others; all the precioua
room: and fumiture, groves and prospects, beginning to
own other eyee and other limbo! She could not think
of much clue on the 29th of September; and the had
thi- lympathetic touch in the evening from Mary, who,
on having occaaion to note down the day of the month,
exclaimed, “Dar me, is not thin the day the Croft-
were to come to Kellynch? I am glad I did not think
of it before. How low it make: rne ! ”

The Croft: took youeeeion with tnie naval alertness,
and were to be vinted. Mary deplored the necessity
for herlelf. “ Nobody knew how much the should
suffer. She Ihould put it of as long an ahe could; ”
but was not easy till the had talked Charles into driving
her over on an early day, and via in a very animated,
comfortable Itate of im 'nary agitation when the came
back. Anne had very uncerer re‘oiced in there being
no mean of her going. She with , however, to lee the
Crofts, Ilild was glad to be within when the vilit wu
returned. They came: the maater of the house wan

48 PERSIJASION.

not at home, but the two listen were together; and u
it chanced that Mrs Croft fell to the share of Anne,
while the Admiral t by Mary, and made himself very
agreeable by his good-humonred notice of her little be I,
she was well able to watch for a likeness, and if it fai ed
her in the features, to catch it in the voice, min the
turn of sentiment and expression.

Mrs Crofg though neither tall nor fat, had a square-
nest, uprightnen, and vigour of form, which gave im-
portance to her person. She had bright dark eyes, good
teeth, and altogether an agreeable face ; though her
reddened and wather-beaten complexion, the conse-
quence of her having been almoc as much at sea as her
husband, made her seem to have lived some yean longer
in the world than her real eight-and-thirty. Her
manners were open, easy. and decided, like one who
had no distrust of herself, and no doubts of what to do;
without any approach to coarseness, however, or any
wnnt of good humour. Anne gave her credit, indeed,
for feelings of great consideration towards herself, in all
that related to Kellynch, and it pleased her : etpecially,
as she had satisﬁed herself in the very ﬁrst half minute,
in the instant even of introduction, that there was not
the smallest symptom of any knowledge or suspicion on
Mrs Croft’s side to give a bias of any son. She was
quite easy on that head, and consequently full of streth
and coumge, till for a moment electriﬁed by Mrs Cro t's
suddenly saying—

“It was you, and not your sister, I ﬁnd, that my
brother had the pleasure of being acquainted with, when
he was in this country.”

Anne hoped she had outlived the age of blushing;
but the age of emotion she certainly had not.

“ Per-ha s you may not have heard that he is
married 3 ' added Mrs Croft.

She could now :xnswu- :15 nllL‘ ought; and was happy

PERSUASION. 49

to feel, when Mn Croft's next words explained it to
be Mr Wentworth of whom, she spoke, that she had
said nothing which might not do for either brother.
She immediately felt how reasonable it was, that Mrs
Croft should be thinking and speaking of Edward, and
not of Frederick; and with shame at her own forget-
fulness, applied herself to the knowledge of their former
nei hbour‘ I present state with proper interest.

he rel. was all tranquillity; till, just as they were
moving, she heard the Admiral say to Mary——

“We are expecting a brother of Mrs Croft’s here
soon ; I dare say you know him by name?"

He was cut short by the eager attacks of the little
boys, clinging to him like an old friend, and declaring
he should not go; and being too much engrossed by
proposals of carrying them away in his coat pocket, km,
to have another moment for ﬁnishing or reeollecting
what he had begun, Anne wns left to persuade herself,
as well as she could, that the same brother must still be
in question. She could not, however, reach such a
degree of certainty as not to be anxious to hear whether
anything had been said on the subject at the other house,
where the Crofts had previously been calling.

The folks of Gmt House were to spend the evening
of this day at the Cottage; and it being now too late
in the year for such visits to be made on foot, the coach
was brefinning to be listened for, when the youngest
Miss urgrove walked in. That she was coming to
apologize, and that they should have to spend the even-
ing by themselves, was the ﬁrst black idea; and Ma
was quite ready to be aﬂ'ronttd, when Louisa made a 1
right by saying, that she only came on foot, to leave
more room for the harp, which was bringing in the
carriage.

“ ad I will tell you our reason,” she added, “and
all about in I am come on to give you notice, that

so PERSUASION.

papa and mamma are out of apirita thin evening, ' y
mamma; the ll thinkin to much of poor Richard!
And we agreed it w dbebetttnhavetheharp, for
it aeema to amuae her more than the iano-forte. I
will tell you why ahe ia out of apirita. I hen the Crofu
called thia morning (they called here afterwards, did
not they 2 , they happened to any that her brother,
Cgpuin entworth, ia juat returned to England, or paid
0 , or something, and in taming to tee them almost
directly; and moat unluckin it came into mamma’l
head, when they were gone, that Wentworth, nr nome-
thing very like it, was the name of poor Richard'a
captain, at one time; I do not know when or where, -
but a great while before he died, r fellow! And
upon looking over hit letters and things, the found it waa
no, and la perfectly Mire that thin mlut be the very man,
and her head ll quite full of it, and of poor Richard 1
So we must all be an merry II we can, that the may not
be dwelling upon auch gloomy thinga.”

The real circummncu of this pathetic piece of family
history were, that the Mulgrovel had had the ill fortune
of a very troublesome, hopeleu ton, and the good for-
tune to lose him before he reached hia twentieth year;
that he had been lent to sea became he wan Itupid and
nnmanageable on shore; that he had been very little
cared for at any time by his family, though quite as much
a he deserved; aeldom hard of, and tearcel at all re-
gretted, when the intelligence of his death a road had
worked in way to Uppercrou, two years before.

He had, in fact, though hit cistern were now doing
all they could for him, by calling him “ poor Richard,"
been nothing better than a thick-headed, unfeeling, un-
proﬁtable Dick Mulgrove, who had never done anything
to entitle himqu to more than the abbreviation of hie
name, living or dead.

He had been several yearn at sea, and had, in the

PERSUAS‘ION. 5 l

conne of thote rernovale to which all midahipmen are
liable, and elpeciall llICh midnhipmen at every captain
wilhea to get rid o , been nix months on board Captain
Frederick Wentwonh'l frigate, the Laconia; and from
the Laconia he had, under the inﬂuence of hi. captain,
written the only two letter. which hit father and mother
had ever received from him during the whole of his
abeence ; that it to lay, the only two disinterested letterl :
all the mt had been mere a licatione for money.

In ch letter he had epoEEn well of hie cape-in ; but
yet. to little were they in the habit of attending to Inch
matte", I) unobeervant and incurioua were they at to
the name: of men or ship, that it had made scarcely
any impreuion at the time; and that Mn Mutgrove
should have been euddenly Itruck, thit very day, with a
recollection of the name of Wentworth, an connected
with her son, Ieerned one of those extraordinary harm
of mind which do aometimel occur.

She had gone to her letters, and found it all as the
supposed; and the re-perunal of these lettere, after so
long an interval, her poor eon gone for ever, and all the
Itrength of hit faults forgotten, had affected her lpiritu
exceedingly, and thrown her into greater grief for him
than the had known on ﬂat hearing of hi- death. Mr
Muegrove wan, in a lesser degree, affected likewile;
and when they reached the cottage, they were evidently
in want, ﬁret, of being lietened to anew on thin subject,
and afterwards, of all the relief which cheerful compan-
ions could give.

To hear them talking so much of Captain Went-
worth, repeating hie name ‘0 often, puzzling over pant
can, and at laet ascertaining that it magi}, that it pro-

bly would, turn out to be the very name Captain
Wentworth whom they rccoilected meeting, once or
twice, afler their coming back from Clifton—a very ﬁne
young man—but they could not say whether it was

5: rusmslon.

moreightyanagqvanne'mo‘uidm
Anne’lm Shefound,hovever,thntitvaone
mwhichdnemuznrehavelf. Sunbeam!!wa
exyedcdintlncoumy,diemmchhenelfmbe
Andnmnnlydiditnﬁyear
thathevuexpected.mdtpeedily,buttheMugmva,
inthcirvamgntiudeforthekindnmheludiaevn
poor Dick, and high for hi: character,
umpedaitvabypoor ick’lhavingbeendx
nionthlnnderhilcare,andmentiu|inghiminmng,
though notperfectly vdl-qaelt pnile, u “a ﬁne dading
felovl, only two about the nehoolmaner,”
were button introducing tbcmnlveyandaeehing hi!
act‘mintanceamnudryoouldhearofhinminl.

I‘he regulation of doing-u helpcdtofotmthe coin-
fartoftheirevening.

Cblpur 11]].

VERY few dayt more, and' Captain Wentworth
wa- known to be at Kellynch, and Mr Mus-
grove had called on him, and come back warm

in bi. prziae, and he W engaged with the Croft: to
dine at Uppercmu by the end of another wcck. It had
been a great diuppointrnent to Mr Mulgrovc to ﬁnd that
no earlier day could be ﬁxed, to impatient was he to thew
hil gmitude, by neing Ca lain Wentwonh under his
own roof, and welcoming lum to all that wan “ranges:
and best in his cellars. But a week mun pan ; only a
week, in Anne’l reckoning, and then, the tuppoux‘l,
they mun meet; and worn the began to wiIh that nine
could feel Iecure even for a week.

Captain Wentvlonh made a ver early return to Mr
Mulgrove’l civility, and the van all but calling there in

mtnsrrasron. 53

the same half’hour. She and Mary were actually
setting forward for the Great House, where. as Ihe
afterwards lamt, they must inevitably have found him,
when they were stopped by the eldest boy's being at
that moment brought home in con uence of a bid
fall. The child’s situation put the visit entirely nib;
but she could not hear of her escape with indiﬂ'erence,
even in the midst of the serious anxiety which they
afterwards felt on his account '

His collar-bone was found to be dialocated, and such
injury [received] in the back, as mused the most
alarming ideas. It was In afternoon of dim and
Anne had everything to do at once ; the apothecary to
send for, the father to have pursued and informed, the
mother to support and keep from hysteria, the servants
to control, the youngest child to banish, and the poor
suffering one to attend and soothe; besides sending. as
soon as she recollected it, proper notice to the other
house, which brought her an accession rather of fright-
ened enquiring companions, than of very useful assistants.

Her brother's return was the ﬁrst comfort; he could
take best care of his wife ; and the second blessing was
the arrival of the apothecary. Till he came and had
examined the child, their apprehensions were the worse
for being vague ; they suspected great injury, but knew
not where ; but now the collapbone was soon replaced,
and though Mr Robinson felt and felt, and rubbed, and
looked grave, and spoke low words both to the father
and the aunt, still they were all to hope the best. and to
be able to rt and eat their dinner in tolerable ease of
mind; a then it was, just before they parted, that the
two young aunts were able so far to digress from their
n lrew’s state, as to give the information of Captain

entworth’s visit; staying five minutes behind their
father and mother, to endeavour to express how per-
feet];r delighted they were with him, how much hand-

54 pmuAsIon.

nomenhowinlinitelymore agreeable they thought him'
than any among their male acquaintance, who
had been at all a favourite before. How glad they had
been to hear papa invite him to my dinner, how lorry
when he said it waa quite out of hit power, and how
glad again when he had promiaed to reply to papa and
mamma'a farther pruning invitationa to come and dine
with them on the marrow—actually on the monow;
and he had promined it in no pleaaant a manner, an if he
felt all the motive of their attention 'uIt aa he ought.
And in Ihort, he had looked and mid everything with
ouch exquiaite grace, that they could allure them all, their
headawere both tnrnedbyhimyandoﬂ'theyran,
quite II full of glee an of love, and a rentIy more full
of Captain Wentworth than of little harlet.

The me alory and the name rapturel were repeated,
when the two girl. came with their hither, through the

loom of the evening, to make enquiriea; and Mr

«grove, no longer under the ﬁrtt nnearineu about hit
heir, could add his continuation and praise, and hope
there would he now no occaeion for putting Captain
Wentworth of, and only be sorry to think that the
cottage party, probably, would not like to leave the little
boy, to give him the meetin . “ Oh! no; at to leav-
ing the little boy,” both ther and mother were in
much too strong and recent alarm to bear the thought;
and Anne, in the joy of the etcape, could not help
adding her warm pmtenaﬁona to thein.

Charles Mutgrove, indeed, afterwards, ahewed more
of inclination : “ the child wan going on to well, and he
wilhed to much to be introduced to Captain Wentworth,
that, perhaps, he might join them in the evening; he
would not dine from home, but he might walk in for
half an hour." But in thin he waa gerly up by
hil wife, with “ 0h ! no, indeed, Charlet, cannot
hear to have you go away. Only think, if anything
Ihould happen 3"

PERSUASION. 55

The child had a good night, and was going on well
the next day. It must be a work of time to ascertain
that no in'nry had been done to the spine; but Mr
Robinson flound nothing to incruse alarm, and Charles
Musgrove began, conseouently, to feel no necessity for
longer conﬁnement. 'lhe child was so be kept in bed
and amused as quietly as possible ; but what was there for
a father to do? This was quite a female case. and it
would be highly absurd in him, who could be of no
use at home, to shut himself up. His father ve much .
wished him to meet Captain Wentworth, an there
being no suliicient reason against it. he ought to go;
and it ended in his making a bold, public declaration,
when he came in from shooting, of his meaning to dress
directl , and dine at the other house.

“ othing can be going on better than the child,”
said he; “ so I told my father, just now, that I would
come, and he thought me quite right. Your sier
being with on, my love, I have no scruple at all. You
would not ilte to lave him yourself, but you see I can
be of no use. Anne will send for me if anything is the
matter."

Husbands and wives genenlly understand when
opposition will be vain. Mary knew, from Charles’s
manner of speaking, that he was quite determined on
going, and that. it would be of no use to teaze him.
She said nothing, therefore, till he was out of the room ;
but as soon as there was only Anne to hear—

“ So you and I are to be left to shift by ourselves,
with this r sick child; and not a creature coming
near us the evening! I knew how it would be.
This is always my luck. If there is anything disagree-
able oing on men are always sure to get out of it, and
Charles is as bad as any of them. Very unfeelingl I
must say it is very nnfeeling of him to be running away
from his poor little boy. Talk: of his being going on

56 PERSUASION.

to well! how doea he know that he in going on well,
or that there may not he a sudden change half an hour
hence? I did not think Charlel would have been no
unfeeling. So here he in to go away and enjoy himeelf,
and bean-e I am the poor mother, I am not to be
allowed to stir; and yet,I am lure, I um more unﬁt
than anybody the to be about the child. My being the
mother in the very reaaon why my feeling- thould not
betried. Inm not at all equal to it. You nw how
hysterical I wan yetterday.”

" But that wu only the elfect of the tuddenneu of
your alarm—of the thock. You will not be hynerical
Igain. I dare nay we thall have nothing to dime- u.
I perfectly undentand Mr Robinaon't direction, and
have no fean; and. indeed, Mary, I cannot wonder at
your huhnd. Nuring does not belong to a man; it it
not his province. A lick child ll alwaya the mother’s

roperty: her ovm feeling. generally make it no.”

“I hope I am at fond of my child a any mother,
but I do not know that I am of any more ule in the
lick—room than Charla, for I cannot be alwayl scold-
ing and teazing a poor child when it is ill; and you raw.
thi- morning, that if I told him to keep quiet, he was
mm m begin kicking about. I have not nerves for the
an of thing."

“ But could you be comfortable your-elf, to be Ipend-
ing the whole evening away from the poor boy P”

a Yes; you nee hit papa can, and why should not I ?
Jemima ll to careful; and the could tend no word every
hour how he waa. I really think Charlea might at
well have told hit father we would all come. I am not
more alarmed about little Charla now than he ll. I
V," dreadfully alarmed yelterday, but the cue it very
diﬁ'erenc to—daY-”

uwell, ifyou do not think it too late to give notice
for younelf, auppoae you were to go. on well as your

' PERSUASION. 5 7

hulband. Leave little Charles to my care. Mr and
Mn Musgrove cannot think it wrong while I remain
with him. '

“ Are you serious ? " cried Mary, her eyeo brighten-
ing. “Dear mel that’s 3 very good thought, very
good. indeed. To be lure, I may just as well go as
not, for I am of no use at home—4m I? and it only
harasse- me. You, who have not a mother’s feelings,
are I great deal the properest penon. You can make
litde Charles do anything} he alwnyl minds you It I
word. It will be I great deal bener than leaving him
with only Jemirm. Ohl I will certainly go; I am
auri- I ought if I can, quite as much as Charles, for
they want me excessively to be acquainted with Cap-
tain Weutworth, and I know you do not mind being
left alone. An excellent thought of yours, indeed,
Anne. I will go and tell Charles, and get ready
directly. You con send for us, you know, at a mo-
ment’s notice. if anything is the matter; but I dare say
there will be nothing to alarm you. I should not go,
you may be sure, if I did not feel quite at ease about
my dear child.”

The next moment she was tapping at her husband’s
dressing-room door, and an Anne followed her up
stairs, she was in time for the whole conversation,
which began with Mary’s saying, in a tone of great
exultation—

“I mean to go with you, Charles, for I am of no
more uoe at home than ou are. If I were to shut
mytell' up for ever with e child. I should not be able
to Ker-node him to do anything he did not like. Anne
wi sta ; Anne undertakes to may at home and take
care of him. It is Anne’s own propoul, and lo I
ll)!“ go with you, which will be a great deal better, for
I have not dined at the other house tince Tuesday.”

" This is very kind of Anne,” was her huoband’s

58 nuunsrou.
anlvler,“and I ahould beveryglad to have you go;
butitaeemantherhardthataheihouldbeleftathome
by henelf, to hurt: our ticlt child.”

Anne waa now at hand to take up her own cause,
and the aincerity of her manner being aoon auﬁicient to
convince him, where conviction wu at lent very agree-
able, he had no farther acruplea at to her being left to
dine alone, though he atill wanted her to join them in
the evening, when the child might be at mt for the
night, and kindly urged her to let him come and fetch
her, but the waa quite unpenuadoble; and thin being
the cue, the had ere long the pleasure of Ieeing them
act 03‘ together in high rpirita. They were gone, all:
hoped, to be happy, however oddl connnlcted Inch
bappineaa might seem; an for henel , ahe waa left with
.3 many aeolationa of comfort, as were, perhapa, ever
likely to be hen. She knew heraelf to be of the ﬁn
utility to the child; and what wan it to her if Frederick
Wentworth were only half a mile diatant, making him-
aelf agreeable to othen?

She would have liked to know how he felt an to
a meeting. Perhaps indifferent, if indifference could
exiat under IIIClI circumstance: He mun be either
indifferent or unwilling. Had he wiahed ever to Ice
her again, he need not have waited till thia time; he
would have done what the could not but believe that
in hit place the thould have done long ago, when
event: had been early giving him the independence
which alone had been wanting.

Her brother and litter came back delighted with
their new acquaintance, and their viait in general.
There had been mulic, ringing, talking, laughing, all
that wan moot agreable; charming mannera in Captain
Wentworth, no ahyneu or relerve; they accrued all to
know each other perfectly, and he was coming the very
next morning to ahoot with Charlea. He was to come

yeasuasron. 59

to breakfast, but not at the Cotxage, though that had
been proposednt lint; butrhen he hadbeen pressedto
come to the Great House innead, and he seemed afraid
of being in Mn Charles Musgrove’l way, on account
of the child, and therefore, somehow, they hardly ltnew
how, it ended in Charles’s being to meet him to break-
fast at his father’s.

Anne undende it. He wiahed to avoid seeing
her. He had inquired after her, the found, slightly,
as might suit a former slight acquaintance, securing to
acknowledge such so she had acknowledged, actualed,
perhaps, by the me view of escaping introducu'on
when they were to meet.

The morning hours of the Cottage were always later
than those of the other house, Ind on the morrow the
difference was so great that Mary and Anne were not
more than beginning breakfast when Charles came in to
y that they were just setting oﬂ‘, that he was come for
hin dogs, that his sisters were following with Ca Iain
Wentworth; his sisters meaning to visit Mary an the
child, and Captain Wentworth proposing also to wait
on her for a few minutes if not inconvenient; and
though Charles had anlwered for the child’s being in
no such slate as could make it inconvenient, Captain
Wentworth would not be satisﬁed without his running
on to give notice.

Mary, very much gratiﬁed by this attention, was
delighted to receive him, while a thou-and feeling:
ruahed on Anne, of which this was the moat conaoling,
that it would soon be over. And it was soon over.
In two minute: after Charlee’s preparation, the others
a red; they were in the drawing-room. Her eye
mmet Captain Wentworth’e, a how, a courtsey
pulled; she heard his voice; he talked to Mary, id
all that was right, mid something to the Min Mua- I
groves, enough to mark an eaey footing; the room

. I

6o
turned full ofpammdvniceghtafe'
minutecendedit. Charlenthewtdhirnaelfattbewin—
da',allwaarudy,theirviitorlndbowedandw
w,thMuqnvumgonetoo,-rddenly
mlvingto ktotheendofthevillageviththe
Eonmn;theroomvaacleared,andAnnemight
niah her breakl'aataaahecmld.
“Itinover!itiaoverl"drerepatedtohenelf
tgainand again. in nervoua gratitude. “The wontia

Soon, however. the began to mean with her-elf, and
try to be feeling lea. Eight yum, almost eight yearn
Ind panned, line all had been given up. How absurd
to be resuming the agitation which each an interval had
hanithet‘l into diaunce and indittinctneu! What might
not eight yean do? Event: of every description,
'changen, ahenatiom, removalI—all, all muat be com-
priaed in it, and oblivion of the at—how natural, how
certain tool It included nary a third part of her
own life.

Alaal with all her macningr the found, that to
retentive feeling: eight yearn may be little more than
nothing.

Now, how were hi- tenu'menu to be read? Waa
this like withing to avoid her? And the next moment
the win hating herself for the folly which asked the
quenion. .

On one other question, which rhapa her utmmt
windorn might not have prevented, e wan noon spared
all nupentel for, after the Min Muagmve: had returned
and ﬁnilhed their visit at the Cottage, the had this
upontaneont information from Mary :—

“Cuptain Wentworth ll not very gallant by you,

 

msunsron. 61

Anne, though he was so attentive to me. Henrietta
uked him what he thought of you, when they went
away, and he said, ‘ You were so altered he should not
have known you again.’ ”

Mary had no feelings to make her reqect her sister's
in a common way, but she was perfectly unsuspicious of
being inﬂicdng uny uliur wound.

“ Altered beyon his knowledge." Anne fully sub-
mitled, in silent, deep mortilication. Douhtless it was
so, and she could Lake no revenge, for he was not
altered, or not for the worse. She had already acknow-
ledged it to herself, and she could not think diﬁ'erently.
let him think of her as he would. No: the yean
which had destroyed her youth and bloom had only
given him a more glowing, manly, open look, in no
respect lessening his ersonsl advantages. She had seen
the same Frederick entworth.

“ So Altered that he should not have known her
sgainl ” These were words which could not but
dwell with her. Yet she soon began to rejoice that she
had heard them. They were of sobering tendency;
they allayed agitation ; they composed, and consequently
mun make her happier.

Frederick Wentworth had used such words, or
something like them, but without an idea that they
would be carried round to her. He had thought her
wretchedly altered, and in the ﬁrst moment of aﬁeal,
had spoken us he felt. He had not forgiven nne
Elliot. She had used him ill, deserted and disa 'nted
him; and worse, she had shewn a feebleness 0 char-
acter in doing so, which his own decided. conﬁdent
temper could not endure. She had given him up to
oblige others. It had been the cilia of over-persuasion.
It had been weakness and timidity.

He had been most warmly attached to her, and had
never seen a wormu since whom he thought her equal;

62 mmou.

MWﬁmmmﬂmﬁndcnm-ty' ' ,hc
hndnodaileof meeting herapin. Hanover-id:
himwugoneforem.

Ilwunnwhinnbjcctmmny. Hennichﬁnd
hdngmmdonnhomfnﬂyintmddmnmleumu
heouddbepropu’lywmpmd; actuallylookingmnd,
rudyto fall in Iavewidl Illlheqxedwhich I dur
Maﬁqﬁckmwdddlow. Hehadnhanfor
either ofdle Mi- Mn-groveyiftheyoonldamhit; a
bean. in than, for woman who am:
inhilwly,excepﬁng ne ’I. Thilwuhi-only
macepﬁon,whalhenidmhialiw,inmm
heruppodﬁom:—

“YaMeImSophhqninmdywmbn
fonlinh match. An y between ﬁfteen and thirty
nu havemcfnr 'ng. Alildebumy,andlfew
nmlel, and a few compliment: to the navy, and I
malouman. Shmldnouhinheenoughforlnilor,
who has had no Incietyammgwomcn to mahhim
nice?"

Henidignhcknewﬁobeconmdimed. Highlight
pondryegkeduhppymvicﬁonlhuhewanim;
nndAnnc lliot wan no: out of hildwnghu, whcnhe
' more than nationally ductith the womn he should
viuh to mectwilh. “A mug mind, with sweet-
nulnfnunner,"madctheﬁntnnd Lhelutoflhe
duel-i 'on.

“ ti-thewonnnlwant,”uidhe. “Song.
:hingalitde inferiorI-hall of course?! widgbm
itmunnolbelnuch. Iqunnfool, dumbean
indeed, for I have thought on the libij than

men. men.”

s-

 

PERSUASION. 6 3

than“: 9‘33].

ROM thin time Captain Wentworth and Anne
Elliot were repeatedly in the e circle. They
were noon dining in company together at Mr

Mun ve‘o, for the little boy’l state could no 1:3“
mpffymhia aunt with a pretence for abIenting h s
an thin was but the beginning of other dining: and
other meetings. .

Whether former feeling: were to be renewed must
be brought to the proof ; former time: must undoubtedly
be brought to the recollection of ach; they could not
but be reverted to; the year of their engagement could
not but be named by him, in the little narratives or
deecriptions which convenation called forth. Hil
profusion qualiﬁed him, hie disposition led him to talk;
and “Tbal wan in the year eix;” “Thar happened
before I went to tea, in the year eix," occurred in the
course of the ﬁrst evening they opent together: and
though his voice did not falter, and though Ill: had no
moon to euppoae his eye wandering towards her while
he epolte, Anne felt the utter impossibility, from her
knowledge of hi: mind, that he could be unvirited by
remembrance any more than hemlf. There mun be the
lame immediate association of thought, though the war
very far from conceiving it to be of equal pain.

hey had no conversation together, no intercourse

but what the commonelt civili required. Once so
much to each other! Now nothmg! There bad been
a time, when of all the large party now ﬁlling the
drawing-room at Uppercrou, they would have found
it most difﬁcult to cease to alt to one another. With
the exception, perhaps, 0 Admiral and Mn Croft,
who seemed particularly attached and happy (Anne
could allow no other exception, even among the married

64 nnsuasron.

couplca), there could have been no two hearta I0 open,
no taste: IO aimilar, no feeling: no in unison, no counte-
nancel to beloved. Now they were a strange"; nay,
worse than mngen, for they could never become
ac uainted. It was a perpetual eetrangernent.

hen he talked, Ihe heard the am voice, and dia-
cerned the lame mind. There wan a very general ignor-
ance of all naval math throughout the party; and he
wan very much quetioned, and ' ly by the two
Mite Muagrovel, who aeemed ha ly to have any eyes
but for him, an to the manner of living on board, daily
regulations, food, hourl, Btc.; and their aurpriae at hia
accounta, at learning the degree of necomrnodation and
arrangement which wal racticable, drew from him
aome leaaant ridicule, w ich reminded Anne of the
early diayn when the too had been ignorant, and the too
had been accuaed of mppoaing aailorl to be living on
board without anything to ear, or any cook to chest it
if there were, or any servant to wait, or any knife and
fork to ule.

From thus listening and thinking, the was routed by
a whisper of Mn Mulgrove'a, who, overcome by fond
regrets, could not help ying—

“ Ah! Mica Anne, if it had leaned Heaven to apart
my poor Ion, I dare say he won d have been just tuch
another by this time.”

Anne suppreued a amilc, and lietened kindly. while
Mn Mutgrove relieved her heart a little more; and {or
a few minutes, therefore, could not keep page with the
conversation of the others.

When she could let her attention take it: natural
courae again, she found the Miss Muagroves just {etching
the Navy List (their own navy list, the ﬁrst that had
ever been at Uppercroae), and sitting down together to
pore over it, wrth the ‘ﬁrofeued view of ﬁnding out the
Illlpl which Captain entworth had commanded.

PERSUASION. 6 5

“ Your lint ms the Asp, I remember; we will look
for the Asp."

"You will not ﬁnd her there. Quite worn out and
broken u . I was the int man who commanded her.
Hardly t for service then. Reported ﬁt for home
tervice for I year or two, and so I was sent off to the
West Indies. ’

The girls looked all amazement. '

“The Admiralty,” he continued, “ entertain them-
selves now and then, with sending a few hundred men
to tea in a ship not ﬁt to be employed. But they have
a greet many to provide for; and among the thousand:
that may just Is well go to the bottom as not, it ll im-
pouible for them to distinguish the very set who may be
east missed.”

“ Phoo! phoo ! ” cried the Admiral, “ what Ituﬂ'
theee young fellows talk! Never was there a better
sloop than the Asp in her day. For en old built Cloap,

ou would not see her equal. Lucky fellow to get her 1

e knows there must have been twenty better men
than himaelf applying for her at the same time. Lucky
fellow to get anything to soon, with no more interelt
than him."

“ I. felt my luck. Admin], I aware you,” replied
Captam Wentworth, scriounly. “ I was as well aatitﬁed
with my appointment as you can desire. It was a great
object with me at that time to be at sea; a very great
object. I wanted to be doin eomethin .”

“To be sure you did. hat Ihouﬁl a young fellow
like you do uhore for half: year together? If a man
ha- not a wife, he soon wantotto be aﬂoat again.”

“ But, Captain Wentworth,” cried Louisa, " how
vexed you mutt have been when on came to the Asp,
to lee what an old thing they had, given you I ”

“ I knew pretty well what the was before that day,”
said he, Irniling. “I had no more discoveries to make

66 PIISUASION.

thnyoulwouldhaveutothe ﬁdu'on and mength of
an oldpeliue. whichyou had teen lent about among
lulf your acquaintance ever inee could runanber.
andwhichathqonlomeverywetdayﬁrlentm
yonndf. Ah! thewundear oldAlp to me. She
didlllthat Invented. Iknewthewould. lknew
that we thould either go to the bottom together, or that
ehcwouldbcthemakingofme; andl never had two
dayloffoul watbernllthetimeI wu at ten in her;
Ind after taking privateen enough to be very entertain-
hblhldthegoodluckinmy gehome,thenext
autumn ﬁll inwiththevery tenchﬁ-igntelwlnned.
I brought her into Plymouth; and here we: another
inmnce of luck. We had not been ix hour: in the
Sound, when a gale tame on, which lasted four dz a
and nights, and which would have done for poor od
Alp in half the time; our touch with the Great Nation
not having much improved our condition. Four-end-
twenty hours later, and I thould only have been a
gallant Captain Wentworth, in a mall paragraph at one
corner of the nemapen; and being loot in only a
doc , nobody we have thought about me.’ '

({nne’t thudderingl were to herself alone; but the
Mitt Mutgrom could be an open as they were tincere,
in their exclamation! of pity and horror.

“And no then, I tuppote," taid Mn Muegmve, in a
low voice, at if thinking aloud, “to then he went away
to the Ltconin, and there he met with our poor boy.
Charla, my den," (beckoning him to her), “do alt
Cnptnin Wentwonh where it wan he lint met with your

r brother. I always forget."

“It wan at Gibraltar, mother, I know. Dick had
been left ill at Gibraltar, with a recommendation from
llll former captain to Captain Wentworth.”

“Oh I but Charles, tell Captain Wentworth, he need
not be afraid of mentioning poor Dick before me, for it

7— ____.—

PIRSUASION. o1

wouldbe ntherspleuureto hearhimtalkedofhyeueh
a good friend."

Charles being somewhat more mindful of the prohi-
bilitiel of the cue, only nodded in reply, and walked

awn .

'Izhe irh were now hunting for the Laconinyand
%Ventworth could not deny himself the pleasure
of taking the recioua volume into hie own hands to live
them the tmulZle, and once more read aloud the little
statement of her name and rate, and preeent non-oom-
missioned clans, obuerving over it that she too had been
one of the best friends nun ever had.

“Ah, thooe were euant days when I had the
Laconial How fut made money in herl A friend
of mine and I had such a lovely cmise together of the
Weetem Islands. Poor Harv-ille, liner! You know
how lunch he wanted mane : worse than myself. He
had a wife. Excellent f w! I Ihall never forget
his ha 'nesl. He felt it all,” much for her lake. I
wish for him again the next summer, when I had still
the same luck in the Mediterranean.”

“ And I am lure, sir,” aid Mrs Muogrove, “ it was
a lucky day for u, when you were put ca in into that
hip-.1 We Ihall never forget what you di ”

er feelings made her speak low; and Captain
Wentworth, hearing only in part, and probably not
having Dick Musgrove at all near hie thonghu, looked
rather in suspeme, and as if waiting for more. .

“ My brother,” whiupered one of the girls; “ mm
in thinking of poor Richard”

" Poor dear fellow l ” continued Mrs Musgrove;
“he was grown so steady, and such an excellent cor-
respondent, while he was under your care! Ahl it
would have been a haw thing, if he had never left you.
I unsure you. Captain entworth, we are very army he
ever left you."

68' PIISUASION.

There was a momentary expiration in Captain Went-
worth'l Face at thin lpeech, a certain glance of his
bright eye, and curl of his handsome mouth, which con-
vinced Anne, that instead of sharing in Mrs Mugmve's
kind wishes, as to her son, he had probably been at
Iorue 'nl to get rid of him; but it wu too transient
an in ulgence of self-amusement to be detected by any
who understood him let: than hertelf ; in another
moment he was perfectly collected and serious, and
almost instantly afterward: coming up to the uofa, on
which the and Mrs Musgrove were sitting, took a place
by the latter, and entered into conversation with her, in
a low voice, about her son, doing it with IO much lym-
pathy and natural grace, at chewed the kindest con-
sideration for all that was real and unabsurd in the
parent's feelings.

They were actually on the lame Iofa, for Mrs Mun-
grove had most readily made room for him : they were
divided only by Mn Mun rove. It was no insigniﬁcant
barrier, indeed. Mrs usgrove was of a comfortable
substantial size, inﬁnitely more ﬁtted by nature to ex-
press good cheer and good humour rhan tendemeas and
sentiment; and while the agitations of Anne’s alender
form, and pensive face, may be considered as very com-
pletely screened, Captain Wentworth should be allowed
some credit for the self-command with which he
attended to her large fat sighings over the destiny of a
son, whom alive nobody had cared for.

Personal size and mental sorrow have certainly no
necessary proportions. A large bulky ﬁgure has as good
a right to be in dee afﬂiction as the most graceful net
of limbs in the world. But, fair or not fair, there are
unbecoming conjunctions, which reason will patronize in
vain—which taste cannot tolerate—which ridicule will
Elle-

The Admiral, after taking two or three refreshing

rmuasrox. 69

turna about the room with his handl behind him, being
called to order by his wife, now came up to Captain
Wentworth, and without any observation of what he
might be interrupting, thinking only of hi! own thoughts,
began with—

“ If you had been a week later at Lisbon, In Ipring,
Frederick, you would have been uked to give a pamge
to Lady Mary Grienon and her daughters.”

“Should I? I am glad I was not a week later
then 2 ”

The Adminl ablued him for hip want of gallant .
He defended himself : though profeuing that he wo d
never willingly admit any ladies on board a ship of his,
excepting for a hall, or a visit, which a few hourl might
comprehend.

“ But, if I know mylelf," aid he, “ thin in from no
want of gallantry toward: them. It is rather from feel-
ing how impouible it ll, with all one’a elfortg, and all
one’a sacriﬁces, to make the accommodations on board
such as women ought to have. There can be no want
of gallantry, Admiral, in rating the claims of women to
every personal comfort 51gb, and thin in what I do. I
hate to hear of women on board,=.or to see them on
board ; and no Ihip under my command shall ever
convey a family of ladies anywhere, if I can help it."

This brought his sister upon him.

“ Ohl Frederick! But I cannot believe it of you.
—All idle reﬁnement!——Women may be an comfortable
on board an in the but houlc in England. I believe I
have lived as much on board as man women, and I
know nothing superior to the accommodation: of a man-
of-war. I declare I have not a comfort or an in-
dulgence about me, even at Kellynch Hall " (with a
kind bow to Anne), “beyond what I always had in
moot of the Ihiys I have lived in; and they have been
ﬁve altogether.’ ’ A

10 PIIBIJASIOIL

“Nothing to the purpoee,” ' her brother.
“ You were living with your h and were the only
womn on hoard."

“ But you, younelf, brought Mn Harville, her liner,
her couain, and the three children, round from Porn-
mouth to Plymouth. Where waa thin ruperﬁne, extra-
ordinary aort of gallantry of youn then i ’

“ All merged in my frimdahip, 8 his. I would
all any brother oﬂioer’e wife that could. and I
would bring anything of Harville'. from the world'l
end, if he wanted it. But do not imagine that I did
not feel it an evil in inelt'."

bl“ upon it, they were all perfectly comfort-
3 e. '

“I might not like them the better for that, perhapc.
Such a number of women and children have no right to
be comfortable on board."

“ My dear Frederick, you are talking quite idly.
Pray, what would become of us poor aailon’ wives, who
often want to be conveyed to one port or another, after
our hushandr, if everybody had your feelings? ”

“M feelinga. you see, did not revent my taking
Mn rville and all her famil to lymonth.”

" But I hate to hear you tal ing In like a line gentle-
man, and an if women were all ﬁne ladiel, innead of
rational creatures. We none of III expect to be in
smooth water all our daye."

“ Ah I my dear," aid the Admiral, “when he haa
got a wife, he will ring a different tune. When he is
married, if we have the good luck to live to another
war, we shall see him do awou and I, and a great
many othera, have done. e ahall have him very
thankful to anybody that will bring him his wife.”

“ Ay, that we Ihall."

" Now I have done,” cried Captain Wentworth.
“ When once married people begin to attack me with—

PERSUASION. 7 r

‘Oh! you will think very differently when you are
married,’ I can only say, ‘No, I Vohall not;’ and
then they say again, ‘ Yes, you will,’ and there in an
end of it.’ ’

He got up and moved away.

“ What u great traveller you must have been,
ma’am I ” said Mrs Musgrove to Mrs Croft.

“Pretty well, ma’am, in the fifteen years of my
marriage; though many women have done more. I
have crossed the Atlantic four tin-rel, and have been once
to the East Indies and back again, and only once;
beside: being in different places about home: Cork,
and Lisbon, and Gibraltar. But I never went beyond
the Streighta, and never was in the West Indies. We
do not call Bermuda or Bahama, you know, the Went
Indies."

Mrs Musgrove had not a word to y in dissent; she
could not accuse herself of havin ever called them any-
thing in the whole course of her llife.

“ And I do nuure you, ma’am,” pursued Mrs Croft,
“ that nothin can exceed the accommodations of a
man-of-war, speak, you know, of the higher rates.
When you come to a frigate, of course, you are more
confined; though any reasonable woman may be per-
fectl happy in one of them ; and I can safely say, that
the p en part of my life he been Ipenton board a
ship. hile we were together, you know, there was
nothing to be feared. Thank God! I have always
been blessed with excellent health, and no climate
disagree- with me. A little disordered always the ﬁrst
twenty-four hour! of going to , but never knew what
sickness was afterwards. The only time that I ever
rally suffered in body or mind, the only time that I
ever fancied myself unwell, or had any ideas of danger
“was the winter that I by myself at Deal, when
the Admiral (Captain roft then) was in the North

1 1 PHSUASION.

Seal. I lived in perpetual fright at that time, and had
all manner of imaginary eomplainta from not knowing
what to do with myself, or when I should hear from
him next; but as long as we could be together, nothing
ever ailed me, and I never met. with the smalleet incon-
venience.”

“ Ay, to be sure. Yes, indeed, oh esl I am quite
of your opinion, Mrs Croft," was gin Musgrnve's
hearty answer. “ There is nothing so had as a separa-
tion. I am quite of your opinion. I know what it in,
for Mr Musgrove always attends the Iltilel, and 1 am
an glad when they are over, and he is cafe hack again."

The evening ended with dancing. On its being pro-
posed, Anne offered her tervioes, as usual; and though
her eyes would sometimel ﬁll with tear! as she m. at
the instrument, the was extremely glad to be employed,
and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved.

It was a merry, 'oyous rty, and no one seemed in
higher spirits that plain entworth. She felt that
he had everything to elevate him, which general atten-
tion and deference, and especiall the attention of all
the young women, could do. 'lxhe Mist Hayters, the
females of the family of cousins alread mentioned,
were a parently admitted to the honour ofy being in love
with him; and as for Henrietta and Louisa, they both
seemed so entirely occupied by him, that nothing but the
continued appearance of the most perfect good-will
between themselves could have made it credible that th
were not decided rivals. If he were a little Ipoi t
by such universal, such eager admiration, who could
wonder ?

These were some of the thoughu which occupied
Anne, while her ﬁngers were mechanically at work, pro-
ceeding for half an hour together, equally without error,
and without conociousneu. Once she felt that he was
looking at herself. observing her altered features, perhaps,

 

rnnsmsrou. 73

trying to trace in them the ruins of the face which had
once charmed him; and one: she knew that he must
have spoken of her; she was hardly aware of it till she
heard the answer; but then she was sule of his having
asked his partner whether Miss Elliot never danced?
The answer was, “ 0h, nol never; she has quite given
up dancing. She had rather play. She is never tired
0 playing." Once, too, he spoke to her. She had
left the instrument on the dancing being over, and he
had sat down to try to make out an air which he wished
to give the Miss Musgroves an idea of. Unintentionslly
she returned to that part of the room; he saw her, and
instantly rising, said, with studied politeness—

“ I beg your pardon, madam. this is your seat ; ” and
though she immediately drew back with a decided
negative, he was not to be induced to sit down again.

Anne did not wish for more of such looks and
speeches. His cold politeness, his ceremonious grace,
were worse than anything.

chum 3*.

APTAIN WENTWORTH was come to
Kellynch as to a home, to stay as ion as
he liked, being as thoroughly the object of3 the

Admiml’s fraternal kindness as of his wife’s. He had
intended, on ﬁrst arriving, to proceed very soon into
Shropshire, and visit the brother settled in that country,
but the attractions of Upperch induced him to put
this off. There was so much of friendliness, and of
ﬂattery, and of everything most hewitching in his
reception there; the old were so hospitable, the young
so agreeable, that he could not but resolve to remain
where he was, and take all the charms and perfections
of Edward’s wife upon credit 3 little longer.

74 PDSIMSION.

ItwaaaoonU maewithhimalm da.
The Muagrovea hardly be more readyﬂtfrr’invilc
than he to come, particularly in the morning. when he
had no companion at home; for the Admiral and Mn
Croft were generally out of door: together, interesting
themaelvea in their new theirgraaa, and their
ah and dawdling about in a we not endurahle to a
thir pemn, or driving out in a gig, lately added to their
eta-bluth

Hitherto there had been but one o ' ion of Captain
Wentworth among the Mugrom an their dependen-
cies. It waa unvarying. warm admiration everywhere;
but thi- intimate footing war not more than enabliehed,
when a certain Charle- Hayter returned among them,
to be a good deal diaturhed by it. and to think Captain
Wentworth very much in the way.

Charlea Hayter wan the eldeat of all the caution, and
a very amiable, pleating young man, between whom and
Henrietta there had been a oontiderable appearance of
nttachment previmu to Captain Wentworth’: introduc-
tion. He wan in ordere; and having a curacy in the
neighbourhood, where residence was not uired, lived
It hit father‘t home, only two milee from ppercmu.
A chart abeeme from home had left hll fair one un-
guarded by hit uttentiont at thin critical rind, and
when he came back he had the pain of nding very
altered manners, and of eeein Captain Wentworth.

Mrl Muagrove and Mn I-fayter were linen. They
ﬁnd each had money, but their man-iagee had made a
material difference in their degree of consequence. Mr
llnyter had none property of his own, but it we ineigni-
licnnt compared with Mr Mulgrovc’a; and while the
Murgrom were in the ﬁrst clue of moiety in the
country, the young Haytere would, from their parenu’
inferior, retired, and unpolithed way of living. and their
own defective education, have been hardly in any class

PERSUASION. 7 5

at all, but for their connexion with Uppereross, this
eldest son of course excepted, who had chosen to be a
scholar and a gentleman, and who was very superior in
eulﬁndon and manners to all the rest.

The two families had always been on excellent terms,
there being no pride on one side, and no envy on the other,
and only such a consciousness of superiority in the Miss
Musgroves, as made them pleased to improve their
cousins. Charles's attentions to Henrietta had been ob-
served b her father and mother without any disa proba-
n'on. “ twould not be a great match for her; but IfHen-
rietta liked him,”——and Henrietta (lid seem to like him.

Henrietta fully thought so herself, before Captain
Wentworth came; but from that time Cousin Charles
had been very much forgotten.

Which of the two sisters was preferred by Captain
Wentworth was as yet quite doubtful, as far as Anne’s
observation reached. Henrietta was perhaps the prettiest,
Louisa had the higher spirits; and she knew not new,
whether the more gentle or the more liver character
were most likely to attract him.

Mr and Mrs Musgrove, either from seeing little, or
from an entire conﬁdence in the discretion of both their
daughters, and of all the youn men who came near
them, seemed to leave everything to take its chance.
There was not the smallest appearance of solicitude or
remark about them in the Mansion-house; but it was
diﬁ'erent at the Cottage: the oung couple there were
more disposed to speculate andv wonder; and Captain
Wentworth had not been above four or ﬁve times in the
Miss Musgroves’ company, and Charles Hayter had but
just rea peared, when Anne had to listen to the opinions
of her Emther and sister, as to whitb was the one liked
best. Charles gave it for Louisa, Mary for Henrietta,
but quite agreeing that to have him marry either would
be extremely delightful.

e

76 PERSUASION.

Charles “ had never seen a pleasanter nun in his life;
and from what he had once heard Captain Wentworth
himselfuy, was very sure that he had not made less than
twenty thousand pounds by the war. Here was a for-
tune at once: besides which, there would be the chance
of what might be done in any future war; and he wan
sure Ca rain Wentworth was as likely a man to dinin-
guish himself as any ofﬁcer in the navy. Oh ! it would
he a capital match for either of his linen."

“ Upon my word it. would," replied Mary. “ Dear
me! If he should rise to any very great. honounl If he
should ever he made a baronetl ‘ Lady Wentworth ’
Ioundn very well. That would be a noble thing; indeed,
for Henrietta! She would take place of me then, and
Henrietta would not dislike that. Sir Frederick and
Lady Wentworth! It would be but a new creation,
however, and I never think much of your new
creations."

It suited Mary best to think Henrietta the one pre-
ferred on the ve account of Charles Hayter, whose

retensions she wished to see put an end to. She
ooked down very decidedly upon the Hayters, and
thought it would be quite a misfortune to have the exist-
ing connection between the families renewed—very sad
for herself and her children.

“ You know," said she, “I cannot think him at all a
ﬁt match for Henrietta; and considering the alliances
which the Musgroves have made, she has no right to
throw herself away. I do not think any young woman
has a right to make a choice that may be disagreeable
and inconvenient to the printipal part of her family, and
be giving bad connections to those who have not been
used to them. And, pray, who is Charles Hayter?
Nothing but a country curate. A most improper match
for Min Musgrove of Uppercross.”

Her husband, however, would not agree with her

PERSUASION. 77

here; for besides having a regard for his cousin, Charles
Hayter was an eldest son, and he saw things as an
eldest son himself.

“ Now you are talking nonsense, Mary," was there-
fore his answer. " It would not he a great match for
Henrietta, but Charles has a very fair chance, through
the Spicers, of getting something from the Bishop in the
course of a year or two; and you will please to re-
member, that he is the eldest son ; whenever my uncle
dies, he ate into very yretty property. The estate at
Winthrop rs not less than two hundred and ﬁfty acres,
besides the farm near Taunton, which is some of the
belt land in the country. I grant you, that an of them
but Charles would he a very shocking match or Henri-
etta, and indeed it could not be; he is the only one that
could be possible ; but he is a very good-natured, good
sort of a fellow; and whenever Winthrop comes into
his hands, he will make a different sort of lace of it,
and live in a re diﬂ'erent sort of way; an with that
property he wil? never be a contemptible man—good
freehold property. No, no; Henrietta might do worse
than marry Charles Hayter; and if she has him, and
Louisa can get Captain Wentworth, I shall be very well
satisﬁed.”

“ Charles may say what he pleases,” cried Mary to
Anne, as soon as he was out of the room, “ but it would
be shockin to have Henrietta marry Charles Hayter:
I ve ba thing for btr, and still worse for m ,- and
the! are it is very much to be wished that Captain
Wentworth may soon put him quite out of her head,
and I have very little doubt that he has. She took
hardly any notice of Charles Hayter yesterday. I wish
you had been there to see her behaviour. And us to
Captain Wentworth's liking Louisa as well as Henrietta,
it is nonsense to say so ; for he certainly rim like Hen-
rietta a great deal the best. But Charles is so positive!

73 eensussron.

I wish you had been with ua ymrda , for then you
might have decided between us; and am sure you
would have thought as I did, unless you had been deter-
mined to give it against me."
. A dinner at Mr Musgrove'l had been the occarion
when all these things should have been seen by Anne;
but she had staid at home, under the mixed plea of a
headache of her own, and some mum of indisposition
in little Charles. She had thought only of avoiding
Captain Wentworth ; but an escape from being appealed
to as umpire was now added to the advantages of a
quiet evening.
A: to Captain Wentworth’l views, she deemed it of
more consequence that he should know his own mind
early enough not to be endangering the happiness of
either sister, or impeaching his own honour, than that
he should prefer Henrietta to Louisa, or Louie: to l
Henrietta. Either of them would, in all mbability, -'
make him an affectionate, good-humoured wife. With
regard to Charles Hayter, she had delicacy which must I
be pained by any lightness of conduct in a well-meaning
young woman, and a heart to pywathize in any of the ‘
sufferings it occasioned; but i enrietta found herself
mistaken in the nature of her feelings, the alteration
could not be understood too soon.
Charles Hayter had met with much to disquiet and
mortify him in his cousin’s behaviour. She had too
old I regard for him to be so wholly estmnged as might ‘
in two meetings extinguish every past hope, and leave
him nothing to do but to keep away from Uppercrou: ‘
but there was such a change as became very alarming, ‘
when such a man as Captain Wentworth was to be ‘
regarded as the probable cause. He haul been absent
only two Sundays, and when they parted, had left her
interested, even to the height of his wishes, in his pro-
apect ol' soon quitting his present curacy, and obtaining

‘4 A

PERSUASION. 79

that of Uppercrosa inatead. It had then seemed the
object unrest her heart, that Dr Shirley, the rector,
who for more than fort years had been zealously dis-
charging all the duties ofy his ofﬁce, but was now rowing
too infirm for many of them, should be quite xed an
engaging a curate; Ihould make his curacy quite an
good as he could afford, and should give Charles
Hnyter the promise of it. The advantage of his having
to come only to Uppercrou, innead of going six miles
another wa ; of his having, in every raga, a better
curacy; 0 his belonging to their dear r Shirley;
and of dear, good Dr Shirley's being relieved from the
duty which he could no longer get through without
most injurious fatigue, had been a great deal, even to
Louisa, but had been almost everything to Henriem.
When he came back, alas! the zeal of the business was
gone by. Louisa could not listen at all to hie account
of a conversation which he had just held with Dr
Shirl : the waa at the window, looking out for
Captain Wentworth; and even Henrietta bad at best
only a divided attention to give, and seemed to have
forgotten all the former doubt and solicitude of the
negociation.

“Well, I am very glad, indeed; but I always
thought you would have it; I always thought you sure.
It did not appear to me that—in ehort, you know, Dr
Shirley "nu! have a curate, and you had secured his
promise. I- he coming, Louisa ? ’

One morning, very aoon after the dinner at the
Musgrovee, at which Anne had not been present,
Captain Weutworth walked into the drawing-room at
the Cottage, where were only herself and the little
invalid Charles, who was lyin on the nth.

The surprise of ﬁnding himself almost alone with
Anne Elliot deprived his manners of their usual com-
poeure: he started, and could only say, “I thought the

80 PERSUASION.

Min Mulgrovel had been here: Mn Mulgrow told
me I Ihould ﬁnd them here,” before he walked to the
window to recollect him-elf, and feel how he ought to
behave.

“They are upstairs with my sitter: they will be
down in a few moments, I dare y," had been Anue’l

ly, in all the confusion that wan natural 3 and if the
child had not called her to come and do Iomething for
him, the would have been out of the room the next
moment, and released Captain Wentworth at well u
herself.

He continued at the window; and after calmly
and politely aaying, “ I hope the little boy ll better,"
was silent.

She was obliged to kneel down by the tofu, and
remain there to eatiefy her patient ; and thul they con-
tinued I few minutes, when, to her very great aatiap
faction, she heard some other person crowing the little
ventibule. She hoped, on turning her head, to are the
matter of the home ; but it proved to be one much leu
calculated for making matter: easy—Charla Hayter,

robahly not at all better pleased by the eight of Captain

entworth, than Captain Wentworth had been by the
night of Anne.

She only attempted to say, “How do you do?
Will not you sit down? The other: will be here pre-
aentl ."

Ciiptain Wentworth, however, came from his window,
apparently not ill-disposed for conversation; but Charles
Hayter noon put an end to hit attempts, by eating
himself near the table, and taking in the newspaper;
and Captain Wentworth rctumed to Ina window.

Another minute brought another addition. The
younger boy, a remarkable «out, forward child, of two
years old, having got the door opened for him by some
one without, made hll determined appearance among

 

psksussmn'. 8;

them. and went straight to the sofa to see what was
going on, and put in his claim to anything good that
might be giving away.

There being nothing to be eat, he could only have
some play; and as his aunt would not let him teaze his
sick brother, he began to fasten himself upon her, as she
knelt, in such a way that, busy as she was about Charles,
she could not shake him off: She spoke to him,
ordered, intreated, and insisted in vain. Once she did
contrive to push him away, but the boy had the greater
pleasure in getting upon her back again directly.

" Walter," said she, “ get down this moment. You
are extremely troublesome. I am very angry with

on."

y “Walter,” cried Charles Hayter, “ why do you
not do as on are bid? Do not you hear your aunt
s k? ome to me, Walter; come to cousin
grles."

But not a bit did Walter stir.

In anolher moment, however, she found herself in
the state of being released from him; some one was
taking him from her. though he had bent down her
head so much, that his little sturdy hands were un-
fastened from around her neck, and he was resolutely
borne away, before she knew that Captain Wentworth
had done it.

Her sensations on the discovery made her perfectly
speechless. She could not even thank him. She
could only hang over little Charles, with most disordered
feelings. His kindness in stepping forward to her
relief, the manner, the silence in which it had passed,
the little particulars of the circumstance, with the con-
viction soon forced on her by the noise he was studioust
making with the child, that he meant to avoid hearing
her thanks, and rather sought to testify that her conver-
sation was the last of his wants, produced such s

82 PIRSUASIOH.

coalition of varying. but very ‘ agitation, :- Ihe
could not recover from, till , by the entrance of
Mary and the Min Musgrovel. to make over her litllc
patient to their cares, and leave the room. She could
not. thy. It might have been an opportunity of watch-
ing the lover and julouliet of the four—they were now
altogether; but she could my for none of it. It will
evident that ClL'II'lL‘I Haylcr will not well inclined
toward: Captain “'entworth. She had a urong im-
preuion of hit having laid, in a vext tone of voice, after
Captain Wentworth’l interference, “ You ought to have
minded nu, Walter; I told you not to teaze our
nunt ; " and could comprehend hil regretting that (gap-
tain Wentworth Ihould do what he ought to have done
him-:lf. But neither Charla Haytei’t feelings, nor
nuylxxdy’l feelingl, could interest her, till Ihe had a
little better amnged her own. She was anharned of
herself, quite ashamed of being no nervoul, to overcome
by Iuch a triﬂe; but to it wan, and it required a long
npplication of Iolitude and reﬂection to recover her.

Chant" ﬂ,

THER opportunities of making her oboervationa
could not fail to occur. Anne had won been
in company with all the {our together often

enough to have an opinion, though too wire to acknow-
ledge at much at home, where the knew it would have
ulduﬁcd neither husband nor wife; for while the con-
Iiilered Louisa to be rather the favourite, she could not
but think, ill fau- zn uhe might dare to judge from
memory and experience, that Captain Wentwoith wal
nut in love with either. They were more in love with
himi yet there it wan not love. It wan a little fever

PERSUASION. 83

of admiration ; but it might, probably must, end in love
with some. Charles Hayter seemed aware of being
slightzd, and yet Henrietta had sometimes the air of
being divided between them. Anne longed for the
power of representing to them all what they were
about, and of pointing out some of the evils they were
exposing themselves to. She did not attribute guile to
any. It was the highest ﬂtisfactinn to her to believe
Capt-in Wentworth not in the least aware of the pain
he was occasioning. There was no trium h, no pitiful
triumph in his manner. He had, probably, never
heard, and never thought of any claims of Charles
Hayter. He was only wrong in ac 'ng the atten-
tions (for accepting must be the word of two young
women at once.

After a short struggle, however, Charles Hayter
seemed to quit the ﬁeld. Three days had passed with-
out his coming once to Uppercmss; a most decided
change. He had even refused one regular invitation to
dinner; and having been found on the occasion by Mr
Musgrove with some large books before him, Mr and
Mrs Musgrove were sure all could not be right, and
talked, with grave faces, of his stud ing himself to
death. It was Mary’s ho and belief that he had
received a positive dismiss: from Henrietta, and her
husband lived under the constant dependance of seeing
him to-morrow. Anne could only feel that Charles
Hnyter was wise.

One morning, about this time, Charles Musgrove and
Captain Wentworth being gone s-shooting together, as
the sisters in the Cottage were sitting quietly at work,
they were visited at the window by the sisters from the
Mansion-house.

It was a very line November day, and the Miss
Musgroves came through the little grounds, and stopped
for no other purpose than to say, that they were going

84 PIRSUASION.

to take a lag walk, and therefore concluded Mary
could not like to go with them; and when Mary im-
mediater 03w, with some jealousy at not being rup-
poaed a g walker, “ Oh, yes! I should like to join
you very much, I am very fond of a long walk;"
Anne felt permadcd, by the looks of the two girls, that
it was precisely what they did not wish, and admired
again the sort of necessity which the family habits
seemed to produce, of everything being to be communi-
cated, and everything being to be done together, how-
ever undesired and inconVenient. She tried to dissuade
Mary from going, but in vain ; and that being the case,
thought it best to accept the Min Mulgmvel' much
more cordial invitation to herself to go likewise, as the
might be useful in turning back with her sister, and
lessening the interference in any plan of their own.

“ I cannot imagine why they should suppoee I
should not like a long walk," said Mary, at she went
up stairs. " Everybody is always supposin that I am
not a good walker; and yet they wouﬁ‘l not have
been pleated if we had refused to join them. When
people come in this manner on purpose to ask us, how
can one say no? "

Just at they were setting off, the gentlemen returned.
They had taken out a young dog, which had spoilt
their sport, and sent them back early. Their time, and
umgth, and firm, were, therefore, exactly ready for
this walk, an they entered into it with pleasure.
Could Anne have foreseen such a junction, she would
have staid at home; but, from some feelings of interest
and curiosity, the fancied now‘that it was too late to
retract, and the whole six set forward together in the
direction chosen by the Miss Musgrovcs, who evidently
considered [lit wnlk :is under their guidance.

Anne’s object was, not to be in the way of an body;
.md wherc the narrow path: across the ﬁelds ma e many

unsussron. 85

rations necessa , to k with her brother and
ﬁ. Her plunge in Hr?!)de must arise from the
exercise and the day. from the view of the last smiles
of the year upon the tawny leaves, and withered hedges,
and from repeating to herself some few of the thousand
poetical descriptions exam of autumn, that season of
peculiar and inexhaustible inﬂuence on the mind of taste
and tenderness, that season which has drawn from every
poet, worthy of being read, some attempt at description,
or some lines of feeling. She occupied her mind as
much as possible in such like musings and quotations;
but it was not possible, that when within reach of Ca -
tain Wentworth’s conversation with either of the Miss
Musgroves, she should not try to hear it; yet she
caught little very remarkable. It was mere live y chat,
such as any oung persons, on an intimate footing, might
fall into. e was more engaged with Louira, than
with Henrietta. Louisa certainly ut more forward
for his notice than her sister. This 'stinction appeared
to increase, and there was one speech of Louisa’s which
stnrck her. After one of the man praises of the day,
which were continually bursting firrth, Captain Went-
wortlr added :—

“ What glorious weather for the Admin] and my
sisterl They meant to take a long drive this mom-
ing; perhaps we may hail them from some of these
hills. The talked of coming into this side of the
country. wonder whereabouts they will upset to-
day. Oh! it does happen very oﬂen,l assure you;
but my sister makes nothing of it; she would as lieve
be tossed out Is not.”

“Ah! you make the most of it, I know," cried
Louisa; "but ifit were really so, I should do just the
same in her place. If I loved a man as she loves the
Admiral, I would always be with him, nothing should
ever separate us, and I would rather be overturned by
him, than driven safely by anybody else.”

86 PERSUASION.

It waa cpoken with enthuaiaam.

“Had you?" cried he, catching the lame tone; “I
honour you! ” And there waa Iilence between them
for a little while.

Anne could not immediately fall into a quotation
again. The sweet scenea of autumn were for a while
put by, unless some tender annnet, fraught with the apt
analogy of the declining year, with declining hap 'neu,
and the inmch of youth, and hope, and ring, al gone
together, blamed ner memory. She you hem-If to say,
at they Itruck by order into another th, “ Is not thin
one of the wa a to Winthrop?" ut nobody heard,
or, at leaat, nobody answered her.

Winthrop, however, or its environs—for young men
are sometimes to be met with, strolling about near
home—wan their deadnation; and after another half
mile of gradual ascent through large enclosures, where
the plough: at work, and the fresh made path spoke the
farmer countencting the sweet: of poetical despondence,
and meaning to have Ipn'ng again, they gained the
lummit of the melt considerable hill, which parted
Uppercmaa and Winthro , and noon commanded a full
view of the latter, at the oot of the hill on the other aide.

Winthrop, without beauty and without dignity, wan
stretched before them an indifferent house, Itanding low,
and hemmed in by the barn: and building: of a fann-

ard.
y Mary exclaimed, “ Bleaa me! here ia Winthrop. I
declare I had no idea! Well now, I think we had
better turn back; I am excessively tired."

Henrietta, conscioua and aahamed, and aeeing no
cousin Charlet walking along any th, or leaning
agaimt any gate, was ready to do an ary wished; but
“ No l " laid Charles Muagmve, and “No, no I "
cried Louisa, more eagerly, and taking her liner aide,
seemed to be arguing the matter warmly.

Pensun'swn. 87

Charles, in the meanwhile, was very decidedly dc-
claring his resolution of calling on his aunt, now that he
was so near; and very evidently, though more fear-fully,
ﬂying to induce his wife to go too. But this was one
o the points on which the lady shewed her strength;
and when he recommended the advantage of resting her-
self a quarter of an hour at Winthrop, as she felt so
tired, she resolutely answered, “ Oh, no, indeed! walk-
ing up that hill again would do her more harm than any
sitting down could do her good," and in short, her
look and manner declared, that go she would not.

After a little accession of these sort of debates and
consultations, it was settled between Charles and his two
listen, that he and Henrietta should just run down for
a few minutes, to see their aunt and cousins, while the
rest of the party waited for them at the top of the hill.
Loui seemed the principal arranger of the plan; and,
as she went a little way with them down the hill, still
talking to Henrietta, Mary took the opportunity of
looking scomfully around her, and saying to Captain
Wentworth—

“ It is very unpleasant having such connexion-l
But, I assure you, I have never been in the house above
twice in my life."

She received no other answer than an artiﬁcial,
assenting smile, followed by s contemptuous glance, as
he turned away, which Anne perfectly knew the mean-
ing of.

The brow of the hill, where the remained, was a
cheerful t: Louisa returned; and Mary, ﬁnding a
comfomb e seat for herself on the step of a stile, was
very well satisﬁed so long as the others all stood about
her; but when Louisa drew Captain Wentworth away,
to try for a gleaning of nuts in an adjoining hedge-row,
and the were gone by degrees quite out of sight and
sound, play was happy no longer: shc quarrelled with

88 . PERSUASION.

her own neat, we: sure Louin had got a much better
somewhere, and nothing could prevent her from going
to look for u better leo. She turned through the same
gate, but could not set: them. Anne found a nice seat
or her, on a dry sunny bank, under the hedge-row, in
which she had no doubt of their Itill being, in name

or other. Mary Int down for a moment, but it
would not do; the wan sure Louisa had found a better
neat tomewhere else, and the would go on till the over-
took her.

Anne, really tired henelf, wan glad to sit down ; and
she ver noon heard Captain Wentworth and Louisa in
the h ge-row behind her, as if making their way back
along the rough, wild tort of channel, down the centre.
They were npeaking an they drew near. _ Louien'a voice
wat the lint dirtinguithed. She eeemed to he in the
middle of tome eager tpeech. What Anne lint heard
wu—

“And no, I made her go. I could not bear that
the ihould be frightened from the vilit by Iuch noneenle.
What! would I be turned baclt from doing a thing
that I had determined to do, and that I knew to be
right, by the airt and interference of Inch a person, or of
any person, I may say? No, I have no idea of being '
l0 eaIily per-naded. When I have made up my mind,

I have made it; and Henrietta seemed entirely to have
made up here to call at Winthrop to-day; and yet, the
was at near giving it up out of nomeneical com Iaisunce l ”

“ She would have turned back, then, but or you E "

“ She would, indeed. I am almost ashamed to say
it."

“Happy for her, to have such a mind at your: at
hand! After the hints you guve just now, which (lid
but conﬁrm my own observation» the lust time 1 was in
company with him, I need not affect to have no com-
prehension of what ll going on. I tee that more than a

ransussrou. 89

more dutiful morning visit to your aunt was in question ;
and woe betide him, and her too, when it comes to
things of consequence, when they are placed in circum-
stances requiring fortimde and strength of mind, if she
have not resolution enough to resist idle interference in
such a triﬂe as this. Your sister is an amiable creature;
but Mr: is the character of decision and ﬁrmness, I see.
If you value her conduct or happiness, infuse as much
of your own spirit into her as you can. But this, no
doubt, you have been always doing. It is the worst
evil of too yielding and indecisive a character, that no
inﬂuence over it can be depended on. You are never
sure of a good impression being durable; everybody may
sway it. Let those who would be happy be ﬁrm.
Here is a nut," said he, catching one down from an
u r bough, “to exem lif : a beautiful gl nut,
vfliiZh, blessed with original strength, hss'ouililded all
the storms of autumn. Nota puncture, not a weak spot
anywhere. This nut," he continued, with playful
so emnity, “ while so many of its brethren have fallen
and been trodden under foot, is still in possession of all
the happiness that a hazel nut can be supposed capable
of.” hen returning to his former earnest wne—“ My
ﬁrst wish for all whom I am interested in, is that they
should be ﬁrm. If Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful
and happy in her November of life, she will cherish all
her lpresent powers of mind.”

e had done, and was unansweretL It would have
surprised Anne if Louisa could have readin answered
such a speech: words of such interest, spoken with such
serious warmthl She could imagine what Louisa was

- feeling. For herself, she feared to move, lcst she should
be seen. While she remained, a bush of low rambling
holly protected her, and the were moving on. Before
they were. beyond her hearing, howover, Louisa spoke
again.

9o rsnsussrou.

“ Mary is good-natured enough in many respects,"
said the g “ but she does sometimes provoke me exces-
sively by her nonsense and pride—the Elliot pride.
She has a great deal too much of the Elliot pride. We
do so wish that Charles had married Anne instead. I
suppose you know he wanted to marry Anne ? "

After a moment's pause, Captain Wentworth said—

“ Do you mean that she refused him ? ”

“ Oh! yes ; certainly."

“ When did that happen ? "

“ I do not exactly know, for Henrietta and I were
at school at the time ; but I believe about a year before
he married Ms . I wish she had accepted him. We
should all haverlilted her a great deal better; and papa
and mamma always think it was her great friend Lady
Russell’s doing that she did not. They think Charles
might not be learned and bookish enough topler Lady
Russell, and that, therefore, she persuaded Anne to
refuse him."

The sounds were retreating, and Anne distinguished
no more. Her own emotions still kept her ﬁxed. She
had much to recover from before she could move.
The listener's proverbial fate was not absolutely hers:
she had heard no evil of herself, but she had heard a
great deal of very painful import. She saw how her
own character was considered by Captain Wentworth,
and there had been just that degree of feeling and
curiosity about her in his manner which must give her
extreme agitation.

As soon as she could, she went after Mary, and hav-
ing found, and walked back with her to their former
station, by the stile. felt some comfort in their whole
party being immediately afterwards collected, and once
more in motion together. Her spirits wanted the soli-
tude and silence which only numbers could give.

Charles and Henrietta returned, bringing, as may be

PERSUASION. 9:

conjectured, Charles Hayter with them. The minutiz
of the business Anne could not attempt to understand ;
even Captain Wentwonh did not seem admitted to per-
fect conﬁdenCe here; but that there had been a with-
drawing on the gentleman’s side, and a relenn'ng on the
lady’s, and that they were now very glad to be together
again, did not admit a doubt. Henrietta looked a little
ashamed, but very well pleased ;—Charles Hayter ex-
ceeding] happy: and they were devoted to each other
almost as the ﬁrst instant of their all setting forward
for Uppercmss.

Everything now marked out Louisa for Captain
Wentworth : nothing could be plainer; and where
many divisions were necessary. or even where they were
not, they walked n'de by aide nearly as much as the
other two. In a long stri of meadow land, where
there was ample space for all, were thus divided,
forming three distinct parties; an to that party of the
three which boasted least animation, and least complain-
ance, Anne necessarily belonged. She joined Charles
and Mary, and was tired enough to be very glad of
Charles's other arm ; but Charles, though in very good
humour with her, was out of tamper with his wife.
Mary had ahewn herself disobliging to him, and was
now to reap the con uence, which consequence was
his dro 'ng her arm most every moment to cut oil
the hea s of some nettles in the hedge with his switch;
and when Mary began to complain of it, and lament her
being ill-used, according to custom, in being on the
hedge side, while Anne was never incommoded on the
other, he dropped the arm. of both, to hunt after a
weasel, which he had a momentary glance of, and they
could hardly get him along at all.

This long meadow bordered a lane which their foot-
path, at the end of it wan to cross, and when the party
had all reached the gate of exit. the carriage advancing

G

92 PERSUASION.

in the Home direction, which had been tome time heard,
was jult coming up, and proved to be Admiral Croft’-
gig. He and hi! wife had taken their intended drive,
and were returning home. Upon hearing how long a
walk the young people had engaged in, they kindly
offered a seat to any lady who might be particularly
tired; it would save her full a mile, and they were
going through Upperch The invitation wan general
and generally declined. The Mill Muagrovel were not
at all tired, and Mary was either offended by not being
aIked before any of the otherl, or what Louisa called
the Elliot pride could not endure to make a third in a
one-horse chaise.

The walking party had crossed the lane, and were
nurmounting an opposite stile, and the Admiral waa
putting hil hone into motion again, when Captain Went-
worth cleared the hedge in a moment, to any something
to hie litter. The aomething might be gueued by it.
effects. '

“Mien Elliot, I am iure you are tired," cried Mn
Croft. “Do let u: have the pleasure of taking you
home. Here ll excellent room for three, I auure on.
If we were all like you,I believe we might sit our.
You muet, indeed, you must.”

Anne wal still in the lane, and though instinctively
beginning to decline, the waa not allowed to proceed.
The Admiral’n kind urgency came in support of his
wife’l: they would not he refused: they compressed
themtelvee into the smallest pouible space to leave her
a corner, and Captain Wentworth, without saying a
word, turned to her, and quietly obliged her to be
animd into the carriage.

Yea ; he had done it. She was in the carriage, and
felt that he had placed her there, that hil will and hit
hands had (lone it, that she owed it to hie perception of
her fatigue, .iml his resolution to give her rent. She

t/

PERSUASION. 93
was very much affected by the view of his disposition
towards her, which all these things made apparent.
This little circumstance seemed the completion of all
that had gone before. She understood him. He could
not forgive her, but he could not be unfeeling. Though
condemning her for the past, and considering it with high
and unjust resentment, though perfectly careless of her,
and though becoming attached to another, still he could
not see her suffer without the desire of giving her relief.
It was a remainder of fonuer sentiment; it was an
impulse of ure, though unacknowledged, friendship ; it
was a proo his own warm and amiable heart, which she
could not cbhtcmplate without emotions Io compounded
of Insure and pain, that she knew not which prevailed.

Eler answers to the kindness and the remarks of her
companions were at ﬁrst unconsciously given. They
had travelled half their way along the rough lane before
she was quite awake to what they said. She then found
them talking of “ Frederick.”

“ He certainly means to have one or other of those
two girls, Sophy," said the Admiral ; “ but there is no
saying which. He has been running after them, too,
long enough, one would think, to make up his mind.
Ay, this comes of the peace. If it were war now, he
would have settled it long ago. We sailors, Miss
Elliot, cannot afford to make long eonrtships in time of
war. How many days was it, my dear, between the
ﬁrst time of my seeing you and our sitting doWn together
in our lodgings at North Yarrnouth l”

“ We had better not talk about it, m dear," replied
Mrs Croft, pleasantly ; “ for if Miss E liot wereto hear
how soon we came to an understanding. she would
never be persuaded that we could he ha py together.
I had known ou by character, however, ong before."

“ “’ell, and I had heard of you as a very pretty irl,

and what were we to wait for besides? I do not ike

94 PIISIMSIOII.

hiingndlthinganlonginhand. I will Frederick
wonldlprudalitde more mun-,ani brin ua home
one of thee young ladiel to Kellyncb. 'icn there
would alwaya be company lbr them. And very nice
yonngladiee tbeyboth are; I hardly know one from
the other."

“ Very good bumoured, unaffected girla, indeed,"
raid Mn Croft, in a tone of calmer praise, eueb ae made
Anne rurpcct that her keener power: might not con-
sider either of them at quite worthy of her brother;
“and a Very respectable family. One could not be
oonnectedjwith better people. My dear Admiral, that
pox! we shall certain y take that post."

But by coolly giving the reins a better direction her-
selfde happily paused the danger; and by once after-
warda judiciously putting out her hand they na'ther fell
into a rut, nor ran foul of a dung-cart; and Anne, with
name amulement at their ater of driving, which the
imagined no bad reprelentation of the general guidance
of their affairs, found herIeIf nfely deposited by them
at the Cottage.

than“: 5].

HE time now approached for Lady Runell’a
return: the day was even ﬁxed; and Anne,
being engaged to join her as noon aa she was

reeettled, wan looking forward to an early removal to
Kell nch, and beginning to think how her own comfort
was hkely to be aﬁecud by it.

It would place her in the lame village with Captain
Wentworth, within half a mile of him; they would
have to frequent the same church, and there must be
intercourse between the two familiar. This was against
her; but on the other hand, he spent so much of his

PERSUASION. 95

time at Uppercross, that in removing thence she might
be considered rather as leaving him behind, than as
going towards him; and upon the whole, she believed
she must, on this interesting question, he the gainer,
almost as certainly as in her change of domestic society,
in leaving poor Mary for Lady Russell.

She wished it might be possible for her to avoid ever
seeing Captain Wentworth at the Hall: those rooms
had witnessed former meetings which would be brought
too painfully before her; but she was yet more anxious
for the possibility of Lady Russell and Captain Went-
worth never meeting anywhere. They did not like
each other, and no renewal of acquaintance now could
do any good; and were Lady Russell to see them
together, she might think that he had too much self-
posse-ion, and she too little.

These points formed her chief solicitude in anticipating
her removal from Uppercross, where she felt she had
been stationed quite long enough. Her usefulness to
little Charles would always give some sweetnesslto the
, memory of her two months’ visit there, but he was
gaining strength space, and she had nothing else to my
a .

The conclusion of her visit, however, was diversiﬁed
in s way which she had not at all imagined. Captain
Wentworth, aﬁzer being unseen and unheard of at
Uppereross for two whole days, appeared again among
them to justify himself by a relation of what had kept
him sway.

A letter from his friend, Captain Harville, having
found him out at last. had brought intelligence of Captain
Harville’s being settled with his family at Lyme for the
winter; of their being, therefore, quite unknowingl ,
within twenty miles of each other. Captain Harri] e
had never been in good health since a severe wound
which he received two years before, and Captain Went-

96 PEISUASION.

worth'u anxiety to lee him had determined him to go
immediately to Lyme. He had been there for four-
and-twcoty hourI. Hit acquittal wan complete, his
friendlhi warmly honoured, a lively interest excited for
hie frien and llll deleription of the ﬁne country about
Lyme no feelineg attended to b the party, that an
eameat desire to Ice Lyme themeelirea, and a project for
going thither wan the conaequence.

The young people were all wild to‘ see Lyme.
Captain Wentworth talked of going there again himself,
it wal only leventeen miles from Uppercrou; though
November, the weather won by no meant had; and, in
short, Louisa, who wat the moat eager of the eager,
having formed the relolution to go, and beddel the
pleuure of doing as she liked, being new armed with
the idea of merit in maintaining her own way, bore
down all the wishes of her father and mother for putting
it all till tummcr; and to Lyme they were to go—
Charlen, Mary, Anne, Henrietta, Lenin, and Captain
Wentworth.

The lint hecdlesa scheme had been to go in the
morning and return at night; but to thin Mr Mungrove,
for the lake of his hornet, would not consent; and
when it came to be rational] considered, a day in
the middle of November woud not lave much time
for tccing a new place, after deducting seven houru, as
the nature of the country required, for going and return-
ing. They were, consequently, to my the night there,
and not to be expected back till the next day’s dinner.
Thin wan felt to be a considerable amendment; and
though they all met at the Great House at rather an
early breakfast hour, and net oﬂ‘ very punctually, it was
so much [mt noon before the two carriages, Mr Mul-
grove‘l coach containing the four India, and Charlen’a
curricle, in which he drove Captain Wentworth, were
descending the long hill into Lyme, and entering upon

 

PERSUASION. 97

the still steeper street of the town itself, that it was
very evident they would not have more than time for
looking about them, before the light and. warmth of the
day were gone.

After securing accommodations, and ordering a
dinner at one of the inns, the next thing to be done was
unquestionably to walk directly down to the sea. They
were come too late in the year for any amusement or
variety which Lyme, as a public place, might offer.
The rooms were shut up, the lodgers almost all gone,
scan:er any family but of the residents left; and, as‘
there is nothing to admire in the buildings themselves,
the remarkable situation of the town, the principal 'strtet
almost hurrying into the water, the walk to the Cobb,
skirting round the pleasant little bay, which, in the
season, is animated with bathing machines and company ;
the Cobb itself, its old wonders and new improvements,
with the very beautiful line of cliffs stretching out to the
east of the town, are what the stranger’s eye will seek ;
and a very strange stranger it must be, who does not see
charms in the immediate environs of L me, to make him
wish to know it better. The scenes in Its neighbourhood,
Charmouth, with its high grounds and extensive sweeps
of country, and still more, its sweet, retired bay, backed
by dark cliﬂh, where fragments of low rock among the
sands, make it the happiest spot for watching the flow
of the tide, for sitting in unwearied contem lation; the
wooded varieties of the cheerful village of p Lyme;
and, above all, Pinny, with its green chasm! between
romantic rocks, where the uttered forest trees and
orchards of luxuriant growth, declare that many a
generation must have passed away since the ﬁrst partial
falling of the clilf prepared the ground for such a state,
where a scene so wonderful and so Iovel is exhibited,
as may more than equal any of the resembling scenes of
the far-famed Isle of Wight: these places must be

98 PERSUASION.

viited. and vi-ited again to make the worth of Lyme

“n ' fro U do b n.

The y m ppercm- 'ng wn e now
deeertedpanrhd melancholy looking-rooms, uill de~
mending noon found themaelvel on the whore ; and
lingering only, as all mun linger Ind gue on a ﬁrIt
return to the Ien, who ever deserve to look on it at all,

meeded towards the Cobb, equally their object in
melf and on Captain Wentworth’l account: for in a
small home, near the foot of an old pier of unknown
date, were the Harvilla Iettled. Captain Wentworth

V turned in to call on his friend; the other: walked on,
and he was to join them on the Cobb.

They were by no means tired of wondering and
admiring; and not even Louiea Ieemed to feel that they
had parted with Captain Wentworth long, when
w him coming after them, with three companionl, I
well known already, by description, to be Captain and
Mn Harville, and a Captain nwick, who was ﬂying
with them.

Captain Benwick had came time ago been lint
lieutenant of the anonia; and the account which Cap-
tain Wentworth had given of him, on hie return from
Lyme before, hie warm praise of him an an excellent
young man and an ofﬁcer, whom he had alwaya valued
highly, which must have stamped him well in the cm
of every linener, had been followed by a little hietory of
hi. rivate life, which rendered him perfectly intereeting
in e eyeu of all the ladies. He had been engaged to
Captain Harville’l timer, Ind wan now mourning her
loan. They had been a year or two waiting for fortune
and promotion. Fortune came, hie prize-mane n
lieutenant being great; promotion, too, came It :1,-
but Fanny Harville did not live to know it. She had
died the preceding summer while he was at lea. Captain
Wentworth believed it impossible for man to be more

ransusswn. 99

attached to woman than poor Benwiclt had been to
Fanny Harville, or to he more deeply aliiicted under
the dmdful change. He considered his disposition as
of the son which must suffer heavily, uniting very strong
feelings with quiet, serious, and retiring manners, and a
decided taste for reading, snd sedentary urruits. To
ﬁnish the interest of the story, the friendship between
him and the Harvilles seemed, if possible, augmented by
the event which closed all their views of alliance, and
Captain Benwiclt was now living with them entirely.
Captain Harville had taken his present house for half a

ear; his tan, and his health, and his Fortune, all direct-
ing him to a residence unexpensive, and by the sea ; and
the grandeur of the country, and the retirement of
Lyme in the winter, appeared exactl adapted to Cap-
tain Benwick’s state of mind. he sympathy and
good-will excited towards Captain Benwick was very
great.

“ And yet," said Anne to herself, as they now moved
forward to meet the party, “he has not, perhasz more
sorrowing heart than I have. I cannot believe his
prospects so blighted for ever. He is younger than I
am; younger in feeling, if not in fact; younger as I
man. He will rally again, and be happy with another.”

They all met, and were introduced. Captain Har-
ville was a tall, dark man, with a sen-‘ble, benevolent
countenance: a little lame; and, from strong features
and want of health, looking much older than Captain
Wentworth. Captain Benwick looked, and was, the
youngest of the three, and, compared with either of
them, a little man. He had a leasing face and a
melancholy air, just as he ought to ave, and drew back
from conversation.

Captain Harville, though not equalling Captain
Wentworth in manners, was a perfect gentleman, un-
affected, warm, and obliging, Mrs Harvillc, a degree

l 00 PERSUASION.

lus polished than her hudaand, scented, however, to
have the same good feelings; and nothing could he
more pleasant than their desire of considering the whole
party as friends of their own, because the friends of
Ca in Wentworth, or more kindly hospitable than
their entreaties for their all promising to dine with
them. The dinner, already ordered at the inn, was at
last, though unwillingly, accepted as an excuse; but
they seemed almost hurt that Captain Wentworth
should have brought any such party to Lyme, without
considering it as a thing of course that they should dine
with them.

There was so much, attachment to Captain Went-
worth in all this, and such a hewitching charm in a
degree of hospitality so uncommon, so unlike the usual
style of give-and-take initiations, and dinners of for-
malin and display, that Anne felt her spirits not likely
to be beneﬁted by an increasing acquaintance among his
brother-oliicers. “These would have been all my
friends," was her thought; and she had to stnrggle
against: great tendency to lowness. -

On quitting the Cobb, they all went iu-doors with
their new friends, and found rooms so small at none
but those who invite from the heart could think capable
of accommodating so many. Anne had a moment’s
astonishment on the subject herself; but it was soon
lost in the pleasunter feelings which rpmng from the
sight of all the ingenious contrivances and nice arrange-
ments of Captain Harville, to turn the actual space to
the best possible account, to supply the deﬁciencies of
lodging-house furniture, and defend the windows and
doors against the winter atoms to be expected. The
varieties in the ﬁtting-up of the rooms, where the
common necessaries rovided by the owner, in the
common indifferent p ight, were contrasted with some
few articles of a rare species of wood, excellently

 

PERSUASION. I O I

worked up, and with something curious and valuable
from all the distant countries Captain Harville had
visited, were more than amusing to Anne: connected
as it all was with his profession, the fmit of its labours,
the eﬁ'ect of its inﬂuence on his habits, the picture of
repose and domestic happiness it presented, made it to
her a something more, or less, than gratiﬁcation.

Captain Harville was no reader; but he had eon-
trived excellent accommodations, and fashioned very
pretty shelves, for a tolerable collection of well-bound
volumes, the propert of Ca‘tain Benwick. His lame-
ness prevented him mm ta 'ng much exercise; but a
mind of usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish him
with constant employment within. He drew, he var-
nished, he carpentered, he glued; he made toys for
the children; he fashioned new netting-needles and
pins with improvements} and if everything else was
done, sat down to his large ﬁshing-net at one comer of
the room.

Anne thought she left great hap iness behind her
when they quitted the house; and Louisa, by whom
she found herself walking, burst forth into ruptures of
admiration and delight on the character of the navy:
their friendliness, their brotherliness, their openness,
their uprightness; protesting that she was convmced of
sailors havin more worth and warmth than any other
set of men in England; that they only knew how to
live, and they only deserved to be respected and loved.

They went back to dress and dine; and so well had
the scheme answered already, that nothing was found
amiss; though its being “ so entirely out of the season,"
and the “no thoroughfare of Lyme," and the “ no
expectation of com ny,” had brought many apologies
from the heads of e inn.

Anne found herself b this time growing so much
more hardened to being in Captain Wentworth's com-

I 02 PBRSUASION.

pony than she had at ﬁrst imagined could ever be, that
the sitting down to the same table with him now, and
the interchange of the common civilities attending on it
(thiy never got beyond), was become a mere nothing.

he nights were too dark for the ladies to meet
again till the morrow, but Captain Harville had pro-
mised them a visit in the evening ; and he came, bnng-
ing his friend also, which was more than had been
expected, it having been agreed that Captain Benwick
had all the appearance of being oppressed by the presence
of so many strangers. He ventured among them again,
however, though his spirits certainly did not seem ﬁt for
the mirth of the part in general.

While Captains entworth and Harville led the
talk on one side of the mom, and by recurring to
former dayl, supplied anecdotes in abundance to occupy
and entertain the others, it fell to Anne’s lot to be
placed rather apart with Captain Benwick; and a very
good impulse of her nature obliged her to begin an
acquaintance with him. He was shy, and disposed to
abunction; but the engaging mildness of her counte-
nance, and gentleneu 0 her manner, coon had their
eﬂ'ect; and Anne was well repaid the ﬁrst trouble of
exertion. He was evidently a young man of consider-
able taste in reading, though principally in poetry; and
besides the persuasion of having given him at least an
evening’s indulgence in the discussion of subjects. which
his usual companions had probably no concern in, she
had the hope of being of real use to him in some sug<
gestions as to the duty and beneﬁt of struggling against
afﬂiction, which had naturally grown out of their con-
versation. For, though shy, he did not seem reserved:
it had rather the appearance of feelings glad to burst
their usual restraints; and having talked of poetry, the
richness of the present age, and gone through a brief
comparison of opinion as to the ﬁrst-rate poets, trying

nusussron. 103

to ascertain whether Mar-union or Tb: Lab 9/ lb: Lab
were to he preferred, and how ranked the Giaaur and
The Bride of 116110;, and moreover, how the Giaour
was to be pronounced, he showed himself so intimately
acquaian with all the tenderest songs of the one poet,
and all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agony
of the other; he repeated, with such tremulous feeling,
the various lines which imaged a broken heart, or a

' mind destroyed by wretchedness. and looked so entirely
as if he meant to be understood, that she ventured
to hope he did not always read only poetry, and to
say, that she thought it was the misfortune of poetry
to be seldom safely enjoyed by those who enjoyed it
completely; and that the strong feelings which alone
could estimate it truly were the very feelings which
ought to taste it but sparingly.

His looks showing him not pained, but leased with
this allusion to his situation, she was embol ened to go
on; and feeling in herself the right of seniority of
mind, she ventured to recommend a larger allowance
of prose in his daily study; and on being requested to
particularizc, mentioned such works of our hen moml-
ists, such collections of the ﬁnest letters, such memoirs
of characters of worth and sulfering, as occurred to her
at the moment as calculated to rouse and fortify the
mind by the highest precepts and the strongest examples
of moral and religious endurances.

Curtain Bcnwick listened attentively, and seemed
grate ul for the interest implied; and thou h with a
shake of the head, and sighs which declar his little
faith in the efficacy of any books on grief like his,
noted down the names of those the recommended, and
promised to procure and read them.

When the evening was over, Anne could not but be
amused at the idea of her coming to Lyme to preach
patience and resignation to a young man whom she had

:04 nnsuwox.

never eeen before; nor could eke help fearing, on more
Ierioul reﬂection, that, like man other gleat moi-alien
and preachers, the had been eloquent on a point in
which her own conduct would ill bear examination.

cbapm ﬁll

NNE and Henrietta, ﬁnding themaelvee the earlien
of the party the next morning, agreed to umll
down to the lea before breakfaet. They went

to the Ianda, to watch the ﬂowing of the tide, which a
line eouth-caeterly breeze wan bringing in with all the
grandeur which I0 ﬂat a chore admitted. They pained
the morning; gloried in the tea; eympathized in the
deli ht of the frech-Feeling breeze—and were lilent;
till enrietta mddenly began again, with—

“Oh, yeal I am quite convinced that, with very
few exception, the lea-air always doe: good. There
can be no doubt of ita having been of the greatest ser-
vice to Dr Shirl , after hie illneu, last apring twelve-
month. He degree himaelf, that coming to Lyme
for a month did him more good than all the medicine
he took; and that being by the lea :Ilwaya make: him
feel young again. Now, I cannot help thinking it a
pity that he doe: not live entirely by the tea. I do
think he had better leave Uppercroee entirely, and ﬁx
at Lyme. Do not you, Anne? Do not you agree
with me, that it in the belt thing he could do, both for
hinuelf and Mr: Shirley? She has cnuainl here, you
know, and many acquaintance, which would make it
cheerful for her, and I am sure she would be glad to
get to a place where the could have medical attendance
at hand, in case of his having another seizure. Indeed,
I think it quite melancholy to have such excellent

 

 

mu}/¢M.[.

(w. n,

5/2; t:

PERS‘JASION. 105

people as Dr and Mrs Shirley, who have been doing
good all their lives, wearing out their last days in a
place like Uppercross, where, excapting our family,
they seem shut out from all the world. I wish his
friends would propose it to him. I really think they
ought. And, as to procuring a dispensation, there
could be no difﬁculty at his time of life and with his
character. My only doubt is, whether anything could
persuade him to leave his parish. He is so ver strict
and scrupulous in his notions; over-scrupulous must
say. Do not you think, Anne, it is being over-
scrupulous! Do not you think it is quite is mistaken

'nt of conscience, when a clergyman sacriﬁces his
health for the sake of duties which may be as well
performed by another )erson.’ And at Lyme, too,
only sevch miles 0 , he would be near enough to
hear if people thought there was anything to complain
of.”

Anne smiled more than once to herself during this
speech, and entered into the subject, as ready to do
good by entering into the feelings of a young lady as
of a young man, though here it was good of a lower
standard, for what could be offered but general acqui-
escence! She said all that was reasonable and proper
on the business; felt the claims of Dr Shirley to re-

se as she ought; saw how very desirable it was that
he should have some active, respectable young man as a
resident curate, and was even coumous enough to hint
at the advantage of such resident curate’s being married.

“I wish,” said Henrietta, very well pleased with
her companion, " I wish Lady Russell lived at Upper-
cross, and were intimate with Dr Shirley. I have
always heard of Lady Russell as a woman of the
greatest inﬂuence with everybodyl I always look
upon her as able to persuade a person to anything! I
am afraid of her, as l told you before, quite afraid of

r06 ensunsmm

her, because the in to very clever; but I raped her
amazingly, and wilh we had ouch a neighbour at
Up rerun."
one wan amueed by Henrietta’l manner of being

grateful, and amused alno that the courle of event: and
the new interest: of Henrietta’a view- Ihould have
placed her friend at all in favour with any of the Mue-
grove famil ; Ill: had only time, however, for a general
anewer, an a with that Inch another woman were at
Uppercrou, before all mbjem suddenly ceased, on lee-
ing Louiaa and Captain Wentworth coming towardr
them. They came alto for a stroll till breakfast wan
lilter to be mdy; but Louisa recollecting immediately
afterwards that rhe had eomething to procure at a thop,
invited them all to go back with her into the town.
They were all at her

When they came to the crepe, leading upward: from
the bach, a gentleman, at the tame moment preparing
to come down, politely drew back, and stopped to give
them way. They amended and patted him; and as
they pained, Anne’t face caught his eye, and he looked
at her with a degree of earnect admiration which she
could not be intenlible of. She was looking remark-
ably well ; her very regular, very pretty featurel, having
the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the line
wind which had been blowing on her complexion, and
by the animation of eye which it had also produced.
It was evident that the gentleman (cmletely a Cgzntle-
man in manner admired her exc ingly. ptain
Wentworth loo round at her inuantly in a way
which thewed his noticing of it. He gave her a
momnu%glance, a glance of brightness, which reemed
to say, " hat man is muck with you, and even I, at
thin moment, oee something like Anne Elliot again.”

After attending Louisa through her businesu, and
loitering about a little longer, they returned to the inn;

PERSUASION. 107

and Anne, in Ira-mg afterward: quickly from her own_
chamber to their dining-room, had nearly run against the
very name gentleman, no he came out ofan adjoining npart-
ment. She had before conjectured him to be a manger
like themoelvet, and determined that a well-looking
groom, who war Itrolling about near the two in: II
they came back, Ihonld be his servant. Both meter
and man being in mourning anointed the idea. It wan
now proved that he belonged to the same in an thern<

Ielvel; and thin lecond meeting, Ihort a it wan, Ilao
proved again, by the gentlernan'l looks, that he thought
her: very lovely, and by the readiness and propriety of
hi. apologieu, that he was I man of exceedingly good
manners. He Ieerned about thirty, and though not
hnmlnomc, had an ngrcenble potion. Anne felt that Illl:
thould like to know who he was.

. They had nearly done breakfut, when the sound of
a carriage (almolt the ﬁrst they had heard Iince entering
Lyme), drew half the party to the window. It wan a
gentleman’l carriage, a cnn-iele, but only coming round
from the Itahle-yard to the front door; Iomebody mutt
he oing away. It wan driven by a servant in mouming.

he word curricle made Charles Mangrove jump up
that he might compare it with his own; the Iervant in
mourning rouned Anne’s curiouity, and the whole six
were collected to look, by the time the owner of the
éurricle was to be seen issuing from the door, amidst
the howt and civilitiel of the hounehold, and taking his
seat, to drive off.
“ Ah I " cried Captain Wentworth, inmntly, and
with half a glance at Anne, “ it in the very man we
n

The Mint Mulgrovel agreed to it; and having all
kindly watched him an far up the hill a they could,
they returned to the hreakfut table. The waiter. cam
into the room noon afterwards. '

H

:08 rensunsrou.

“ Pray." lid Captain Went-with, inmdiately, “ can
you me!le the name of the gentle-mu who in junt gone
IWI

“yYee, ir, a Mr Elliot, a gentleman of large fortune,
came in In night from Sidmnuth. Dare ny you
heurdthecan’iage,ir. while you were at dinner; and
ﬁngmmforankhemgonhie wlytoBathand

ndon."

"Elliotl ” Many had looked on each other, and
many had repeated the name, before I" this had been
got through, even by the smart rapidity of a waiter.

“Ble- Inel " cned Mary. “it mun be our con-in;
it mun be our Mr Elliot, it mun, indeed! Charles.
Anne, must not it? In mourning, you nee, just an our
Mr Elliot mun be. How very extnordinaryl In the

mneinnwithiu! Anne.muunot it beam-Mr
Elliot? my father’l next heir? Pny, Iir,” turning to
the waiter, “ did not you hear, did not hie Icrvnnt lay
whether he belonged to the Kellynch family i "

“ No, m’am, he did not mention no particular
family; but he laid his maeter wu a very rich gende-
man, and would be a baronight some day. ’

“There! you nee!” cried Mary in an ecstasy;
“jun u I nidl Heir to Sir Walter Elliot! I war
sure that would come out, if it wzu no. Depend upon
it. that in a circumnance which hie Iervanu take care to
publith, wherever he goes. But, Anne, only conceive
how extraordinary! I with I had looked at him more.
I Wllh we had been aware in time who it war, that he
might have been introduccd to us. What a pity that
we Ihould not have been introduced to each other I
Do you think he had the Elliot countenance? I hardly
looked at him. I war looking at the horse: ; but I think
he had tomething of the Elliot countenance. I wonder
the inn: did not strike me I Oh I the great-coat was
hanging over the panel, and hid the arms, to it did;

rnasuasron. 109

otherwise, I am sure, I should have observed them, and
the livery too ; if the servant had not been in morning,
one should have known him by the livery."

“ Putting all these ve extraordinary circiunstances
together,” said Captain entworth, “ we must consider
it to be the arrangement of Providence that you should
not be introduced to your cousin."

When she could command Mary’s attention, Anne
quietly tried to convince her that their father and Mr
Elliot had not, for man years, been on such terms
as to make the power 0 attempting an introduction at
all desirable.

At the same lime, however, it was a secret grati-
ﬁcation to herself to have seen her cousin, and to know
that the future owner of Kellynch was undoubtedly I
gentleman, and had an air of good sense. She would
not, upon any account, mention her having met with
him the second time; luckily Mary did not much
attend to their having passed close by him in their earl
walk, but she would have felt quite ill-used by Anne s
having actually run against him in the passage, and
received his very polite excuses, while she had never
been near him at all; no, that cousinly little interview
must remain a perfect secret.

“ Of course," said Ma , “ you will mention our
seeing Mr Elliot the next ume you write to Bath. I
think my father certainly ought to hear of it; do
mention all about him."

Anne avoided a direct reply, but it was just the
circumstance which she considered as not merely un-
neccuary to be communicated, but as what ought to be
suppressed. The offence which had been given her
father, many years back, she knew; Elizabeth’s r-
ticular share in it she suspected; and that Mr Elliot’s
idea always produced irritation in both was beyond a
doubt. Mary never wrote to Bath herself ; all the toil

l I 0 PERSUASION.

of keeping up a Ilow and unntiafactory correspondence
with Elizabeth fell on Anne.

Breakfaat had not been long over when they were
joined by Captain and Mn Harville and Captain Ben-
wick; with whom they had appointed to take their last
walk about Lyme. They ought to be Ietn'ng of for
Uppererou by one, and in the mean while were to be
all together, and out of door: as long as they could.

Anne found Captain Benwick getting near her, at
noon at they were all fairly in the meet. Their con-
venation the preceding evening did not diaincline him
to leek her again ; and the walked together tome time,
talking as before of Mr cott and Lord Byron, and
still as unable as before, and at unable :- any other two
readers, to think exactly alike of the meriu of either,
till something occasioned an almoat general change
amongst their purity, and instead of Captain Benwick,
she had Ca tain arville by her side.

“ Miss lliot," said he, speaking rather low, “ you

' have done a good deed in making that poor fellow talk
so much. I with he could have such company oftener.
It is bad for him, I know, to be shut up as he in ; but
what can we do ? We cannot part.”

d No,” mid Anne, “ that I can easily believe to be
impouible; but in time, perhaps—we know what time
does in every can: of allliction, and you must remember,
Captain Harville, that your friend may yet be called a

mug maumer—only last summer, I understand.”

“Ay, true enough," (with a deep sigh), “ only

une.”
J “ And not known to him. perhapa, so soon.”

u Not till the ﬁrst week in August, when he came
home from the Cape, just made into the Grappler. I
m. at Plymouth dreading to hear of him; he sent in
letters, but the Grappler was under orders for Pom-

moulll. Thu-t- lllt‘ m-ws must follow him, but who

PERSUASION. l I l

was to tell it? not I. I would as soon have been run
up to the ard-an'n. Nobody could do it, but that good
fellow ” pointing to Ca in Wentworth). “The La-
conia ha come into lymouth the week before; no
danger of her being sent to sea'again. He stood his
chance for the rest; wrote up for lure of absence, but
without waiting the return, travelled night and day till
he got to Portsmouth, rowed all" to the Grappler that
instant, and never left the poor fellow for a week.
That ’s what he did, and nobody else could have saved

r James. You may think, Miss Elliot, whether he
Is dear to us i ”

Anne did think on the question with perfect de-
cision, and said as much in reply as her own feelings
could accomplish, or as his seemed able to bear, for he
was too much attuned to renew the subject, and when
he lsvpolte again, it was of something totally diﬂ'erent.

rs Harville’s giving it as her oplnion that her
husband would have quite walking enough by the time
he reached home, determined the direction of all the
party in what was to be their last walk; they would
accompany them to their door, and then remm and
set off themselves. 13 all their calculations there
was not' time for this; but as they drew near
the Cobb, there was such a general wish to walk
along it once more, all were so inclined, and Louisa
soon grew so determined, that the diﬂ'erence of a
quarter of an hour, it was found, would he no diﬁ'erence
at all; so with all the kind leave-taking,and all the
kind interchange of invitations and promises which may
be imagined, they (parted from Captain and Mrs Har-
ville at their own car, and still accompanied by Cap-
tain Benwick, who seemed to cling tothem to the last,
proceeded to make the pro er adieus to the Cobb.

Anne found Captain enwick again druwin near
her. Lord Byron’s “dark blue seas" coud not

l l 2 MANOR.

Bilofheinghvnughtfnrwdhythdrprmntvie',
Indiregladlygavehimallhaauentionulongu
attention in It ya soon drawn, perforoe,
another my.

'I‘herevlutoomnchwindtonuke the high penal"
the new Cobb plaunt for the ladies, and they agreed
to get down the amp: to the lower, and all were con-
tented to pen quietly and carefully down the steep
ﬂight, excepting Loni-3 the mun he down
them by Captain Wentvlorth. In all their IIth he
had had to jump her ﬁ'orn the etilee; the Ienaation war
delightful to her. The hardnae of the pavement for
her feet nude him lea- willing upon the recent occa-
Iion ; he did it, however. She wan nfey down, and
inmntly to show her en’ayment, ran up the lepeto he
jumped down again. e advised her againlt it, thought
the too great; but no, he reasoned and talked in
win, the nniled and said, “I am determined I will : ”
he put out hie hands; the war too precipitate by half I
necond, the fell on the pavement on the Lower Cobb,
and war taken u lifeleul There war no wound, no
blood, no vilible mine; but her eyee were closed, the
bruthed not, her face war like death. The honor of
that moment to Ill who rtood around!

Captain Wentworth, who had caught her up, knelt
with her in hit armr, looking on her with a face an
pallid as her own in an agony of silence. “ She it
deldl the it dndl " ecreamed Mary, catching hold of
her hueband, and contributing with his own horror to
make him imrnoveable; and in another moment, Hen-
rietta, linking under the conviction, lost her rennet too,
and would have fallen on the maps but for Captain
Benwick and Anne, who caught and supported her
between them.

“ll there no one to help me?” were the ﬁrst
word! which boat from Captain Wentworth, in I

szsussron. “3
tone of deqair, and as if all his own mngth were

M-

8""60 to him, go to him," cried Anne, .“ for heaven’s
sake go to him. I can supEbrt her myself. Leave me,
and go to him. Rub her nds, her temples; here
are salts : take them, take them.”

Captain Benwick obeyed, and Charles at the same
moment disengaging himself from hit wife, they were
both with him; and Louisa was raised up and mpported
more ﬁrmly between them, and everything was done
that Anne had pmmpnd, but in vain; while Captain
Wentwnrth, staggering against the wall for his support,
exclaimed in the hitterest agony—

“ Oh God! her father and mother! "

“ A surgeonl " laid Anne.

He caught the word : it seemed to rouse him at
once; and saying only—“ True, true, a surgeon this
instant,” was darting away, when Anne eagerly sug-

“ Captain Benwick, would not it be better for
Captain Benwick? He knows where a nurgeon is to
be found."

Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of
the idea, and in s moment (it was all done in rapid
moments) Captain Benwick had resigned the poor
corpse-like ﬁgure entirely to the brother's care, and was
off for the town with the Ilth idity.

As to the wretched [party le behind, it could
scarcely be said which 0 the three, who were com-
pletely rational, was suﬂ'ering most: Captain Went-
worth, Anne, or Charles, who, really a very sli'ectionate
brother, hung over Louisa with sob: of grief, and could
only turn his eyes from one sister to see the other in a
state as insensible, or to witness the hysterical agitation
of his wife, calling on him for help which he could not
gin.

I I4 PERSUASION.

Anne, attending with all the mngth, and zeal, and
thought, which inninct lupplied, to Henrietta, Itill
tried, .1 inumlu, tn ragga: comfort to the otherl, tried
to quiet Ma , to animate Charla, to antage the feel-
ing: of Captain Wentwonh. Both Ieemed to look to
her for directions

“ Anne, Anne," cried Charla, “what in to be
done next? What, in heaven’a mm, in to be done
next 9 ”

Captain Wentwonh’a eye: were alIo turned towarda
her.

“Had not the better be carried to the inn? Yea,
I am lure : carry her gently to the inn."

“Yea, yen, to the inn,’ repeated Captain Went-

worth. comparative] collected, and eager to be doing
Iomething. “I wil carry her myself. Mungrove,take
care of the others."
' By thin time the report of the accident had lprcad
among the workmen and boatmen about the Cobb, and
many were collected near them, to be unful if wanted;
at anyrate, to enjoy the night of a dead young lady, nay,
two dead young ladiel, for it proved twice on line at
the ﬁrst report. To name of the beet-looking of these
good people Henrietta was consigned, for, though
partially revived, ahe war quite helplcu; and in thin
manner, Anne wlking by her aide, and Charles attend-
ing to hll wife, they let forward, treading back, with
feelingl unutterable, the ground which no latel , I0 very
latel , and I0 light of heart, they had passed along.

They were not of the Cobb before the Harvillel
met them. Calptain Benwick had been leen ﬂ ing by
their house, wi a countenance which thow some-
thing to be wrong; and they had let of? immediately,
informed and directed at th parsed, towards the Ipot.
Shocked aa Captain Harvile wan, he brought semen
and nervel that could be innantly useful; and a look

PERSUASION. l l s

between him and his wife decided what war to be done.
She mnat be taken to their home; all mun go to their
house; and wait the nurgeon’a arrival there. They
would not linen to Icruplel : he war obeyed: they
were all beneath hir roof ; and while Louiln, under Mrs
Harville’s direction, was conveyed up ruin, and given
'on of her own bed, nuisance, cordiall, restorau'vea
were applied by her huaband to all who needed them.

Lenin had once opened her eyes but noon cloeed
them again, without apparent conlcioueneu. This had
been a proof of life, however, of Iervice to her sister;
and Henrietta, thou h perfectly incapable of being in
the same room with ouira, war kept, by the agitation
of hope and fear, from a return of her own incenaibility.
Mary, too, was growing calmer.

The surgeon wae with them almmt before it had
leemed po-ible. They were lick with horror, while he
examined; but he war not hapelell. The head had
received a severe contusion, but he had Ieen greater in-
juriel recovered from; he wm by no means hopeless;
he spoke cheerfully.

That he did not regard it an a desperate cane, that he
did not my a few hours must end it, was at ﬁrst felt
beyond the hope of melt; and the ecstacy of such I
reprieve, the rejoicin , deep and Iilent, after a few
fervent ejaculation: o gratitude to Heaven had been
oﬁ'ered, may be conceived.

The tone, the look, with which “Thank God! ”
was uttered by Captain Wentwonh, Anne was rule
could never be forgotten by her; nor the eight of him
afterwardl, as he sat near I table, leaning over it with
folded mm, and fnce concealed, an if overpowered by
the varioua feelings of his Ioul, and trying by prayer and
reﬂection to calm them.

Louise’s limbs had elcaped. There was no injury
but to the head. '

r l 6 nosunsron.

It now beanie neceolaryfor the partytocontider
what when tobedongutothu‘r general Iituation.
They were now ableto speak to each other and con-
lult. That Louie: mun remain where the was, how-
ever dime-ring to her friend. to be involving the Har-
villa in Inch trouble, did not admit. a doubt. Her
removal wan impo-ible. The Harvillel lilenced all
templel, and, aunuch ll they cwld, all gratitude. They
had looked forward and an-anged everything before the
other- began to reﬂect. Captain Benwick must give up
hicroom to them and get a bed elrewhere; and the
whole wan tettled. They were only concerned that the
houae could accommodate no more; and yet, perhaps,
by“putting the children away in the maid’r room, or
awingin a cot eomewhere," they could hardly bear to
think of not ﬁnding room for two or three besides,
lupporing they might with to may ; though, with regard
to any attendance on Mill Muagrove, there need not be
the lean uneaoineu in leaving her to Mn Harville’e
care entirely. Mrs Harville was a very experienced
none, and her nursery-maid, who had lived with hei-
long, and one about with her everywhere, was juot ruch
another. etween those two the could want no pouible
attendance by day or ni ht. And all thin wae laid with
a truth and sincerity ot'l‘eeling irrelietible.

Charles, Henrietta, and Captain Wentworth were the
three in consultation, and for a little while it was only
an interchange of perplexity and terror. “ Uppercrou,
the neceuity of tome one’e going to ngercrou; the
newt to he conveyed; how it could be roken to Mr
and Mr: Muagrove; the lateneu of the morning; an
hour already gone eince they ought to have been off;
the impouibility of being in tolerable time." At ﬁnt
the were capa le of nothing more to the purpoee than
Iuc exclamation; but after a while Captain Went-
worth, exerting himself, said——

 

rnsunsron. r l 1

“We must be decided, and without the lost of an-
other minute. Every minute is valuable. Some one
mun resolve on being off for ppercroas instantly.
Musgrove, either you or I must go.’

Charles agreed, but declared his resolution of not
going away. He would he as little encumbrance on
possible to Cnpmin and Mn Harville 3 but u toleaving
his sieter in such a state, he neither ought nor would.
So far it was decided; and Henriettl It ﬁrst declared
the same. She, however, wan noon pervunded to think
diﬁ'erently. The mefulness of her ﬂyingl She, who
had not been able to remain in Loulea’s room, or to look
at her, without eufferings which made her wone than
helpless! She was forced to acknowledge that the
coulddo no good, yet wan still unwilling to be away,
till, touched by the thought of her father and mother,
she gave it up ; she consented, she was anxious to be at
home.

The [In had reached this point, when Anne, coming
quietly own from Louisa’s room, could not but hear
what followed, for the rlour door was a .

“ Then it is settled, usgrove," cried Went-
worth, “that you my, and that I take care of or
Iister home. But as to the rut, as to the others, i one
staystoauilt Mrs Harville, I think it need he only
one. Mrs Charles Musgrove will, of course, wish to get
back to her children ; but if Anne will may, no one so
pm r, so capable :- Anne."

he puused a moment to recover from the emotion of
hearing herself so spoken of. The other two warmly
agreed to what he laid, and she then appeared.

“ You will stay, I am sure; you will my and nurseher,"
cried he, turning to her and speaking with a glow, and
yet a gentleness, which seemed almost restoring the
She coloured d ly, and he recollected hinuelf and
moved away. he expressed henelf molt willing,

r 18 msuasron.

ready, happy to remain. “It wan what the had been
thinking of, and withing to he allowed to do. A bed
on the ﬂoor in Louiaa’l room would be Iullieient for
her, if Mn Harville would but think to."

One thing more, and all seemed arranged. Though
it wan rather detirahle that Mr and Mn Muegrove
thould he previoutly alarmed b come than of delay;
yet the time uired hy the ppercrou home: to take
them back, we d be a dreadful extension of Iutpenle;
and Captain Wentworth proposed, and Charlea Mue-
grove agreed, that it would be much better for him to
take a chain: From the inn, and leave Mr Mulgrove’l
carriage and hornet to be sent home the next morning
early, when there could he the farther advantage of
ending an account of Louisa’t night.

Captain Wentworth now hurried oﬂ' toget everything
ready on hie part, and to be noon followed by the two
ladies. When the plan will made known to Mary,
however, there was an end of all pence in it. She wan
to wretched, and no vehement, complained to much of
injuatice in being expected to go away instead of Anne:
Anne, who wan nothing to Louisa, while the wan her
litter, and had the hen right to day in Henrietta't
Iteadl Why was not the to be as unful as Anne?
And to home without Charles, too, without her hub-
bandl o, it waa too unkind. And in than, the
said more than her huaband could long withttand, and
at none of the nthen could oppose when he gave way,
there wan no help for it: the change of Mary for Anne
war inevitable.

Anne had never Jubmitted more reluctantly to the
'ealoua and ill-judging claiml of Mary; but no it mun
in, and they let off for the town, Charles taking care of
hit litter, and Captain Benwick attending to her. She
gave a moment’i recollection, a they hun'ied along,
to the little circummncet which the name vpou had

PERSUASION. r 19

witnessed earlier in the morning. There she had
listened to Henrietta’s schemes for Dr Shirley's leav-
in Uppercross ; farther on, she had first seen Mr
E lint; a moment seemed all that could now be given
to any one but Louisa, or those who were wrapped up
in her welfare.

Captain Benwick was most considerater attentive to
her; and, united as they all seemed by the distress of
the day, she felt an increasing degree of good-will to-
wards him, and a pleasure even in thinking that it
might, perhaps, he the occasion of condnuing their
acgintance.

tain Wentworth was on the watch for them, and
n chaise and four in waiting, stationed for their conveni-
ence in the lowest part of the street; but his evident
surprise and vexation at the substitution of one sister for
the other, the change of his countenance, the astonish-
ment, the ex ressions begun and suppressed, with which
Charles was istened to, made but a mortifying reception
of Anne; or must at least convince her that she was
valued only as she could be useful to Louisa.

She endeavoured to be composed, and to be just.
Without emulating the feelings of an Emma towards
her Henry, she would have attended on Louisa with a
Zeal above the common claims of regard, for his sake;
and she hoped he would not long be so unjust as to
suppose she would shrink unnecessarily from the ofﬁce
0 a friend.

In the mean while she was in the carriage. He had
handed them both in, and placed himself between them ;
and in this manner, under these circumstances, full of
astonishment and emotion to Anne, she quitted Lyme.
How the long stage would pass; how it was to infect
their manners 3 what was to be their sort of intercourse,
she could not foresee. It was all quite natural, how-
ever. He was devoted to Henrietta; always turning

I 20 PERSUASION.

towards her ; and when he spoke at all, always with the
view of supporting her hopes and raising her spirita.
In general, his voice and manner was nudioualy calm.
To spare Henrietta from agitation seemed the govern-
ing principle. Once only, when she had been grieving
over the last ill-judged, ill-fated walk to the Cobb, bitterly
lamenting that it ever had been thought of, he burst
forth, as if wholly overcomc—'

“ Don’t talk of it, don’t talk of it,” becried. “ Oh,
God! that I had not given way to her at the (ml
momentl Had I done as I ought! But so eager and
so resolute! Dear, sweet Louisa! "

Anne wondered whether it ever occurred to him now,
to question the linstness of his own previous opinion as
to the universa felicity and advantage of ﬁrmness of
character; and whether it might not strike him that,
like all other qualities of the mind, it should have its
proportions and limits. She thought it could scarcely
escape him to feel that a persuadnhle temper might
sometimes be as much in favour of happiness as a very
resolute character.

They got on fast. Anne was astonished to recognise
the same hilll and the same objects so soon. Their
actual speed. heightened by some dread of the conclu-
ion, made the road appear but half as long as on the
day before. It was growing quite dusk, however, before
they were in the neighbourhood of Uppercross, :and
there had been total silence among them for some time,
Henrietta leaning back in the corner, with a shawl over
her face, giving the hope of her having cried herself to
sleep; when, as they were going'up their last hill, Anne
found herself all at once addreucd by Cnptain Went-
wm'lli. In .1 low cautious voice, he said :—

“ l have been considering what we had best do. She
must not .uppmr at lirst. She could not stand it. I
have been thinking whether you had not better remain

PERSUASION. l 2 l

in the carriage with her, while I go in and break it to
Mr and Mrs Musgrove. Do you think this a good
Ian i"

She did: he was satisﬁed, and said no more. But
the remembrance of the a I remained a pleasure to
her, as a proof of friendship, and of deference for her
judgment, :1 gmat pleasure ; and when it became a sort
of Iting proof, its value did not lessen.

hen the distreuing communication at Uppercross
was over, and he had seen the father and mother uite
as composed as could be hoped, and the daughter al the
better for being with them, he announced his intention
of morning in the same carriage to Lyme; and when
the horses were baited, he was off.

Chest" 5333.

HE reminder of Anne's time at Uppercross,
comprehending only two days, was spent en—
tirely at the Mansion House; and she had the

satisfaction of knowing herself extremely useful there,
both as an immediate companion, and a assisting in all
thooe arrangements for the future, which, in Mr and
Mrs Musgrove’s distressed state of spirits, would have
been diﬂiculties.

They had an early account from Lyme the next
morning. Louisa was much the same. No symptoms
worse than before had appeared. Charles came a few
hours afterwards to bring n later and more particular
account. He was tolerany cheerful. A speedy cure
must not be ho , but everything was going on as well
as the nature is the case admitted. In speaking of the
Harvilles, he seemed unable to satisfy his own sense of
their kindness, especially of Mrs Harville’s exertions u

! I 2 PEISUASION.

a none. “She really left nothing for Mary to do.
He and Mnry had been persuaded to go early to their
inn laat night. Mary had been hysterical again thil
morning. When he came away, the wan going to walk
out with Captain Benwick, which he ho would do
her good. He almost withed the had prevailed
on to come home the day before; but. the truth was,
that Mrs Harville left nothing for anybody to do."

Charlea wan to return to L me the lame afternoon,
and hit father had at lint hal a mind to go with him,
but the ladien could not content. It would be going
only to multiply trouble to the othera, and increaae hia
own diltreu; and a much better acheme followed, and
van acted upon. A chaiae wan tent for from Crewk-
heme, and Charlea conveyed back a far more uaeful
peraon in the old nursery-maid of the family, one who,
having brought up all the children, and teen the very
hut, the lin ering and long-pelted Muter Harry, lent
to achool afar hi: brothern, we now living in her de-
serted nursery to mend ttockingu, and dress all the blaina
and bruises Ihe could get near her, and who, conse-
quently, waa only too happy in being allowed to go and
help nurle dear Mina Louisa. Vague wiahea of get-
ting Sarah thither had occurred before to Mrs Muagrove
and Henrietta; but without Anne, it would hardly have
been reaolved on, and found practicable to noon.

They were indebted, the next day, to Charlen Hayter,
for all the minute knowledge of Louisa, which it wa-
l0 euential to obtain every twenty-four houra. He
made it hit business to go to Lyme, and hit account wan
atill encouraging. The intervals of sense and contciout-
neu were believed to be manger. Every report agreed
in Captain Wentworth’a appearing ﬁxed m Lyme.

Anne wan to leave them on the morrow, an event
which they all dreaded. “ What ahould they do with-
out her? They were wretched comfonera for one an-

PERSUASION. I 23

other." And so much was said in this way, that
Anne thought she could not do better than impart
among them the general inclination to which she was
privy, and persuade them all to go to Lyme at once.
She had little difﬁculty; it was soon determined that
they would go: go to-morrow, ﬁx themselves at the
inn, or get into lodgings, as it suited, and there remain
till dear Louisa could be moved. They must be taking
06' some trouble from the good people she was with:
they might at least relieve Mrs Harville from the care
of her own children: and in short, they were so happy
in the decision, that Anne was delighted with what she
had done, and felt that she could not spend her last
morning at Uppercross better than in assisting their pre-
parations, and sending them off at an early hour, though
her being left to the solitary range of the house was the
consequence.

She was the last, exce ting the little boys at the cot-
tage, she was the very an, the only remaining one of
all that had ﬁlled and animated both houses, of all that
had given Uppercross its cheerful character. A few
days had made a change indeed!

If Louisa recovered, it would all be well again.
More than former ha piness would be restored. There
could not be a doubt, to her mind there was none, of
what would follow her recovery. A few months hence
and the [room now] so deserted, occupied but by her
silent, pensive self, might be ﬁlled again with all that
was happy and gay, all that was glowing and bright in
gﬁsperous love, all that was most unlike Anne

iotl

An hour’s com lete leisure for such reﬂections as
these, on a dark glovember day, s small thick rain
almost blotting out the very few objects ever to be dis-
cerned from the windows, was enough to make the
sound of Lady Russell’s carriage exceedingly welcome; ‘

l

l 24 PIRSUASION.

and thou h desirous to be gone, she could not quit
the snsion ouse. or look an adieu to the Cottage,
with its black. dripping and comfortless veranda, or
even notice through the misty glasses the last humble
tenements of the village, without a saddened heart.
Scenes had pant-d in Uppercross which made it precious.
It stood the record of many senntions of pain, once
severe, but now softened; and of some instances of re-
lenting feeling, some hreathings of friendship and recon-
ciliation, which could never be looked for again, and
which could never cease to be dear. She left it all
behind her, all but the recollection that such things had
been.

Anne had never entered Kell ch since her quitting
Lady Russell’s house in Seprem . It had not been
necessary, and the few occasions of its being possible for
her to go to the Hall she had contrived to evade and
escape from. Her lint return was to resume her place
in the modem and elegant apartments of the Lodge, and
to ladden the eyes of its mistress.

I‘here was some anxiety mixed with Lad Russell’s
joy in meeting her. She knew who had been requenting
Uppercross. But happily, either Anne was improved
in plumpness and looks, or Lady Russell fancied her
so ; and Anne, in receiving her compliments on the
occasion, had the amusement of connecting them with
the silent admiration of her cousin, and of hoping that
she was to be blessed with a second spring of youth and
beauty.

When they came to converse, she was soon sensible
of some mental change. The subjects of which her
heart had been full on leaving Kellynch, and which she
had felt slighted, and been compelled to smother among
the Murgroves, were now become but of secondary in-
terest. She had lately lost right even of her father, and
sister, and Barh. Their concerns had been sunk under

PERSUASION. ! 2 5

those of Uppemross; and when Lady Russell reverted
to their former hopes and fears, and spoke her satisfac-
tion in the house in Camden Place which had been
taken, and heir regret that Mrs Clay should still be with
them, Anne would have been ashamed to have it known
how much more she was thinking of Lyme and Louisa
Musgrove, and all her acquaintance there; how much
more interesting to her was the heme and the friendship
of the Harvilles and Captain Benwick, than her own
father’s house in Camden Place, or her own sister’s
intimacy with Mrs Clay. She was actually forced to
exert herself to meet Lady Russell with anything like
the appearance of equal solicitude, on topics which had
by nature the [ﬁrst] claim on her.

There was a little awkwardness at ﬁrst in their dis‘
course on another subject. They must ak of the
accident at Lyme. Lady Russell had not en arrived
ﬁve minutes the day before, when a full account of the
whole had burst on her; but still it must be talked of,
she must make enquiries, she must regret the impru-
dcnce, lament the result, and Captain Wentworth’s
name must be mentioned by both. Anne was conscious
of not doing it so well as Lady Russell. She could
not speak the name, and look straight forward to Lady
Russell’s eye, till she had adopted the expedient of
telling her brieﬂy what she thought of the attachment
between him and Louisa. When this was told, his
name distressed her no longer.

Lady Russell had only to listen composedly, and
wish them happy, but internally her heart revelled in
angry pleasure, in (pleased contempt, that the man who
at twenty-three ha seemed to understand somewhat of
the value of an Anne Elliot, should, eight years after-
wards, be charmed by a Louisa Musgrove.

The ﬁrst three or four days passed most quietly,
with no circumstance to mark them excepting the re-

r26 rmuasrou.

ceipt of a note or two from Lyme, which found thetr
way to Anne, the could not tell how, and brought a rather
impaving dacclitunt "of liouin. 13d the. end of that

ri , La urse s iteneu co no Ion er,
Ed the fairyi'ter self-thiggtenings of therelms?becameg in
a decided tone, “ I must call on Mn graft; I really
must call upon her soon. Anne, have you coura e to
go with me and pay a visit in that house? It wi be
some trial to us both.”

Anne did not shrink from it: on the contrary, she
tmly felt as she said, in observing—

“ I think you are very likely to suffer the roost of
the two; your feelings are less reconciled to the change
than mine. By remaining in the neighbourhood, I am
become inured to it."

She could have said more on the subject, for she had
in fact so high an opinion of the Crofts, and considered
her father so very fortunate in his tenants, felt the
pariah to be no sure of a good example, and the poor of
the best attention and relief, that however tor and
ashamed for the necessity of the removal, she cou d not
but in conscience feel that they were gone who deserved
not to stay, and that Kellynch Hall had passed into
better hands than its owners. These convictions must
unquestionably have their own pain, and severe was its
kind; but they precluded that pain which Lady Russell
would suffer in entering the house again, and returning
through the well-known npartmentt.

In such moments Anne had no power of saying to
herself, “ These room: ought to belong only to us.
Oh, how fallen in their destination! How unworthin
occupied! An ancient family to be so driven awnyl
Strangers ﬁlling their place! ’ No, except when she
thought of her mother, and remembered where she had
been used to sit and preside, she had no igh of that
tleOCription to heave.

PERSUASIONV 'l 27

Mrs Croft always met her with a kindness which
gave her the pleasure of fancying herself s favourite, and
on the present occasion, receiving her in that house,
there wig‘particular attention.

The accident at Lyme was soon the prevailing
topic, and on comparing their latest accounts of the
invalid, it appeared that each lady dated her intelligence
from the same hour of yestenrwm ; that Captain Went-
worth had been in Kellynch yesterday (the ﬁrst time
since the accident), had brought Anne the last note,
which she had not been able to trace the exact steps
of ; had staid a few hours, and then returned again to
Lyvne, and without any present intention of quitting it
any more. He had enquired after her, she found, par-
ticularly; had expressed his hope of Miss Elliot’s not
being the worse. for her exertions, and had spoken of
those exertions as greaL This was handsome, and gave
her more pleasure than almost anything else could have
done.

As to the sad catastrophe itself, it could be canvassed
only in one style by a couple of steady, sensible women,
whose judgments had to work on ascertained events;
and it was perfectly decided that it had been the conse-
quence of much thwghtﬁdness and much imprudence;
that its effects were most alarmin , and that it was
frightfirl to think how long Miss usgrove's recove
might yet be doubtful, and how liable she would stil
remain to sulfer from the concussion hereafter! The
Admiral wound it all up summarily by exclaiming—

“ Ay, a very had business, indeed. A new sort of
way this, for a young fellow to be making love, by
breaking his mistress’s head, is not it, Miss Elliot?
This is breaking a head and giving a plaster, tnrly I ”

Admiral Croft’s manners were not quite of the tone
to suit Lad Russell, but the delighted Anne. His
goodness oly heart and simpHcity of character were
irresistible. "

r 28 rsnsunsrou.

“ Now, this must be very bad for you," said lie,
vuddenl rousing from a little reverie, “to be coming
and fimhng us here. I had not recollected it before, I
declare, but it mutt be very bad. But now, do not
stand upon ceremony. Get up and go over all the
rooms in the house, if you like it.”

“ Another time, sir, I thank you; not now.’ '

“ Well, whenever it suits you. You can slip in from
the Ihrubbery at any time; and there you will ﬁnd we
keep our umbrellas hanging up by that door. A good
place is not it? But," (checking himself), “you will not
think it a good place, for yours were always kept in the
butler’l room. Ay, so it always it, I believe. One
man's way- may be as good u another’s, but we all
like our own best; and no you must judge for yourself,
whether it would he better for you to go about the
house or not.”

I llAnne, finding she might decline it, did so very grate-
ll o

‘z’We have made Very few changes either," continued
the Admiral, after thinking a moment. “Very few.
We told you about the laundry-door at Uppercross.
That has been a very great improvement. The wonder
was, how any family upon earth could bear with the
inconvenience of its opening as it did so long! You
will tell Sir Walter what we have done, and that Mr
Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvement the houee
ever had. Indeed, I muet do ourselves the juice to
say, that the few alterations we have made have been all
very much for the better. My wife should have the
credit of them, however. I have done very little be-
sides tending swny come of the large looking-glasses
from my dressing-room, which was your father’s. A
very good man, and very much the gentleman, I am
sure ; but I should think, Miss Elliot," (looking with
s'erioul reﬂection), “I should think he must be rather a

 

PERS'UASION. l 29

dressy man for his time of life. Such a number of
looking-glans! oh, Lord! there was no getting awa
from one's self. So I got Sophy to lend me a ban ,
and we soon shifted their quarters; and now I am
quite snug, with my little shaving-gla- in one corner,
and another great thin that I never go near."

Anne, amused in spite of herself, was rather distressed
for an answer; and the Admiral, fearing he might not
have been civil enough, took up the subject again, to
u __

" The next time you write to your good father, Miss
Elliot1 pray give my compliments and Mrs Croft’s, and
ny'that we are settled here quite to our liking, and
have no fault at all to find with the lace. The break-
fan-room chimney smokes a little, grant on, but it
is only when the wind is due north and bows hard,
which may not happen three times a winter. And take
it altogether, now that we have been into most of the
houses hereabouts and can judge, there is not one that
we like better than this. Pray say so, with my com-
pliments. He will be glad to hear it.”

Lady Russell and Mn Croft were very well pleased
with each other: but the acquaintance which this visit
began was fated not to roceed far at resent; for
when it was returned, the (grafts announced) themselves
to he going away for a few weeks, to visit their con-
nexiona in the north of the county, and probably might
not be at home again before Lady Russell would be
removing to Bath. v

So ended all danger to Anne of meeting Captain
Wentworth at Kellynch Hall, or of seeing him in com<
pany with her friend. Everything was safe enough,
and she smiled over the many anxious feelings the had
wasted on the subject.

r30 pnxsuasron.

cbsnttr $317.

HOUGH Charles and Mary had remained at
Lyme much longer after Mr and Mrs Mus-
grove’s going than Anne conceived they could

have been at all wanted, they were yet the ﬁrst of the
family to be at home again; and as soon as possible
after their return to U percross they drove over to the
Lodge. They had le t Louisa beginning to sit up; but
her had, though clear, was exceedingly weak, and her
nerves susceptible to the highest extreme of tenderness;
and though she might be renounced to be altogether
doing very well, it was stillbmpossible to say when she
might be able to bear the removal home; and her
father and mother, who must return in time to receive
their younger children for the Christmas holidays, had
hardly a ho of being allowed to bring her with them.

They ha been all in lodgings together. Mrs Mus-
grove had got Mrs Harville's children away as much as
she could, every possible supply from Uppercross had
been fin-nished, to li hten the inconvenience to the
Harvilles, while the arvilles had been wanting them
to come to dinner every day; and, in short, it seemed
to have been only a struggle on each side, as to which
should be most disinterested and hospitable.

Mary had had her evils; but upon the whole, as was
evident by her staying so long, she had found more to
enjoy than to suffer. Charles Hayter had been at
Lyme oftener than suited her; and when they dined
with the Harvilles there had been only a maid-servant
to wait, and at ﬁrst Mrs Hurville had always given Mrs
Musgrove precedenu; but then she had received so
very handsome an apology from her on ﬁnding out
whose daughter she was, and there had been so much
going on every day, there had been so many walks

pnasussma. 131

between their lodging- and the Harvilles, and she had
got books fmm the library, and changed them so often,
that the balance had certainly been much in favour of
Lyme. She had been taken to Charmouth we, and
she had bathed, and she had gone to church, and there
were a great many more people to look at in the church
at Lyme than at Uppercross; and all this, joined to
the sense of being so very useful, had made really an
agreeable fortnight.

Anne inquired after Captain Benwick. Mary's face
was clouded directly. Charles laughed.

“Ohl Captain Benwick is very well, [I] believe,
but he is a very odd young man. I do not know what
he would be at. We asked him to come home with us
for a day or two: Charles undertook to ive him some
shooting, and he seemed quite deligh and, for my
part, I thought it was all settled, when, behold! on
Tuesday night, he made a very awkward sort of an
excuse; ‘ he never shot,’ and he had ‘been quite mis-
understood,’ and he had promised this and he had pro-
mised that, and the end of it was, I found, that he did
not mean to come. I sup se he was afraid of ﬁnding
it dull; but upon my word0 I should have thought we
were lively enough at the Cottage for such a heart-
broken man as Ca tain Benwick.’

Charles laugh again, and said, “New, Ms , you
know very well how it reall was. It was al your
doing," (tumingto Anne.) “ e fancied that if he went
with us he should ﬁnd on close by : he fancied every-
body te be living in pperemss; and when he dis-
covered that Lady Russell lived three miles off, his
heart failed him, and he had not courage to come.
That is the fact, upon my honour. Mary knows it is.”

But Mary did not give into it very graciously, whether
from not considering Captain Benwiclt entitled by birth
and situation to be in love with an Elliot, or from not want-

I 3 2 PERSUASION.

ing to believe Anne a greater attraction to Uppercrou
than heraelf, mun be left to he gueued. Anne't good-
will, however, war: not to be le-ened by what the
heard. She boldly acknowledged her-elf ﬂattered, and
continued her enquiriea.

I‘Ohl he tallu of you," cried Charles, in much
terma " Mary interrupted him. “I declare,
Charles, I never heard him mention Anne twice all
the time! wan there. I declare, Anne, he never
tallu of on at all.”

" No, ’ admitted Charles, “ I do not know that he
ever does, in a general way; but. however, it it a very
clear thing that he admires you exceedingly. Hit head
in full of some book- that he in reading upon your re-
commendation, and he wants to talk to you about them ;
he haa found out aomething or other in one of them
which he thinke—ohl I cannot pretend to remember
it, but, it wal romething very ﬁne—I overheard him
telling Henrietta all about it; and then ‘ Mina Elliot’
was Ipoken of in the highest terms! Now, Mary, I
declare it wan to, I heard it myself, and you were in the
other room. ‘Ele ance, eweetneu, beauty.’ Oh!
there war no end of in Elliot’l charms."

“And I am sure," cried Mary, warmly, “ it wa-
very little to his credit if he did. Miss Harville only
died last June. Such a heart is very little worth hav-
ing, in it, Lady Runell? I am cure you will agree
with me."

“ I must see Ca tain Benwick before I decide,” raid
Lady Russell, lmi ing.

“ And that you are very likely to do very won, I can
tell you, ma’am," said Charlel. “ Though he had not
nerve: for coming nwny with us, and setting 05' again
afterwardl to y a formal viait here, he will make hit
way over to ellynch one day by himoelf, you ma
depend on it. I told him the dietance and the roa ,

 

PERSUASION, I 33

and I told him of the church’s being so very well
worth seeing; for as he has a taste for those sort of
things, I thought that would be a good excuse, and he
listened with all his undemanding and soul; and I am
sure, from his manner, that you will have him calling
here soon. So, I give you notice, Lady Russell."

“ Any acquaintance of Anne’s will be always wel-
come to me," was Lady Russell’s kind answer.

“ Oh I as to being Anne’s acquaintance,” said Mary,
" I think he is rather my acquaintance, for I have been
seeingnhim every day this last fortnight." '

“ ell, as your joint acquaintance, then, I shall be
very happy to sec Captain Benwick.”

“ You will not ﬁnd anything very agreeable in him,
I assure you, ma’nm. He is one of the dullest young
men that ever lived. He has walked with me, some-
times, from one end of the sands to the other, without
nying a word. He is not at all a well-bred young
man. I am sure you will not like him."

“ There we differ, Mary,” said Anne. “I think
Lady Russell would like him. I think she would be
so much pleased with his mind, that the would very
soon see no deﬁciency in his manner.”

“ So do I, Anne," said Charles. “ I am sure Lady
Russell would like him. He is just Lady Russel] s
sort. Give him a book, and he will read all day
long."

“ Yes, that he will ! ” replied Mary, tauntingly.
“ He will sit poring over his book, and not know when
a person speaks to him, or when one drops one’s
scissors, or anything that happens. Do you think Lady
Russell would like thnt?"

Lady Russell could not help laughing. “ Upon my
word,” said she, "I should not have supposed that my
opinion of any one could have admitted of such differ-
ence of conjecture, steady and matter of fact as I may

134 msuasnorn.

call mylell'. I have really: curioity to lee the per-
Ion who can give occaion to llcll dineetly opposite
notion; I with he may be induced to call here. And
when he duel, Mary, you may depend nn hearing my
opinion; butlanndetenninednottojndighimbefore-
hand.”

“ You will not lilte Him; I will answer for it."

Lady Runell begun talking of uomcthing else.
Mary npoke with animation of their meeting with, or
rather midng Mr Elliot no extnordinurily.

“ He in a man," laid Lady Ruuell, “ whom I have
no with to Ice. Hie declining to be on cordial terms
with the head of hit Family has left a very mung im-
pression in hie dinfavour with me."

Thin decision checked Mag: eagemeu, and ﬂopped
her short in the midn of the lliot countenance.

With regard to Captain \Ventworth, though Anne
hurded no enquiries, there wan voluntary communi-
cation nuﬂieient. Hi: min-its had been greatly recover-
ing lately, as might be expected. AI Louiu improved,
he had improved, and he was now unite a dili‘enent
creature from what he had been the m week. He
had not seen Louisa; and was to extremely frful
of any ill consequence to her from an interview, that
he did not press for it at all; and, on the contrary,
nemed to have a plan of going away for a week or ten
days, till her head was stronger. He had talked of
gonng down to Plymouth for a week, and wanted to

nude Captain Benwick to go with him; but, a.

harles maintained to the lalt, Captain Benwiclt seemed
much more disposed to ride over to Kellyncln.

There can be no doubt that Lad Russell and Anne
were both occalionnlly thinking ofy Captain lienwiclt,
from thin time. Lady Russell could not hear tlne
door-bell without feeling that it might be his herald;
nor could Anne return from any stroll of wlitary in-

PIRSUASION. l 3 5

dulgence in her father's grounds, or any vigit of charity
in the village, without wondering whether she might
see him or hear of him. Ca tain Benwick came not,
however. He was either ess disposed for it than
Charles had imagined, or he was too Ihy; and after
giving him a week’s indulgence, Lady Russell deter-
mined him to he unworthy of the interest which he had
been beginning to excite.

The Musgroves came back to receive their haﬂy
boys and girls from school, bringing with them rs
Hznille’s little children, to improve the noise of
Uppercrou, and lessen that of Lyme. Henrietta re-
mained with Louisa, but all the rest of the family were
again in their umlal quarters.

Lady Russell and Anne id their compliments to
them once, when Anne could5| not but feel that Upper-
cnou was slmdy quite alive uglin. Though neither
Henrietta, nor Louisa, nor Charles Hayter, nor Cap-
tain Wentworth were there, the room presented as
strong a contrast as could he wished to the lust state
she had seen it in.

Immediately surrounding Mru Musgmvc were the
little Hurvilles, whom she was sedulously guarding
from the tyranny of the two children from the Cottage,
expreuly arrived to amuse them. On one side was a
table occupied by some chattering girls, cutting up silk
and gold per; and on the other were treuels and
trlys, hen ng under the weight of brawn and cold pies,
where riotous boys were holding high revel; the whole
completed by a roaring Christina ﬁre, which seemed
determined to be heard in spite of all the noise of the
others. Charles and Mary also came in, of course,
during their visit, and Mr Musgrove made a point of
paying his retpectl to Lady Russell, and sat down close
to her for ten minutes, talking with a very rained
voice, but from the clnmour of the children on his

r 36 rnsunsrou.

knees, generally in vain. It wan a ﬁne family-
pieoe. '

Anne, judging from her own temperament, would
have deemed Iuch a dome-tic hurricane a had mtorative
of the nervea, which Louiu’l illneu must have to
greatly thaken. But Mn Mil-grove, who got Anne
near her on purpose to thank her moat cordially, again
and again, for all her attentionl to them, concluded 3
than recapitulatioo of what the had suffered hereelf by
obterving, with a happy glance round the room, that
after all she had gone through, nothing wae to likely to
do her good as a little quiet cheerfulneu at home.

Louisa wan now recovering apace. Her mother
could even think of her being able to join their party at
home, before her brothen and aintere went to echool
again. The Harvillee had promiled to come with her
and stay It Uppercrou whenever the returned. Captain
Wentworth wal gone for the present, to ace his brother
in Shropshire.

“1 hope I shall remember, in future,” said Lady
Ruuell, ll soon at the were relented in the atr-
rin c, “ not to call at ppercroal in the Chrimnat
ho idayl.”

Everybody has their taste in noise: as well u in
other matterl; and sounds are quite innoxiom or most
dime-sing, by their tort rather than their quantity.
When Lady Ruuell not long afterwards, wan entering
Bath on 3 wet afternoon, and driving through the long
coune of ntrcett from the Old Bridge to Camden Place,
amidst the dth of other carriages, the heavy rumble of
can: and drayt, the hawling of newsman, mufﬁn-men,
and milkmen, and the ceateleu clink of pattenl, ahe
made no complaint. No, thcae were noim which
belonged to the winter pleasures; her lpiritl rose under
their inﬂuence; and like Mn Mungrove, the was feel-
ing, though not saying, that after being long in the

rnnsussmu. _ 131

coun , nothin could he so for her as a little
quiatlcyheesfulnegu. W

Anne did not share these feelings. She rlisted in
a very determined, though very silent disine ination for
Bath; caught the ﬁrst dim view of the extensive build-
ings, making in min, without any wish of seeing them
better; felt their progress through the streets to be,
however disagreeable, yet too rapid; for who would
be glad to see her when she arrived? And looked
back with fond regret to the bustles of Uppercrou and
the seclusion of Kcllynch.

Elizabeth’s last letter had communicated I piece of
news of some interest. Mr Elliot was in Bath. He
had called in Camden Place; had called a second time,
a third; had been pointedly attentive. If Elizabeth
and her father did not deceive themselves, had been
taking as much pains to seek the acquaintance, and pro-
claim the value of the connecu'on, as he had fonnerly
taken pains to show neglect. This was very wonderful
if it were tme; and Lady Russell was in a state of
very agreeable curiosity and perplexity about Mr Elliot,
already recanting the sentiment she had so lately ex-
pressed to Ma , of his being “ a man whom she had
no wish to see. ’ She had a great wish to see him. If
he really sought to reconcile himself like a dutiful
branch, he must be for ‘ven for having dismembered
himself from the patern tree.

Anne was not animated to an equal pitch by the
circumstance, but she felt that she would rather see Mr
Elliot again than not, which was more than she could
say for many other persons in Bath.

She was put down in Camden Place, and Lady
Russell then drove to her own lodgings in Riven
Street.

r38 . PERSUASION.

Chapter 5}}.

IR WALTER had taken a ve good home in
Camden Place,a loft digniﬁ situation, such
as become: a man 0 consequence; and both

he and Elizabeth were settled there, much to their
addiction.

Anne entered it with a sinking heart, anticipating an
imprisonment of many months, and anxiously saying to
herself, “Oh! when ahall I leave you again?” A
degree of unexpected cordiality, however, in the wel-
come she received, did her good. Her father and
inter were glad to see her, for the sake of shewing her
the house and fumiturc, and met her with kindness.
Her making a fourth, when they sat down to dinner,
was noticed as an advantage.

Mn Clay wan v plea-ant and very miling, but
her comedies and mi as were more a matter of course.
Anne had always felt that she would pretend what wat
proper on her arrival, but the complainnce of the others
was unlooked for. They were evidently in excellent
spirits, and she was soon to listen to the causes. They
had no inclination to listen to her. After laying out for
some compliments of being deeply regretted in their old
neighbourhood, which Anne could not pay, they had
only a few faint inquiries to make, before the talk must
be all their own. Uppercrose excited no interest,
Kellynch very little: it was all Bath.

They had the pleasure of assuring her that Bath
more dran amWered their expectations in every respect:
Their houee was undoubtedly the best in Camden
Place, their dmwing-rooms had many decided advan-
tages over all the others which they had either seen or
heard of, and the su riority was not less in the at le of
the ﬁtting-up or diee taste of the furniture. heir

PERSUASION. r 39

acquaintance wu exceedingly sought after. Everybody
woe wanting to viait them. They had drawn back
from many introductions, and still were perpetually
having card. left by people of whom they knew
nothing.

Here were funda of enjoyment! Could Anne
wonder that her father and sister were hnpyyi She
might not wonder, but she mun nigh that r fadier
Ihould feel no degradation in llil change, uhould see
nothing to regret in the duties and dignit of the reti-
dent landholder. should ﬁnd no much to vain of in
the littleneuel of a town ; and the must nigh, and amile,
and wonder too, an Elizabeth threw open the folding-
doon, and walked with exultation from one drawing-
room to the other, boating of their Ipace: at the
pouibility of that woman, who had been mistress of
Kellynch Hall, ﬁnding extent to be proud of between
two walla, perhape thirty feet aaunder.

But Lhil was not Ill which they had to make them happy.
They had Mr Elliot too. Anne had a great dea to
hear of Mr Elliot. He was not only pardoned, they
were delighted with him. He had been in Bath about
afortnight; (he had need through Bath in November,
in hit way to Londldn, when the intelligence of Sir
Walter's being settled there had of course reached him,
though only twenty-four hour: in the place, but he had
not been able to avail himqu of it;) but he had now
been a fonni ht in Bath, and his ﬁrst ob'ect on arriving
had been to cave hie card in Camden lace, following
it up by web auiduouu endeavourl to meet, and when
they did meet, by “Hill great openneu of conduct, Inch
readineu to apologize for the pact, Inch oolicitude to be
received at a relation again, that their former good
understanding was completely re-eetabliohed.

They had not a fault to ﬁnd in him. He had ex-
plained away all the appearance of neglect on hie own

K

I 40 PMASION.

aide. It had originated in minpprehenaion entirely.
He had never had an idea of throwrng hinuelf off 3 he
had feared that he waa thrown off, but knew not why,
and delicacy had kept him ailent. Upon the hint of
having apoken diarupectfully or carele-ly of the family
and the family honoun, he waa quite indignant. He, _
who had ever boomed of being an Elliot,and whooe
feelinge, at to connection, were only too atrict to unit
the unfeudal tone of the present day. He waa ae-
toniohed, indeed, but hil character and general conduct
muat refute it. He could refer Sir Walter to all who
ltnew him; and certainly, the Pllnl he had been taking on
thin, the lint op nunity of reconciliation, tobe reamred
to the foon'ng of”: relation and heir- reaumptive, waa a
strong proof of hie opiniona on the cu jeet.

The circumauncea of his marriage, too, were found
to admit of much cxtenuation. Thin war an article not
to be entered on by himself; but a very intimate friend of
hie, a Colonel Wallis, a highly re ctable man, per-
fectly the gentleman (and not an il -loo|ting man, Sir
Walter added , who was living in very good style in
Marlborough uildinga, and had, at hit own particular
request, been admitted to their acquaintance through Mr
Elliot, had mentioned one or two thinga relative to the
marriage, which made a material diﬂ'erence in the dis.
credit of it.

Colonel Wallis had known Mr Elliot long,had been
well acquainted alto with his wife, had perfectly under-
stood the whole story. She was certainly not a woman
of family, but well educated, accomplilhed, rich, and
exec-lively in love with hie friend. There had been
the charm. She had taught him. Without that attrac-
tion, not all her money would have tempted Elliot, nnd
Sir Walter wu, moreover, muted of her having been in
ve fine woman. Here was a great deal to toften the
bunneat. A very ﬁne woman with a large fortune, in

PERSUASION.‘ I 4 I

love with him] Sir Walter seemed to admit it as
complete apology; and though Elizabeth could not see
the circumstance in quite so favourable a light, she
allowed it to be a great extenuation.

Mr Elliot had called repeatedly, had dined with
them once, evidently delighted by the distinction of
being asked, for they gave no dinners in. general; de-
lighted, in short, by every proof of cousinly notice, and

lacing his whole happiness in being on intimate terms
in Camden Place.

Anne listened, but without quite understanding it.
Allowances, large allowances must be made for the
ideas of those who spoke. She heard it all under em-

‘hellilhment. All that sounded extravagantor irrational
in the progress of the reconciliation might have no origin
but in the language of the relators. Still, however, she
had the sensation of there being something more than
immediately appeared, in Mr Elliot’s wishing, after an
interval of so many years, to be well received by them.
In a worldly view, he had nothing to gain by being
on terms with Sir Walter; nothing to risk by a state of
variance. In all probability he was already the richer
of the two, and the Kellynch estate would as surely be
his hereafter as the title. A sensible man, and he had
looked like a my sensible man, why should it be an object
to him? She could only oﬁer one solution: it was,

rhaps, for Elizabeth’s sake. There might really have
ten :- liking fonnerl , though convenience and accident
had drawn him a diﬁyerent way; and now that he could
afford to lease himself, he mi ht mean to pay his addresses
to her. liubeth was certain y veryhandsome, with well-
bred, elegant manners, and her character might never
have been penetrated by Mr Elliot, knowing her but in
public, and when very young himself. How her temper
and understanding mi ht bear the investigation of his
present keener time of life was another concern and

l 42 PIBSUASION.

nthera fearful one. Most earnestly did she wish that
he might not be too nice, or too observant if Elizabeth
were his object; and that Elizabeth was ' ted to
believe herself so, and that her friend, Mn lay was
encouraging the idea, seemed apparent by a glance or two
between them, while Mr Elliot’s frequent visits were
talked of.

Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at
Lyme, but without being much attended to. “Oh!
yea, perhaps, it had been Mr Elliot. They did not
know. It might be him, perhaps." They could not
linen to her descri tion of him. They were describing
him themselves ; ir Walter especially. He did justice
to his very gentlemanlike up rance, his air of elegance
and faahion, his good-sh: face, his sensible eye; but,
at the same time, “ mun. lament his being very much
under-hung, a defect which time seemed to have in-
creaaed; nor could he pretend to say that ten years had
not altered almost every feature for the worse. Mr
Elliot appeared to think that he (Sir Walter) was
looking exactly as he had done when they last parted ; "
but Sir Walter had “ not been able to return the com-
pliment entirely, which had embarrassed him. He did
not mean to complain, however. Mr Elliot was better
to look at than most men, and he had no objection to be
seen with him anywhere.”

Mr Elliot, and his friend! in Marlborough Buildings,
were talked of the whole evening. “Colonel Walliu
had been so impatient to be introduced to them! and
Mr Elliot so anxious that he should ! ” and there was
a Mrl Wallis, at present known only to them by deacrip—
tion, as she was in daily expectation of her conﬁne-
ment ; but Mr Elliot spoke of her an “ a most charm-
ing woman, quite worthy of being known in Camden
Place," and as soon as she recovered they were to be
acquainted. Sir Walter thought much 0 Mrs Wallis;

PERSUASION. . 143

she was laid to be an exceslively retty woman, beau-
tiful. “ He longed to lee her. e hoped ll): might
make some amends for the many very plain face: he was
continually passing in the streets. The worst of Bath
was the number of its plain women. He did not mean
to say that there were no pretty women, but the number
of the plain wan out of all proportion. He had fre-
quently observed, as he walked, that one handmme face
would he followed by thirty, or ﬁve-and-thirty frighta ;
and once, as he had stood in a shop in Bond Street, he
had counted eighty-seven women go by, one after
another, without there being a tolerable face among
them. It had been a frosty morning, to be sure, a sharp
frost, which hardly one woman in n thousand could
stand the tent of. But Itill, there certainly were a
dreadful multitude of ugly women in Bath; and as for
the men! they were inﬁnitely worse. Such scarecrows
as the streets were full of ! It was evident how little
the women were tuned to the sight of anything tolerable,
by the effect which a man of decent appearance pro-
duced. He had never walked anywhere nrm-in-ami
with Colonel Wallin (who was it ﬁne military ﬁgure,
though sandy-haired) without observing that every
woman’s eye was upon him; every woman's e c was
sure to be upon Colonel Walliv.” Modest Sir alter!
He was not allowed to empe, however. Hi: daughter
and Mn Clay united in hinting that Colonel Wallis’s
companion might have at good a ﬁgure as Colonel
Wallis, and certainl was not sand #haired.

“ How is Mary coking?" sai Sir Walter, in the
height of hll good humour. “ The last time I saw her
she had a red nose, but I hope that may not happen
every day."

“ Oh I no, that must have been quite accidental. In

neral she has been in very good health and very good
foeoks since Michaelmaa."

144 PERSUASION.

“ If I thought it would not tempt her to go out in
Iharp windt, and grow eoane, I would lend her a new
hat and peliue."

Anne was considering whether the should venture to
tugged that I gown. or a cap, would not be liable to any
Inch mini-e, when a knock at the door I nded every-
thing. “A knock at the door! and lo atel It wat
ten o’clock. Could it be Mr Elliot? They knew he
wan to dine in Lanadown Crescent. It wu pouible that
he might Itop in his way home to uk them how they
did. They could think of no one elee. Mn Clay
decidedly thou ht it Mr Elliot'l knock.” Mr: Clay
wan right. ith all the date which a butler and
foot-boy could give, Mr Elliot war urhered into the
room.

It wan the name, the very tame man, with no differ-
ence but of dreu. Anne drew a little back, while the
other: received hil complimentl, and her litter his
upologiet for calling at IO unulual an hour, but “ he
could not be I.) near without withing to know that
neither the nor her friend had taken cold the day
before," &c., &c. ; which war all u politely done, and
at politely taken, at pouiblc, but her part mutt follow
then. Sir Walter talked of his youngest daughter;
“ Mr Elliot must give him leave to present him to hit

onngett dau hter " (there wan no occation for remem-
Zering Maryj‘; and Anne, smiling and Nothing, very
becomineg ewed to Mr Elliot the pretty eaturce
which he had by no means forgotten. and instantly saw,
with amusement It hil little start of eurpriee, that he had
not been It all aware of who the was. He looked
completely attonithed, but not more aitonithed than
pleated: hi. eyel brightened! and with the most per-
fect ahlcrity he welcomed the relationehip, alluded to
the paint, aml untreated to be received as an acquaintance
nlrcmly. llc was quilc as good-looking as he had ap-

PERSUASION. l 45

peared at Lyme, his countenance improved by speaking,
and his manners were so exactl what they ought to be,
so polished, so easy, so particuiarly agreeable, that she
could compare them in excellence to only one person's
molten. They were not the same, but they were,
perhaps, e ually good.

He sat own with them, and im troved their conver-
ntion very much. There could no doubt of his
being a sensible man. Ten minutes were enough to
certify that. His tone, his expressions, his choice of
subject, his knowing where no stop: it was all the
operation of a sensible, discerning mind. As soon as he
could, he began to talk to her of Lyme, wanting to
compare opinions respecting the place, but especially
wanting to spak of the circumstance of their happening
to be guests In the same inn at the same time; to give
his own route, understand something of hers, and regret
that he should have lost such an opportunity of paying
his respects to her. She gave him a short account of
her party and business at Lyme. His regret increased
as he listened. He had spent his whole solitary even-
ing in the room adjoining theirs; had heard voices,
mirth continually; thought they must be a most delight-
ful set of people, longed to be with them, but certainly
without the smallest suspicion of his ssing the
shadow of a right to introduce himself. We had but
asked who the pony were! The name of Musgrove
would have told him enough. “ Well, it would serve
to cure him of an absurd practice of never asking a
question at an inn, which he had ado ted, when quite a
young man, on the principle of its being very ungenteel
to be curious.”

“The notions of a young man of one or two and
twenty," said he, " as to what is necessary in manners
to make him uite the thing, are more absurd, I believe,
than those 0 any other set of beings in the world.

146 PIRSUASION.

The folly of the meanc they often employ in only to be
equalled by the folly of what they have in view."

But he must not be addrelling hil reﬂection to Anne
alone : he knew it; he was noon diﬁ'uted again among
the otherl, and it way only at intervals that he could
return to Lyme.

Hit enquiries, however, produced at length an account
of the wene the had been engaged in there, coon after
hie leaving the place. Having nlludedto “ an accident,”
he mutt hear the whole. When he questioned, Sir
Walter and Elizabeth began to quenion allo, but the
difference in their manner of doing it could not be un-
felt. She could only compare Mr Elliot to Lady
Ruucll, in the with of really comprehending what had
paused, and in the degree of eoncem for what the muet
have eulfered in witueuing it.

He Itaid an hour with them. The elegant little
clock on the mantel-piece had muck “ eleven with its
silver aoundc," and the watchman wan beginning to be
hard at a dimncc telling the lame tale, before Mr
Elliot or any of them seemed to feel that he had been
there long.

Anne could not have Iu d it 'ble that her
ﬁrst evening in Camden PEEL): couldpllizlve passed It)
well.

chnpttt aw}.

HERE wan one point which Anne, on returning
to her family, would have been more thankful
to ascertain even than Mr Elliot’s being in love

with Elizabeth, which was, her father’s not being in
love with Mrs Clay; and the wan very far from eaty
nbout it, when ahe had been at home a few houn. On
going down to bmkfau the next morning, the found

PBRSUASION. I 47

there had just been a decent pretence on the lady's side
of meaning to leave them. She could imagine Mrs
Clay to have said, that “now Mi- Anne was come,
she could not suppose herself at all wanted;" for
Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper, “That
must not be any reason, indeed. I assure you I feel it
none. She is nothing to me, compared with you ; "
and she was in full time to hear her father say, “ My
dear madam, this must not be. As yet, you haw
seen nothing of Bath. You have been here only to be
useful. You must not nun awa from us now. You
must stay to be ac uainted with hire Wallis, the beauti-
ful Mrs Wallis. 0 our line mind, I well know the
sight of beauty is a tea gratiﬁcation.”

He spoke and looked so much in eamest, that Anne
was not surprised to see Mrs Clay stealing a glance
at Elizabeth and herself. Her countenance, perhaps,
might ex rest some watchfulness; but the praise of the
ﬁne min did not appear to excite a thought in her
sister. The lady could not but yield to such joint
entrcntics, and promise to stay.

In the course of the same morning, Anne and her
father chancing to be alone to ether, he began to com-
pliment her on her impro looks; he thought her
“lea thin in her person, in her cheeks; her skin, her
complexion, greatly improved; clearer, fresher. Had
she been usin anything in particular? ” “No,
nothing." " erer Gowland,” he supposed. “No,
nothing at all." "Hal he was surprised at that;"
and added, “ certainly you cannot do better than con-
tinue as you are; you cannot be better than well ; or I
should recommend Gowland, the constant use of Gow-
' land, during the spring months. Mrs Clay has been
using it at my recommendation, and you see what it has
done for her. You see how it has carried away her
freckles."

r48 PERSUASION.

If Elizabeth could but have heard this! Such per-
sonal praiae might have uruck her, eapecially as it did
not appar to Anne that the freckles were at all
lessened. But everything must take its chance. The
evil of the marriage would be much diminished, if
Elizabeth were also to marry. As for herself, she
might always command a home with Lady Russell.

Lady Russell's composed mind and polite manners
were put to some trial on this point, in her intercoune
in Camden Place. The eight of Mrs Clay in such
favour, and of Anne so overlooked, wan a perpetual
provocation to her there ; and vexed her as much when
she was awa , as a person in Bath who drinks the
water, gets all the new publicationr, and has a very large
acquaintance, has time to be vexed.

As Mr Elliot became known to her, she grew more
charitable, or more indifferent, towards the others. His
manners were an immediate -recommendation; and on
conversing with him she found the solid so fully so -
pom'ng the superﬁcial, that she was at ﬁrst, as she to d
Anne, almost ready to exclaim, “Can this be Mr
Elliot?” -and could not seriously picture to herself a
more agreeable or estimable man. Everything united
in him; good understanding, comet opiniona, know-
ledge of the world, and a warm heart“ He had strong
feelingmof family attachment and family honour, with-
out pride or weakness; he lived with the liberality of
a man of fortune, without display; he jud ed for him-
self in everything essential, without defying public
opinion in any point of worldly decomm. He was
utead , observant, moderate, candid; never run away
with y spirits or by selfishness, which fancied itself strong
feeling; and yet, with a sensibility to what was amiable
and lovely, and a value for all the felicitiea of dome-tic
life, which characters of fancied enthusiasm and violent
agitation seldom really possess. She was sure that he

PEISUASION. r49

had not been happy in marriage. Colonel Wallia laid
it, and Lady Ru-ell saw it; but it had been no un-
happinen to tour hil mind, nor (the began pretty noon
to luqiect to prevent hia thinking of I eecond choice.
Her Iati action in Mr Elliot outweighed all the plague
of Mn Clay.

It wu now aome yenn eince Anne had begun to
learn that she and her excellent friend could Iometimee
think differently; and it did not ourpriee her, therefore,
that Lady Russell should lee nothing sulpicioua or in-
conliltent. nothing to reguire more moﬁvel than appeared,
in Mr Elliot'l great desire ofa reconciliation. n Lady
Russell’s view, it wan rfectly natural that Mr Elliot,
at a mature time of lifrahould feel it a moat deairnble
object, and what would very generally recommend him
among all Ieneible people, to be on good terme with the
had of hit family; the Iimpleot proceu in the world of
time upon a head naturally clear, and only erring in the
heyday of youth. Anne presumed, however, aﬁll to
Imile about it, and at last to mention "Elizabeth."
Lady Ruuell liatened, and looked, and made only
thin cautious reply :—" Elizabeth! very well ; time
will explain."

It wot a reference to the future, which Anne, after
a little observation, felt the mun submit to; She could
determine nothing at present. In that house Eliubeth
must be first; and the was in the habit of luch general
observance an “ Mien Elliot,” that any particularity of
attention ueemed almost impouihle. Mr Elliot, too, it
must be remembered, had not been a widower seven
month: A little delay on hiI aide might be very ex-
cuaable. In fact, Anne could never eee the crape
round hie hut, without fearing that [he war the inex-
ciuable one, in nttributing to him Iuch imagination” for
though his marriage had not been very happy, adll it
had exiatgd no many yearu that the could not compre-

l 50 PIRSUASION.

bend a very rapid recovery from the awful impreuion
of in being dimlved.

However it might end, he wat without any quertion
their plenantett ac uaintance in Bath : the saw nobody
equal to him; and It wan: great indulgence now and
then to talk to him about Lyme, which he seemed
to have II lively a with to lee again, and to lee more
of, II herIeIf. They went through the particular: of
their first meeting a great many times. He gave her to
undentand that he had looked at her with tome eamest—
neu. She knew it well; and she remembered another

man’s look alto.

They did not always think alike. Hie value for rank
and connexion the perceived to be greater than hen. It
will not merely complainance, it must he a liking to the
caute, which made him enter wannly into her father
and litter’a Iolicitudeu on a subject which she thought
unworthy to excite them. The Bath paper one mom-
ing announced the arrival of the Dowager Vitcountcu
Dahymple, and her daughter, the Honoumble Mile
Cmeret; and all the comfort of No. —— Camden Place,
war Iwept away for many dayt ; for the Dalrymples (in
Anne's opinion, moat unfortunately) were cousins of
the Elliott; and the agony was how to introduce them-
eclch properly.

Anne had never seen her father and sister before in
contact with nobility, and the must acknowledge herself
diappaimed. She had hoped better things from their
high idea: 0f their own aituation in life, and was reduced
m form I with which the had never foreaeen; a Will!
am they had more pride; for “our counint, Lady
Dzlrymple and Miss Carteret ; ” “ our cousin. the
Dnlrym Ilel," lounded in her curl all day long.

Sir alter ll-hl once been in company with the late
Viscount, but hml never sr'cn any of the rest of the

family; and the Lliﬁicullieb of the Case nrosu from them

_.A Lee.

PEXSUASION. I 5 I

having been a suspension of all intercourse by letters of
ceremony, ever since the death of that said late Viscount,
when, in consequence of a dangerous illness of Sir
Walter’s at the mine time, there had been an unlucky
omission at Kellynch. No letter of condolence had
been sent to Ireland. The neglect had been visited on
the head of the sinner; for when poor Lady Elliot died
herself, no letter of condolence was received at Kellynch,
and, consequently, there was but too much reason to ap- ‘
prehcnd that the Dalrymples considered the relationship
as closed. How to have this anxious business set to rights,
and be admitted as cousins again, was the question : and
it was a question which, in a more rational manner,
neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot thought unimportant.
“ Family connexions were always worth preserving,
good company always worth seeking; Lady Dal: mple
had taken a house, for three months, in Laura lace,
and would be living in style. She had been at Bath
the year before, and Lady Russell had heard her spoken
of as s charming woman. It was very desirable that the
connexion should be Icncwcd, if it could be done, with-
out any compromise ofproprietyon theside of the Elliots.”

Sir Walter, however, would choose his own means,
and at last wrote a very ﬁne letter of ample ex lanation,
regret, and entreaty, to his right honounb e cousin.
Neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot could admire the
letter; but it did all that was wanted, in bringing three
lines of scmwl from the Dowager Viscountess. “ She
was very much honoured, and should be happy in their
acquaintance.” The toils of the business were over,
the sweets began. They visited in Laura Place, they
had the cards of Dowager Viscountcss Dall’ymple, and
the Honourable Miss Carteret, to be arranged wherever
they might be most visible: and “ Our cousins in Laura
Place,”-—“ Our cousins, Lady Dalrymple and Miss
Carterct," were talked of to everybody.

I 5 I PIESUASION.

Anne wu ashamed. Had Lady Dalrym le and her
daughter even been very agreeable, the woul Itill have
been uhamed of the agitation they created, but they
were nothing. There wan no superiority of manner,
accomplishment, or understanding. Lady Dalrym le
had ncquired the name 0 “a Charmin woman," -
court the had a mile and a civil answer or everybody.
Miss Carteret, with still lean to say, was to plain and so
awkward, that the would never have been tolerated in
Camden Place but for her birth.

Lady Rut-ell oonfeued that she had expected some-
thing better; but yet “it wan an acquaintance worth
having ; " and when Anne ventured to k her opinion
of them to Mr Elliot, he agreed to their being nmhing
in themaelvet, but still maintained that, as a family con-
nexion, as good com ny, as those who would collect
good com ny aroun them, they had their value. Anne
lmiled a aard—

“ y idea of good company, Mr Elliot, it the com-
paﬂny o clever, well-informed people, who have a great
d of conversation ; that it what I call good
corn ny.”

" on are minaken,” laid he, gently, “that is not
good company; that in the bet. Good company re-
quire: on y birth, education, and manners, and with
regard to education is not very nice. Birth and good
mannen are cuential; but a little learning it by no
means a dangerous thing in good company ; on the
contrary, it will do very well. My cousin Anne shakes
her head. She in not Iatisﬁed. She is fastidious. My
dear courin” (sitting down by her), “ you have I better
right to be faltidious than almost any other woman I
know; but will it anawer? Will it make ou happy?
Will it not be witer to accept the society 0 these ood
ladies in Laura Place, and enjoy all the advantages 0 the
connexion u far as possible? You may depend upon

PERSUASION. ' r 53

igthatdieywillmoveinthelirstoetin Bath this
winter, and as rank is rank, your being known to be
'related to them will have its use in ﬁxing your family
(our family let me any?I in that degree of consideration
which we must. all wrs for.”

"Yes," sighed Anne, “ we shall, indeed, be known
to be related to them I ” then rccollectin herself, and
not wishing to be answered, she added, “i certainly do
think there has been by far too much trouble taken to
procure the acquaintance. I suppose" (smiling) “I have
more pride than any of you; but I confess it does vex
me, that we should be so solicitous to have the relation-
ship acknowledged, which we may be very sure is I
nutter of perfect indifference to them."

" Pardon me, my dear cousin, you are unjust to your
own claims. In London, perhaps, in your present quiet
style of living, it might be as ou sa ; but in Bath, Sir
Walter Elliot and his family will, always be worth
knowing: always acceptable as acquaintance."

“Well,” said Anne, “I certainly am proud, too
proud to enjoy a welcome which depends so entirely
upon place.’

“ I love your indignation," said he; “ it is V:
natural. But here you are in Bath, and the ob'ect u
to be established here with' all the credit and ignity
which ought to belong to Sir Walter Elliot. You talk
of being proud; I am called roud, I know, and I shall
not wish to believe myself otlierwise; for our pride, if
investigated, would have the same object, I have no doubt,
though the kind may seem a little different. In one

int, I am sure, my dear cousin” (he continued, speak-
ing lower, though there was no one else in the room),
“ in one point I am sure we must feel alike. We must
feel that every addition to your father's society, among
his equals or superiors, may be of use in divem'ng his
thoughts from those who are beneath him."

l 54 PERSUASION.

He looked, n he cpoke, to the seat which Mn Clay
had been lately occupying: a sufficient explanation of
what he particularly meant ; and though Anne could not
believe in their having the name sort of pride, she was
pleased with him for not liking Mn Clay; and her
conscience admitted that his withing to promote her
father’s getting great acquaintance was more than ex-
cusable in the view of defeating her.

chapter ﬁ‘H‘JJ.

HILE Sir Walter and Elizabeth were usidu-
ously pushing their good fortune in Laura
Place, Anne was renewing an acquaintance
of a very different description.

She had called on her former governess, and had
heard from her of there being an old schoolfellow in
Bath, who had the two atrong claims on her attention
of past kindness and present suﬂ'ering. Mia: Hamilton,
now Mn Smith, had shown her kindness in one of
those periods of her life when it had been moot valu-
able. Anne had gone unhappy to school, grieving for
the lots of a mother whon'i the had dearly loved, feel-
ing her separation from home, and suffering as a girl of
fourteen, of strong scntibility and not high spiritt, mutt
suffer at such a time; and Miss Hamilton, three years
older than herself, but still, from the want of near
relation: and a settled home, remaining another year at
school, had been useful and good to her in a way which
had considerably lessened her misery, and could never
be remembered with indiﬂercnce.

Min Hamilton had left school, had married not long
afterwards, was said to have married a man of fortune,
and this was all that Anne had known of her, till now

£ 1--“ 4

amusswu. r 5 5

that their governess’s account brought her situation for-
ward in a more decided but very diﬂ'erent form.

She was a widow, and poor. Her husband had
been extravagant; and at In! death, about two years
before, had left his affairs dreadfully involved. She
had had difﬁculties of every sort to contend with, and
in addition to these disth had been afﬂicted with a
severe rheumatic fever, which, ﬁnally settling in her
legs, had made her for the present a cripple. She had
come to Bath on that account, and was now in lodgings
near the hot baths, living in a very humble way, unable
even to aﬂ'ord herself the comfort of a servant, and of
course almost excluded from society.

Their mutual friend answered for the satisfaction
which a visit from Miss Elliot would give Mrs Smith,
and Anne therefore lost no time in oing. She men-
tioned nothing of what she had heard, or what she in-
tended, at home. It would excite no roper interest
there. She only consulted Lady Russel, who entered
thoroughly into her sentiments. and was most ha to
convey her as near to Mrs Smith’s lodgings, in Wat-
gate Buildings, as Anne chose to be taken.

The visit was paid, their acquaintance re-established,
their interest in each other more than rekindled. The
ﬁrst ten minutes had its awkwardness and its emotion.
Twelve years were gone since they had parted, and
each presented a somewhat different person from what
the other had imagined. Twelve years had changed
Anne from the blooming, silent, unformed girl of
ﬁfteen, to the ele ant little woman of seven-and-
twenty, with every beauty excepting bloom, and with
manners as conscioust right as they were invari-
ably gentle; and twelve years had transformed the
ﬁne-looking, well-grown Miss Hamilton, in all the
glow of health and conﬁdence of superiority, into a
poor, inﬁrm, helpless widow, receiving the visit of her

I.

r 56 panstmsrou.

former protege: u a favour; but all that was uncom-
fortable in the meeting had noon patted away, and left
onl the interesting charm of remembering former par-
tiahtien and talking over old timel. ‘

Anne found in Mn Smith the good acute and agree-
able manner. which the had almoct ventured to depend
on, and a disposition to convene and be cheerful be-
yond her expectation. Neither the diuipau'ona of the
pant—and the had lived very much in the world—nor
the reltrictionr of the present, neither aicknels nor
rorrow seemed to have cloned her heart or mined her
rpiriu.

In the count: of a mood virit she talked with great
openneu, and Anne't astoniahment increased. She
could scarcely imagine a more cheerleu situation in
itself than Mr: Smith’a. She had been ve fond of
her husband: the had buried him. She had n need
to afﬂuence: it was gone. She had no child to con-
nect her with life and happiness again, no relation
to assist in the arrangement of perplexed affairs, no
health to make all the rest Ill oruble. Her accom-
modations were limited to a nouy parlour, and a dark
bedroom behind, with no ponibility of moving from
one to the other without auittance, which there war
only one tenant in the home to afford, and the never
quitted the house but to be conveyed into the warm
bath. Yet, in rpite of all this, Anne had tenuon to
believe that the had momenta only of languor and de-
prelbion to hour. of occupation and enjoyment. How
could it be! She watched, obterved, reflected, and
ﬁnall determined that this was not a case of fortitude
or o retignation only. A submittive tpirit might be

tient, a ttrong understanding would supply resolution,
Eu here war something more; here was that elarticity
of mind, that dirpoaition to be comforted, that wer of
turning readily from evil to good. and of ﬁn ‘ng em-

pmuasron. , r 57

plnyment which canied her out of herself; which was
from nature alone. It was the choicest ift of Heaven;
and Anne viewed her friend as one 0 those instances
in which, by a merciful appointment, it seems designed
to counterbalance almost eve other want.

There had been a time, Mrs Smith told her, when
her spirit: had nearly failed. She could not call her-
self an invalid now, compared with her state on first
reaching Bath. Then she had, indeed, been a pitiable
object; for she had caught cold on the journey, and
had hardly taken possession of her lodgings before she
was again conﬁned to her bed, and suffering under
severe and constant pain ; and all this among strangers,
with the absolute necessity of having a regular nurse,
and ﬁnances at that moment particularly unﬁt to meet
any extraordinary eXpense. She had weathered it,
however, and could truly say that it had done her good.
It had increased her comforts by making her feel herself
to be in good hands. She had seen too much of the
world to expect sudden or disinterested attachment any-
where, but her illness had proved to her that her land-
lady had a character to preserve, and would not use her
ill ; and she had been particularly fortunate in her
nurse, as a sister of her landlady, a nurse by profession,
and who had always a home in that house when unem-
ployed, chanced to be at liberty in time to attend
her. “And she,” said Mrs Smith, “besides nursing
me most admirably, has really roved an invaluable
acquaintance. As soon as I catSd use my hands she
taught me to knit. which has been a great amusement;
and she put me in the way of making these little thread-
cases, pin-cushions, and card-racks, which you always
ﬁnd me so busy about, and which supply me with the
means of doing a little good to one or two very poor
families in this neighbourhood. She has a large
acquaintance, of course professionally, among those who

 

r 58 "REHABION.

an all'ord to buy, and she dispose: of m merchandizc.
She always takes the right time for app ying. Every-
body’s heart is open, you know, when they have re-
cently escaped from severe pain, or are recovering the
blessing of health, and Nurse Rooke thoroughly under-
stands when to speak. She is a shrewd, intelligent,
sensible woman. Hers is a line for seeing human
nature; and she has a fund of good sense and observa-
tion, which, as a companion, make her inﬁnitel superior
to thousands of those who, having only received ‘the
best education in the world,’ know nothing worth
attending to. Call it gouip, if you will, but when
Nurse Rooke has half an hour’s leisure to bestow on
me, she is sure to have something to relate that is
entertaining and proﬁtable: something that makes one
know one’s ies better. One likes to hear what is
going on, to aufm'l as to the newest modes of being
triﬂing and tilly. To me, who live so much alone, her
convcmtion, I assure you, is a treat."

Anne, far from wishing to cavil at the pleasure, re-
plied, “I can easily believe it. Women of that class
have great op nunities, and if they are intelligent may
be well worth, listening to. Such varieties of human
nature as they are in the habit of witnessing! And it
is not merely in its follies that they are well read; for
they see it occasionally under every circumstance that
can be most interesting or alfecting. What instances
must pau before them of ardent, disinterested, self-
denying attachment, of heroism, fortitude, patience,
resignation; of all the conﬂicts and all the sacriﬁces
that ennoble us most. A sick chamber may often
furnish the worth of volumes.”

“Yes,” said Mrs Smith, more doubtingly, “some-
times it run , though I fear its lessons are not often in
the elevate style you describe. Here and there, human
nature may be great in times of trial; but, generally

msvnsron. 159

speaking, it in it: weakness and not its strength that
appears in a lick chamber: it is selﬁshness and im-
patience, rather than generosity and fonitrsde, that one
hears of; There is so little real friend-hi in the world!
and unfortunately,” speaking low an uemulonslly,)
“ there are so many w forget to think seriously til it
is almm too late."

Anne law the misery of luch feelings. The husband
had not been what he ought, and the wife had been led
among that rt of mankind which made her think worse ,
of the world)a than she hoped it deserved. It was but a

‘ng emotion, however, with Mn Smith; she shook
rt off, and soon added in a different tone——

“ I do not suppose the situation my friend Mrs
Rook: is in at present will furnish much either to
interest or edify me. She is only nursing Mrs Wallis
of Marlborough Buildings; a mere pretty, silly, ex-
pensive, fashionable woman, I believe; and of course
will have nothing to report but of lace and linery. I
mean to make my proﬁt of Mrs Wallis, however. She
has plenty of man , and I intend she shall buy all the
high-priced things have in hand now.”

Anne had called several times on her friend, before
the existence of such a person was known in Camden
Place. At last, it became necessary to speak of her.
Sir Walter, Elizabeth, and Mrs Clay, returned one
morning from Laura Place, with a sudden invitation
from Lady Dalrym le for the same evening, and Anne
was already engag to spend that evening in Westgate
Buildings. She was not sorry for the excuse. They
were only asked, she was cure, because Lady Dalrymple,
being kept at home by a bad cold, was glad to make
use of the relationship which had been so pressed on
her; and she declined on her own account with great
alacrity—" She was engaged to spend the evening with
an old schoolfellow." They were not much intereated

160 nasmsrou.

in anything relative to Anne ; but ttill there were quee-
tion- enough asked, to nuke it under-toad what thi- old
Ichoolfellow wan and Elizabeth wt- disdainful, and
Sir Walter nevere.

"Wettgate Buildingtl " laid he; “and who in Mill
Anne Elliot to be vieitin in Weltgate Buildings? A
Mn Smith. A widow flirt Smith; end who won her
hulband? One of the live thounnd Mr Smith. whose
names are to be met with everywhere. And what is
her attraction? That the ll old and tickly. Upon my
word, Mine Anne Elliot, you have the most extraor-
dinary Intel Everything that revqu other people, low
company, paltry rooml, foul air, dieguuing ounciationl,
Ire Inviting to you. But. lurer you may put olf thin
old lady till to-morrow: the it not to near her end, I
Waume, but that the may hope to tee another day.

hat is her age? Forty P”

"No, sir, Ihe ie not one-and-thirty; but I do not
think I can put of? my engagement, becaute it in the
only evening for tome time which will It once unit her
and mylelf. She goe- into the warm bath to-morrow; and
for the reat'of the week, you know, we are engaged."

" But what does Lady Rustell think of this acquaint-
ance ? " naked Elizabeth.

“ She see- nothing to blame in it," replied Anne;
“ on the contrary, the a prove. it, and llll genertlly
taken me when I have ca led on Mn Smith.”

“ Wettgate Building: must have been rather aurprited
hy the appearance of a carriage drawn it near it: pave-
ment," obaerved Sir Walter. “ Sir ﬁenry Ruuell’t
widow, indeed, hat no honour: to diuinguiah her mm,
but ltill it ll 1 handwme uipage, and no doubt ll well
known to convey a Miss E liot. A widow Mn Smith,
lodging in Wengate Building: I A poor widow, barely
Ible to live, between thirty and fort ; a mere Mr-
Smith. In every-day Mn Smith, of ali' people and all

 

PIRSUASION. 16:

names in the world, to be the chosen friend of Mill
Anne Elliot, and to be prefeer by her to her own
family connections among the nobility of England and
Ireland! Mrs Smith! Such a name! ”

Mrs Clay, who had been present while all this
passed, now thought it sdvinble to leave the room, and
Anne could have said much, and did long to In a
little in defence of her friend’s not very dissimilar
claims to theirs, but her sense of personal respect to
her father prevented her. She made no reply. She
left it to himself to recollect, that Mrs Smith was not
the only widow in Bath between thirty and forty, with
little to live on, and no simame of dignity.

Anne kept her appointment, the others kept theirs,
and of course she heard the next morning that they had
had a delightful evening. She had been the only one
of the set absent, for Sir Walter and Elizabeth had not
only been quite at her ladyship’s service themselves,
but had actually been happy to be employed by her in
collecting others, and had been at the trouble of invitin
both Lady Russell and Mr Elliot; and Mr Elliot ha
made a point of leaving Colonel Wallis early, and Lady
Russell had fresh arranged all her evening engagements,
in order to wait on her. Anne had the whole history
of all that such an evening could supply from Lady
Russell. To her, its greatest interest must be, in
having been very much talked of between her friend
and Mr Elliot; in having been wished for, regretted,
and at the same time honoured for staying away in such
a cause. Her kind. compassionate visits to this old
schoolfellow, sick and reduced, seemed to have quite
delighted Mr Elliot. He thought her a most extra-
ordinary young woman: in her tem r, manners, mind,
a model of female excellence. e could meet even
Lady Russell in a discussion of her merits; and Anne
could not be given to undemand so much by her friend,

:6: rusuastou.

caddnotknowhelrlftoheeohighlymedbya
visible man, without Imny of thoee agreeable muons
which her friend man: to create.

Lady Rustellwaanow perfectlydecidedinher

' ' oerEllim. Shewaaaamuchconvinud of
huning to gainAnne intinteaa ofhiadeaerving
her, and was beginning to calculate the number of
week. which would free hi from all the remaining
remain!- of widowhood, and Ive him at liberty to
exert hie moat wen of plea-ng' . She would not
qeak to Anneopwi'l‘lthpohalf the certainty the felt on the
subject, the would venture on little more than hints of
what might be hereafter, of a pot-'ble attachment on
hll side, of the detinblene. of the alliance, IIan
Inchenattachrnenttobemlandmnrned. Anne
hard her, and nude no violent exclamation: ; Ihe only
nniled, blushed. and ganly thook her head.

“I am no match-maker, at you well know," laid
Lady Russell, “being much too well aware of the
uncertainty of all human event! and mlculationt. I
only mean that if Mr Elliot should some time hence
pay hll addresses to you, and if you thould he '
to accept him, I think there would be every poubility
of your being happy together. A most mitable con-
nection everybody mutt contider it, but 1 think it might
be a very happy one."

“ Mr Elliot ll an exceedingly agmhle man, and in
many rerpects I think highly of him," taid Anne;
“ but we lllOllld not auit."

Lady Russell let lllll put, and only id in rejoinder,
"I own that to be able to regard you at the future
miltreal of Kellynch, the future Lady Elliot, to look
forward and tec you occupying your dmr mother’t
place, Iuccceding to all her rights, and all her popularity,
I! well u to all her virtues, would be the highen
possible gntilicatinn to me. You are your Inothm’t

‘ A“ ___w

PERSUASION. :6;

self in countenance and ' ition; and if I might
be allowed to fancy you me an ahe waa, in uituation,
and name, and home, presiding and blening in the same
lpot, and only Iuperior to her in being more highly
valued! M dearelt Anne, it would ive me more
deli ht than ll often felt at my ﬁrm of life."
Agnne waaobliged to turn away, to rile, to walk to u
distant table, and, leaning there in pretended employ-
ment, try to Iubdue the feelings thil ieture excited.
For a few momenta her imagination an her heart were
bewimhed. The idea of becoming what her mother
had been; of having the precioul name of “ Lady
Elliot ” ﬁrst revived in herself; of being restored to
Kellynch, calling it her home again, her home for ever,
wan a charm which Ihe could not immediately resist.
Lady Ru-ell said not another word, willing to leave
the matter to it! own operation; and believing that,
could Mr Elliot at that moment with propriety have
a ken for himan I—ehe believed, in short, what Anne
'd not believe. The same image of Mr Elliot speak-

,ing for hirmelf brought Anne to componure a 'n.
The charm of Kellynch and of “ Lady Elliot’ all
faded away. She never could accept him. And it
we. not only that her feeling: were still adveme to any
man save one; her judgment, on a aeriouo consider-
ation of the poetibilitiea of such a cue, was against
Mr Elliot.

Though they had now been acquainted a month, she
could not be Iatisﬁed that the really knew hie character.
That he wu a Ienaible man, an agreeable man, that he
talked well, profeued good opinions, Deemed to judge
properly and at a man of pnnciple, this wno all clear
enough. He certainly knew what was right, nor could
the ﬁx on any one article of moral duty evidently
tramgreued: but yet she would have been afraid to
newer for hie conduct. She diath the pm, if not

164 ensuasrox.

the preaent. The names which occaioually drop: of
former aaaociatea, the allun'ona to former practice: and
Edwin, euggeeted suspicion. not favourable of what he

been. She aw that there had been badhahitt;
that Sunday travelling had been a common thing; that
there had been a period of hie life (and probably not a
Ihort one) when he had been, at leaat, eareleu on all
aerioue matters; and, though he might now think very
diﬂ‘erendy, who could anewer for the true sentiment. of
a clever, cautioua man, grown old enough to appreciate
a {air character? How could it ever be ucertained
that his mind war truly cleaned?

Mr Elliot war rational, diacreet, poliahed, but he war
not open. There war never any hum of feeling, any
warmth of indignation or delight, at the evil or good of
othen. Thin, to Anne, wan a decided imperfection.
Her early impreeriona were incurable. She rized the
frank, the o -hearted, the eager character beyond all
other; armth and enthuaiarm did uptivate her Itill.
She felt that she could to much more depend upon the
incerity of thoee who Iometimee looked or raid a
oareleea or a hasty thing, than of thoae whoa: pre-
tence of mind never varied, whoae tongue never
dipped.

Mr Elliot wan too generally agreeable. Various at
were the tempera in her father’l home, he leaned them
all. He endured too well, atood too wel with every
body. He had ken to her with acute degree of
openneu of Mr- C'l’aoy ; had appeared completely to nee
what Mn Clay waa about, and to hold her in con-
tempt; and yet Mn Clay found him at agreeable at
any body.

Lady Rum-ll Il-‘IVI either loan or more than her young
friend, for the ow nothing to excite dietrnrt. She
could not imagine a man more exactly what he ought
to be than Mr Elliot ; nor did all: ever enjoy a tweeter

nnsvaswu. 16 5

feeling than the of Ieeing hirn receive the hand of
her beloved Anne m Kellynch church. in the course of
the following autumn.

 

chum $1733].

T was the beginning of Febnlary; and Anne, having
been a month in Bath, wu growing very eager for
news from Uppercrou and Lyme. She wanted

to hear much more than Mary communicated. It war
three weelu eince the had heard at all. She onlmew
that Henrietta wal at home again; and that in,
though considered to be recovering fact, wan still at
Lyme; and she won thinking of them all very intently
one evening, when a thicker letter than urinal from
Mary war delivered to her; and, to nicken the plea-
sure and surprise, with Admiral and re Croft’s com-
plimentn.

The Crofts mutt be in Bath! A circummnce to
intereu her. They were people whom her heart turned
to ve naturally.

“ t in thin?" cried Sir Walter. “ The Cmﬁa
arrived in Bath? The Crofts who rent Kellynch?
What have they brought you ? ”

" A letter from Upperch Cottage, tir.”

“ Ohl thoee letter: are convenient pa- rtI. They
Iecure an introduction. I ahonld have visited Admiral
Croft, however. at any rate. I know what in due to
my tenant.”

Anne could listen no longer; Ihe could not even
have told how the poor Admiral’a complexion elcaped ;
her letter engrossed her. It had been begun several
days back.

:66 reasons-row.

February ut—.

“Mr Due. Amer—I nuke no apolay for my
ilenoe,bemueeIknow bowlittlepeoplethinkol’letten
ineuchaplaceaaBath. Youmultbeagrutdealmo
ha y to are for Uppercmu, which.as youwell know,

ordn little to write about. We have had a very dull
Chrinmau Mr and Mn Muegrove have not had one
dinner-party all the holiday; I do not reckon the
Hayten on anybody. The holidays, however, are over
at lat: I believe no children ever had such long (men.
I am sure I had not. The home was cleared yewer-
day, except of the little Harvilleu; but you will he
turpriled to her that they have never gone home.
Mn Harville mun he an odd mother to part with them
It) long. I do not understand it. They are not. at all
nice children, in my opinion ; but Mn Muegrove let-ml
to like them uite ill well, if not better, than her grand—
children. hat dreadful weather we have hadl It
may not be felt in Bath, with your nice pavements; but
in the country it is of norm: consequence. I have not
had a creature call on me tince the aecond week in
January, except Charles Hayter, who hat been calling
much oftener than was welcome. Between ourselves, I
think it a great pity Henrietta did not remain at Lyme
u long an Louis; it would have kept her a little out
of hit way. The carriage ll gone to-day, to bring
Louie: and the Harvilleu wmorrow. We are not
liked to dine with them, however, till the day after,
Mn Mungrove ll so afraid of her being fatigued by the
journey, which ll not very likely, considering the care
that will be taken of her; nnd it would be much more
convenient to me to dine there to-ntorrow. I am glad
you ﬁnd Mr Elliot to agreeable, and with I could be
acquainted with him too; but I have m utual luck: I
am nlwayl out of the way when anything deeirableia

PERSUASION. l 07

going on; alwayl the Int of my family to be noticed.
What an immenoe time Mr- Clay ha- been staying with
Eliubethl Does the never mean to go away? But,
perhaps, if the were to leave the room vacant, we might
not be invited. Let me know what you think of this.
I do not expect my children to be mixed, you know.
I can leave them at the Great House very well, for a
month or six weeks. I have this moment heard that
the Crofts are going to Bath almoat immediately: they
think the Admiral gouty. Charles heard it quite by
chance: they have not had the civility to give me any
notice, or offer to take anything. I do not think they
im rove at all as neighbours. We see nothing of them,
and this is really an instance of gross inattention.
Charles joina me in love, and everythin proper.
Your: affectionately, “ MALI! ——.'

“ I am sorry to say that I am very far From well;
and Jemima has told me that the butcher says there
is a had sure-throat very much about. I dare say I
lllﬂll catch it; and my sore-throats, you know, are
alwayl worse than anybody's."

So ended the ﬁrst part, which had been afterwards
put into an envelop, containing nearly at much more. '

“ I kept my letter open, that I might send you word
how Louisa bore her journey, and now I am extremely
glad I did, having a great deal to add. In the ﬁrst
place, I had a note from Mn Croft yesterday, offering
to convey anything to you; a very kind, friendly note
indeed, addressed to me, just as it ought; I uhall there-
fore be able to make my letter as lon as I like. The
Admiral doe: not seem very ill, an I Iince'rely ho
Bath will do him all the good he wants. I shall
truly glad to have them hack again. Our neighbour-
hood cannot spare such a pleasant family. But now

168 msmsrorr.

for Louisa. I have nonmhing to communicate that
villamidayou not a little. She and the Harvillee
mine on Tuesday very nfely, and in the evening we
wentm ask herﬁhow lb! did. when we were rather

' notw ndCa 'nBenwitkofthe ,for
Wheel: inviteduvllxellathe Harvdlee‘ ; 1:3wa
do you think was thereuon.’ Neitherrnorenorle-
thanhiebeinginlovevrith Lodqmdnatchooaingtn
venturetoU m-ﬁllheludlndanamerfrorqu
Mangrove; ior it was all settled between himand her
befor'ethecameaway,andhe hadwrittmto herfather
byCaptainHarville. True, upon my honour! Are
notyoualoninhed? Illullheurprindatlennifyou
ever received a hint of it, for I never did. Mn Mub-
grnve prmem Iolemuly tint she knew nothing of the
matter. We Ire all very well planed, however; for
though it ll not ualtohernurryiugCa ' Went-
worth, it in inﬁni yhetter thanCharlen lyner; and
Mr Mangrove hu written hie con-mt, and Captain
Benwick in expected to—day. Mn Harville aye her
hubnd feel- a good deal on hie poor liner’a account;
but, however, Louin in a great favourite with both.
Indeed, Mn Harville and I quite agree that we love
her the better for having numed her. Charles wonders
what Capnin Wentworth will any; but if you remember,
I never thought him attached to Louisa; I never could
lee mything of it. And this ll the end, you ace, of
Captain Benwick’l being mppoeed to be an ndmirer of
your: How Charlel could take such I thing into hi!
head um always incompnhennble no me. Ihope he
will be more Igreeahle now. Certainly not I great
match for Louira Murgrove, but a million u'mea better
than marrying among the Hayten."

Mary need not have fared her duer’l being in any
degree prepared for the newt. She had never in her
life been more amnilhed. Capuin Beuwiclt Ind

PERSUASION. x69

Louisa Musgrove! It was almost too wonderful for
belief, and it was with the greatest effort that she could
remain in the room, preserve anair of calmness, and
answer the common questions of the moment. Happily
for her, they were not many. Sir Walter wanted to
know whether the Crofts travelled with four horses,
and whether they were likely to be situated in such a
pan of Bath as it might suit Miss Elliot and himself to
visit in ; but had little curiosity beyond.

" How is Mary?” said Elizabeth; and without
waiting for an answer, "And pray what brings the
Crofts to Bath ?"

I‘ They come on the Admiral’s account. He is
thought to be gouty.”

" Gout and decrepitude! " mid Sir Walter. “ Poor
old gentleman ! "

“ Have they any acquaintance here? ” asked Eliza-

“ I do not know ; but I can hardly suppose that, at
Admin! Croft’s time of life, and in his profession, he
should not have many acquaintance in such a place as
this.

“ I so ect," said Sir Walter, coolly, “ that Admin]
Croft wil be best known in Bath as the renter of
Kellynch Hull. Elisabeth, may we venture to present
him and his wife in Laura Place .’ ”

" Oh no! I think not. Situated as we are with
Lady Dalryrnple, cousins, we ought to be very careful
not to embarrass her with acquaintance she mi ht not
approve. If we were not related it would not signify;
but as cousins, she would feel scrupulous as to any pro-
posal of ours. We had better leave the Crofts to ﬁnd
their own level. There are several odd—looking men
walking about here, who, I am told, are sailors. The
Crofts will associate with them."

This was Sir Walter and Elizabeth's share of

I 70 PERSUASION.

interest in the letter; when Mrs Clay had paid her
tribute of more decent attention, in an enquiry after
Mrs Charles Mulgrove and her ﬁne little boyn, Anne
war at liberty.

In her own room she tried to com rehend it. Well
might Charlea wonder how Captain entworth would
feell Perhapl he had quieted the ﬁeld, had given
Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found he did not
love her. She could not endure the idea of treachery
or levity, or anything akin to ill usage between him and
his' friend. She could not endure that such a fricndlhip
as their. should be severed unfairly.

Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove! The
high-spirited, joyoue-talking Louisa Mangrove, and the
dejected, thinking, feeling, reading Captain Benwick,
seemed each of them everything that would not suit the
other. Their mind: most diuimilar! Where could
have been the attraction? The answer soon prelentetl
itself. It had been in situation. They had been
thrown together several weekn; they had been living in
the same small family party: since Henrietta’a coming
away, they mutt have been depending almort entirely on
each other, and Louisa, just recovering from illness,
had been in an interesting state, and Captain'Benwiclt
was not inconsolable. That was a point which Anne
had not been able to avoid suspecting before; and
instead of drawing the ram conclusion a: Mary. from
the preaent course of events, they served only to conﬁrm
the Idea of his having felt some dawning of tendemesa
toward herself. She did not mean, however, to derive
much more from it to gratify her vanity than Mary might
have allowed. She wan persuaded that any tolerany
pleasing young woman who had listened and seemed to
feel for him would have received the same compli—
ment. He had an ﬂirt-climate heart. He muat love
somebody.

eensussrou. 17 1

She aw no reason against their being happy. Louisa
had ﬁne naval fervour to begin with, and they would
soon grow more alike. He would gain cheerfulness,
and she would learn to be an enthusiast for Scott and
Lord Byron; nay, that was probably learnt already;
of course they had fallen in ove over poetry. The
idea of Louisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary
taste and sentimental reﬂection was amusing, but she
had no doubt of its being so. The day at Lyme,
the fall from the Cobb, might inﬂuence her health, her
nerves, her courage, her character to the end of her
life, as thorougth as it appeared to have inﬂuenced her
fate.

The conclusion of the whole was, that if the woman
who had been sensible of Captain Wentworth’s merits
could be allowed to prefer another man, there was
nothing in the engagement to excite lasting wonder;
and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend byit, certainly
nothing to be regretted. No, it was not regret which
made Anne’s heart beat in spite of herself, and brought
the colour into her cheeks when she thought of Captain
Wentworth unshaclded and free. She had some feel-
ings which she was ashamed to investigate. They were
too much like joy, senseless joy!

She longed to see the Crofts ; but when the meeting
took place, it was evident that no rumour of the new:
had yet reached them. The visit of ceremony was paid
and returned; and Louisa Musgrove was mentioned,
and Captain Benwick, too, without even half a smile.

The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in
Gay Street, rfectly to Sir Walter's satisfaction. He
was not at all? ashamed of the acquaintance, and did,
in fact, think and talk a great deal more about the
Admiral than the Admiral ever thought or talked about
him.

The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as

M .

:12 unsmsron.

they withed for, and comidered their intercourae with
the Elliott at a mere nutter of form, and not in the
lent likely to afford them any plea-ore. They brought
with them their countz habit of being alwtyt together.
He wuordered to w k to keep off the gout, and Mn
Croft teemed to go Iharel with him in everything, and
to walk for her life to do him good. Anne saw them
wherever the went. Lady Ruuell took her out in her
can-inge almoat every morningI and the never failed to
think of them, and never failed to teethem. Knowing
their feeling: at the did, it wat a moat attractive picture
of happineu to her. She alwayt watched them no long
at the could. delighted to fancy the undentood what they
might be talking of, at they walked along in ha p inde-
pendence, or equally delighted to tee the [{dymiral’t
hearty thake of the hand when he encountered an old
friend, and obtervc their eagemeu of convernation when
occarionally forming into a little knot of the navy, Mn
Croft looking an intelligent and keen at any of the
ofﬁcer: around her.

Anne win too much engaged with Lady Russell to
be often walking herself; but it to happened that one
morning, about a week or ten days after the Croftt’
arrival, it suited her best to leave her friend, or her
friend’t carriage, in the lower part of the town, and re-
turn alone to Camden PlaCe, and in walking up Miltom
Street the had the good fortune to meet with the Ad-
miral. He wat ttanding by himtelf, at a prinuhop
window, with hit hands behind him, in earnest contem-
plation of some print, and the not only might have

atacd him unseen, but wat obliged to touch at well at
addreu him before the could catch hit notice. When
he did perceive and acknowledge her, however, it wat
done With all hit usual frankneu and good-humour.
“ Hal it it you? Thank you, thank you. Thit it
grating me like a friend. Here I am, you ace, ttaring

— * _“____-<

rensussron. r 7 3

at a have. I can never get h this shop without
ﬂopping. But what a thing here Is, by way of a boatl
Do look at it. Did you ever see the like? What
queer fellows your line painters rmut be, to think that
anybody would venture their lives in such I shapeless
old cockleshcll as that? And yet here are two gende-
rnen tuck up in it mightily at their ease, and looking
about them at the rocks and mountains, as if they were
not to be upset the next moment, which they certainly
must be. I wonder where that boat was built! " (laugh-
ing heartily} ; “I would not venture over a horsepond
in it. We l,” (turning away), “now, where are you
bound? Can I go anywhere for you, or with you?
Can I be ofany use?"

“ None, I thank you, unless you will give me the
pleasure of our company the little way our road lies
together. am going home.” .

“ That I will, with all my heart, and farther too.
Yes, yes, we will have a snug walk together, and I have
something to tell you as we go along. There, take my
arm; that ’s right; I do not feel comfortable if I have
not a woman there. Lord! what a boat it ill ” taking
I last look at the picture, as the began to be in motion.

‘; Did you say that you ha something to tell me,
sir . "

“ Yes, I have, presently. But here comes a friend,
Captain Brigden; I shall only say, ‘ How d'ye do ? ' as
we pass, however. I shall not sto . ‘ How d’ye do 1’
Brigden stares to see anybody With me but my wife.
She, poor soul, is tied by the leg. She has a blister on
one of her heels, as large as I three-shilling iece. It
you look across the street, you will see Admiral Brand
coming down and his brother. Shabby fellows, both
of them I I am glad they are not on this side of the
way. Sophy mnnot hear them. They played me a
pitiful trick once : got away some of my best men. I

r74 rnsunsron.

willtellyouthewholeun anothertime. Then:
cometoldSirArehihnld mandhiagrandaon.
Iaoohheaeeaua; beki-eahia lundtoyou; hetaket
yon hr my wife. Ah! the baa come too noon
for that younker. Poor old irArchihaldl How do
like Bath, Mi- Ellioti It unit: In very well.
earealwayrmeetingwithtomeold friendorother;
the‘reetaﬁlll ofthem every maming;auremhave
plenty of chat; and then we get away ﬁom them all,
and ahut oanelvea into our lodging; and draw in our
chain, and are u mug an if we were at Kellynch, ay, or
'II we need to be even at North Yannouth and Deal.
We do not like our lodging: here the wane, I an tell
on, for putting in in mind of thooe we ﬁrm had at North
armouth. The wind blow: through one d' the cup-
board! in the lame way.”
When they were got a little farther, Anne ventured to
re- ngain for what he had to communicate. She had
when clar of Ml.le Street to have her curioaity
gratiﬁed ; but the was ttill obliged to wait, for the Ad-
miral had made up his mind not to begin till they had
gained the greater rpace and quiet of Belmont; and u
the was not really Mrt Croft, the must let him have hit
own way. At noon at they were fairly ascending Bel-
mont, he began——

“ Well, now you shall hear something that will lur-

rile you. But lint of all, you must tell me the name
of the young lady I am going to tall: about. That
young lady, you know, that we have all been to con-
eerncd for. The Miss Mrragrove that all thia ha; been
happening to. Her Christian name : l nlwaya forget
her Chriatiau name.”

Anne had been ashamed to appear to com rchcnd I0
noon at the really did; but now she could ely tuggeut
the name of “ Louiaa."

“Ay, ﬂy, Miu Louiu Mmgrove, that is the name.

PERSUASION. I 75

I with young ladiee had not Iuch a number of ﬁne
Chrim'an namee. l Ihonld never be out if they were
all Sophyl, or nomething of that non. Well, thin Min
Louila, we all thought, you know, wan to marry Fred-
erick. He wan courting her week after week. The
only wonder war, what they could be wailing for, till
the bulineu at Lyme mme; then, indeed, it wan clear
enough that they mult wait till her brain wa- oet to
right. But even then there war eomething odd in their
way of going on. Inmd of naying at Lyme, he went
off to Plymouth, and then he went off to lee Edward.
When we came back from Minehead he was gone down
to Edward’l, and there he has been ever since. We
have neen nothing of him Iince November. Even
Sophy could not undermnd it. But now, the matter
ha: taken the otran est turn of all ; for thin young lady,
this name Mina ulgmve, instead of being to marry
Frederick, in to marry Jame: Benwick. You know
James Benwick ? ”

“A little. I am a little acquainted with Captain
Benwiek.”

“ Well, the in to marry him. Nay, most likely they
Ire married already, for I do not know what they should
wait for." ca B

“I thought in cnwick I ve leaning un
man," said Amer: and I undeniandytlliat he beg-1:! a:
excellent character."

“Oh! yea, yes, there in not a word to be uid
againlt Jame. Benwick. He in only a commander, it it
true, made lalt lummer, and these are bad drnee for
getting on. but he hu not another fault that I know of.
An excellent, good-hearted fellow, I aim you; a very
active, zealoul oﬂicer, too, which in more than you
would think for, perhapl, for that unit Iort of manner
’ doe. not do him junioe.”

“ Indeed, you are mistaken there, Air; I should never

1 76 nasmslon.

augnr want of rpirit from Captain Beuwick'e MIC".
I thought them particularly and I will anlwer
for it, they would generally pleaeel

“ Well, well, ladiee are the hen judges; hut Jamel
Benwick in rathertoo piano for me; and though very
likely it in all our paniality, Sophy and I cannot help
thinking Frederick’n mannen better than his. There
in Iomething about Frederick more to our take."

Anne wan caught.‘ She had only mnt to oppoee
the too common idea of lpirit and gentleneu being in-
wmpatihle with each other, not at all to repretent Captain
Benwielt’l mannen an the very beat that could panibly
be I and, after a little heeitation, Ihe wan beginning to
lay, "I wan not entering into any compariaon of the
two friends ; ” but the Admiral intermpted her
with—

“ And the thing in certainly tnie. It ll not a mere
bit of gouip. We have it from Frederick himself.
Hit litter had a letter from him yeaterday, in which he
telll ul of it, and he had jun had it in a letter from
Harville, written upon the spot, from Uppercrou. I
fanc they are all at Uppercroea.”

his was an opportunity which Anne could not re-
Ilu; the aid, therefore, “I hope, Admiral, I hope
there ll nothing in the at le of Captain Wentworth’l
letter to make you and rs Croft particularly unealy.
It did certainly eeern, last autumn, an if there were an
attachment between him and Louie: Mulgrove; but 1
hope it may be undemood to have worn out on each
tide equally, and without violence. I hope hie letter
doel not breathe the Ipirit of an ill-ulcd man."

“ Not at all, not at. all: there in not an oath or a
murmur from beginning to end."

Anne looked down to hide her Imile.

" No, no; Frederick in not a man to whine and
complain; he but too much spirit for that. If the girl

msmsron. :77

like: anoﬂier man better, it in very lit the ahould have
hinl-ll

" Certainly. But what I mean ll, that I hope there
in nothing in Captain Wentvlorth’l manner of writing,
to make you nipple he thinkt himtelf ill-need by he
friend, which might appear, you know, without it- being
nheolutely laid. I Ihould be very sorry that Inch a
friendship 30 hnl eubeieted between him and Cagain
Benwick Ihould be deatroyed, or even wounded y a
circummnce of thin Ion."

“Yen, ea, I understand you. But there in nothing
at all of t- nature in the letter. He does not give
the lent ﬂing at Benwick; doe- not no much a lay,
‘ I wonder at it. I have a moon of my own for won-
dering at it.’ No, you would not guele, from hit way of
writing, that he had ever thought of thie Mine (what ’5
her name?) for himself. He very handsomely hopel
the will be happy together; and there in nothing very
un orgivin‘fl in that, I think.”

Anne 'd not receive the perfect conviction which
the Admiral meant to convey, but it would have been
nucleus to greet the enquiry farther. She therefore satia-
ﬁed henel with common-place remarkl or quiet atten-
tion, and the Admin] had it all his own way.

“Poor Frederick!" laid he, at lat. “Now he
mutt begin all over again with Iomebody elle. I think
we mult get him to Bath. Sophy mutt write, and beg
him to come to Bath. Here are pretty girls enough,
am sure. It would be of no true to go to Up rcrou
again, for that other Min Mulgrove, I ﬁnd, in kc
by her cousin, the young yawn. Do not on think,
Min l_:‘.lliotI we had better try to get him to ath i ”

l 78 PnsuASION.

tblpttt’ ’3’.

HILE Admiral Cmft wu taking thi- walk
with Anne, and expreuing hi- widi of get-
ting Ca tain Wentworth to Bath, Captain

Wentworth was ready on his way thither. Before
Mn Croft had written, he war arrived, and the very
next time Anne walked out, the law him.

Mr Elliot wan attending hit two ooueinn and Mrs
Clay. They were in Miltorn Street. It began to rain,
not much, but enough to make Ihelter delirabk for
women, and quite enough to make it very deeirahle for
Miu Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed
home in Lady Dalrymple’s carriage, which was wen
waiting at a little distance: the, Anne, and Mn Clay,
therefore, turned into Molland’t, while Mr Elliot Mpﬁd
to Lady Dalrymplc, to requclt her auimnce. e
soon joined them again, succeuful, of course; Lady
Dalrymple would be moat. happy to take them home,
and would call for them in a few minutel.

Her ladyrhip’a carriage was a borouche, and did not
hold more than four with any comfort. Min Carteret
was with her mother; comequently it was not reason-
able to expect accommodation for all the three Camden
Place ladies; There could he no doubt at to Mite
Elliot. Whoever suffered inconvenience, the mutt
IuiTer none, but it occupied a little time to settle the
point of civility between the other two. The min was
a mere triﬂe, and Anne was most sincere in preferring
a walk with Mr Elliot. But the rain was also a mere
triﬂe to Mu Clay; the would hardly allow it even to
drop at all, and her boots were so thick! much thicker
than Mist Anne’a ; and, in thort, her civility rendered
her quite an anxious to he left to walk with Mr Elliot
u Anne could be, and it was discussed between them

PERSUASION. 1 19

with a generosity so polite and so determined, that the
others were obliged to settle it lbr them; Miss Elliot
maintaining that Mrs Clay had a little cold alread , and
Mr Elliot| deciding, on appeal, that his cousin Kane’s
boots were rather the thickest.

It was ﬁxed, accordingly, that Mrs Clay, should be
of the party in the can'iage ; and they had just reached
this point, when Anne, as she sat near the window,
descned, most decidedly and distinctly, Captain Went-
worth walking down the street.

Her start was perceptible only to herself; but she
instantly felt that she was the greatest limpleton in the
world, the most unaccountable and absurd! For a
few minutes she saw nothing before her: it was all
confusion. She was lost, and when she had scolded
back her senses, she found the others still waiting for
the carriage, and Mr Elliot (always obliging) just
setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mrs

Cla ’s. _
Syhe now felt a great inclination to go to the outer
door; she wanted to see if it rained. Why was she to
suspect herself of another motive? Captain Went-
worth must be out of sight. She left her seat, she
would go; one half of her should not be always so
much wiser than the other half, or always suspecting
the other of being worse than it was. She woul see if
it rained. She was sent back, however, in a moment,
by the entrance of Captain Wentworth himself, among
a party of gentlemen and ladies, evidently his acquaint-
ance, and whom he must have joined a little below
Milsom Street. He was more obviously struck and
confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed
before ,he looked quite red. For the ﬁrst time since their
renewed acquaintance, she felt that she was betraying
the least sensibility of the two. She had the advantage
of him in the preparation of the last few moments. All

use nasuasrou.

the overpowering, blinding, bewilderin ﬁrst eﬂ'ecta of
atrong eurpriee were over with her. till, however, Ihe
had enough to feel! It wan agitation, pain, pleunre;
a Iomething between delight and miaery.

He apoke to her, and then turned awe . The
character of hit manneer ernbamunleat. he could
not have called it either cold or friendly, or anything Do
certainly an emban'aued.

After a abort interval, however, he me toward: her,
and spoke again. Mutual inquiriea on common cub-
ject- paued : neither of them, probably, much the wiaer
for what they heard, and Anne condoning fully aemible
of hit being leu at cue than fomerly. They had by
dint of being no very much together, gotta lpeak to each
other with a connidenble rtion of apparent indifference
and calmneI; but he co d not do it now. Time had
changed him, or Louiea had changed him. There waa
contciouaneaa of come tort or other. He looked
ve well, not an if he had been Iuﬂ'ering in health or
apinta, and he talked of UpperchI, of the Mulgrovea,
nay, even of Louisa, and had even a momentary look
of hi! own arch Iigniﬁcance at he named her; but yet
it wan Ca tain Wentworth not comfortable, not my, not
able to feign that be was.

It did not aurpriae, but it grieved Anne to obaerve
that Elizabeth would not know him. She now that he
saw Elizabeth, that Elizabeth uw him, that there wan
complete internal recognition on each tide 5 the wee
convinced that he waa ready to be acknowledged ll an ~
acquaintance, expecting it, and ahe had the pain of
teemg her ainer turn away with unalterable coldneaa.

Lady Dalryrnple'a carriage, for which Mi- Elliot waa
growing very Impatient, now drew up; the tenant came
in to announce it. It was beginning to rain again, and alta-
gether there wan a delay, and a bulde,and a talking, which
man make all the little crowd in the shop underltand
that Lady Dalrymple waa calling to convey Miu Elliot.

 

ennsuasrou. , 18:

At last Miss Elliot and her friend, unattended but by
the servant (for there was no cousin returned), were
walking off; and Captain Wentvrorth, watching them,
turned again to Anne, and by manner, rather than
words, wal offering his service. to her.

" I am much obliged to yon," was her answer, “but
I am not going with them. The carriage would not
accommodate to many. I walk: I prefer walking.”

" But it rains."

“Oh! very little. Nothing that I ard."

After a moment's pause, he said: “ lfl‘rnrngll't’eﬁcnr‘rlte
only esterda , I have ui myse pro y or
Bath :lready,yy'ou ace,” ageing: to a new umbrella) ;
“ I wish you would make use of it, if you are determined
to walk ; though I think it would be more prudent to
let me get you a chair."

She wa very much obliged to him,_bnt declined it all,
repeating her convicu'on, that the rain would come to
nothin at present, and adding, “ I am only waiting for
Mr Eliot. He will be here in a moment, I am uure.”

She had hardly apoken the words when Mr Elliot
walked in. Captain Wentworth recollected him per-
fectly. There was no difference between him and the
man who had stood on the stepl at Lyme, admirin
Anne as the paced, ex tin the air and look.| and
manner of the privileged re ntion and friend. He came
in with eagemeu, appeared to lee and think only of her,
apologised for hit my, waa grieved to have It t her
waiting, and anxious to get her away without urther
loss of time, and before the rain increased; and in
another moment they walked 05' together, her arm
under his, a gentle and emban'ataed glance, and a
“ Good morning to you! ” being all that the had time
for, as the passed away.

As soon as they were out of night, the ladies of
Captain Wentworth’s party began talking of them.

rBa ‘ elasuasron.

“ Mr Elliot does not dislike his eontin, I fancy ? "

“ Oh! no, that is clarenough. One can gums what
will hap there. He is always with them; half lives '
in the rnilyl I believe. What a very good-looking
man I "

“ Yes, and Miss Atkinson, who dined with him
once at the WallisesI says he in the most agreeable man
she ever wu in company with.”

“She is pretty,I think; Anne Elliot; very pretty
when one comes to look It her. It is not the faahion
to say so, but Iconfess I admire her more than her
sister."

“Oh! so do I."

“ And so do I. No comparison. But the men are
all wild alter Miss Elliot. Anne is too delicate for
them."

Anne would have been particularly obliged to her
cousin if he would have walked by her side all the way
to Camden Place without taying a word. She had
newr found it so ditlicult w linen to him, though
nothing could exceed his solicitude and care, and though
his subjects were principally such u were wont to be'
always interesting : praise, warm, just, and discriminating.
of Lad Russell, and insinuations highly rational against
Mn C ay. But jun now the could think only of Cap-
tain Weutworth. She could not understand his present
feelings, whether he were really suffering much from
diuppointmcnt or not; and till that point were settled,
she could not be quite herself.

She hoped to he wine and reannahle in time; but
alasl alasl she must confeaa to herself that she was not
wise yet.

Another circumstance very essential for her to know,
was how long he meant to be in Bath; he had not
mentioned it, or she could not recollect it. He
might be only passing through. But it was more pm-

nnsuasron. :83

hable that he should be come to lay. In that case, so
liable as every body was to meet every body in Bath,
Lady Russell would in all likelihood see him some-
where. ~ Would she recollect him? How would it all be?

She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell
that Louisa Mangrove was to marry Captain Benwick.
It had cost her something to encounter Lady Russell’s
surprise; and now, if she were by any chance to be
thrown into com ny with Captain Wentworth, her
imperfect knowl ge of the matter might add another
Ihade of rejudice against him.

The allowing morning Anne was out with her
friend, and for the ﬁrst hour, in an incessant and fearful
sort of watch for him in vain; but at last, in returning
down Pulteney Street, she distinguished him on the right
hand pavement at such adiatance u to have him in view
the greater part of the street. There were many other
men about him, many groups walking the same way,
but there was no mistaking him. She looked in-
stinctively at Lady Russell, but not from any mad idea
of her recogniling him so soon as she did herself. No,
it was not to be supposed that Lady Russell would per-
ceive him till they were nearly opposite. She looked
at her, however, from time to tune, anxioualy; and
when the moment a proached which must point him
out, though not daring to look again for her own
countenance she knew was unﬁt to be seen , she was yet
perfectly conscious of Lady Rulsell's eyes being turned
exactly in the direction for him—of her being, in short,
intently observing him. She could thoroughly compre-
hend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady
Russell’s mind, the dilﬁculty it must be for her to
withdraw her eyea, the astonishment she must be feeling
that eight or nine years should have pamed over him,
and in foreign climes and in active service too, without
robbing him of one personal grace!

l 34 msuasrou.

At last, Lady Rural! drevrhuk ha head. “Now,
how woulddrerpeakofhirn?"

“ You will wonder,” aid the. "what has hnen ﬁxing
myeye no long; but I val lookin after aomewindow-
mm, which Lady Alicia and ngI F rankland were
telling me of Ian night. They deacrihed the drawing-
roomwindovI-curtnimofoneofthehonnaonthiaide
oftheuy,andthilpartofthe|tmet.uheingthe
h-ndaornett and ha hung of any in Bath, but could
not recollect the exact number, and I have been trying
mﬁndontwhichitcouldhe; but I confe- I unlee
no curtain. hereahonta that never their deleription.”

Anne u‘ghed, and bluahed, and miled, in pity and
ditdain, either at her friend or henelf. The part which
pmokedhermmwaathut in all thiavlaate offere-
Iight and nation, the should have loot the right moment
for aeeing whether he new them.

A day or two pulled without producing anything.
The theatre or the menu, where he run rmat likely tn
he, were not fnhionable enough for the Elliou. whose
evening amusements were hole y in the elegant atnpidity
of private parties, in which they were getting more and
more engaged; and Anne, wearied of ruch a late of

nation, in]: of knowing nothing, and ﬁncying her-
nel manger became her strength was not tried, was
quite in: tient for the concert evening. It war a
concert or the beneﬁt of a penon patroniaed by Lady
Dalryrnple. Of noune they mutt attend. It vial
m1], expected to be a good one, and (a):an Went-
vonh was very fond of muric. If the c d onl have
a few minutet’ canvemtion with him again, the ncied
aheuhauld bend-lied; anduto thepowerofaddreu—
ing him, the felt all over courage if the opportunity
occurred. Elizabeth had turned from him, Lady
Rune" overlooked him; her nerves were strengthened
by the: circumuncea; the felt that the owed him

attention.

rensuasrou. :85

She had once partly promiaed Mn Smith to d
the evening with her; but in a drort hurried ahe
excnaed henelf Ind put it of, with the more decided
pmmiae of a longer viait on the marrow. Mn Smith

ve a moat good-humoured acquieacence.

" By all meana," laid aha; “ only tell me all about
it, when you do come. Who in your party 2 ”

Anne named them all. Mr: Smith made no reply ; but
when ahe waa leaving her laid, and with In expreuinn
half aeriona, half arch, “ Well, I heartily WiIll your
concert may anawer; and do not fail me to-morrow if
you can come; for I begin to have a foreboding that I
may not have man more viaila from ymn’:

Anne waa ed and conﬁned; but after atanding
in a moment’a nupenae,wal obliged, and not torry to be
obliged, to hurry away.

cbuvm SS.

IR WALTER. hit two daughtera, and Mr-
Clay, were the narliel of all their party at the
rooma in the evening; and a Lady Dalrymple

muat he waited for, the took their nation by one of
the ﬁrea in the Octagon oorn. But hardly were they
I0 aetded, when the door opened again, and Captain
Wentworth walked in alone. Anne waa the neareet to
him, and making yet a little advance, ahe innandy
apnke. He waa preparing only to bow and pan: on,
but her gentle " How do you do i " brought him out of
the Itraight line to “and near her, and make enquiries
in remrn, in spite of the fonnidahle father and sister in
the back ground. Their being in the back ground waa
a cuppa". to Anne; she knew nothing of theirllooka,
and :1: equal to everything which the believed right to
be done.

186 rusmsxow.

While werelpahm avhrqzenn' 'ghetweenher
father and liuheth caught her ar. She could not
distingui-h, hot the must gue- the object; Ind on
C: 'n Wentworth’l nuking a dimnt bow, che oom-

thatherfntherhad judgeduoweJlutogive
him that imple acknowledgment of acquaintance, and
the wit in time by a I'de glance to tee a alight
courtly from Elirabeth henelf. This, though late,
and reluctant, Ind ungracious, wan yet better thin
nothing, and her Ipiriu improved.

After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath,
and the concert, their convention began to ﬂag, and no
little wat raid at lat, that the war expecting him to go
every moment, but he did not; he seemed in no hurry
to leave her; and presently with renewed cpirit, with a
little rmile, a little glow, he aid—

“I have hardly teen you ince our day at Lyme.
I am afraid you mutt have mlfercd from the chock,
rmd the more from its not overpowering you at the
time."

She wured him that the had not.

“It. wu a frightful hour," aid he, “a frightful
dayl ” Ind he patted hit hand across his eyel, II if the
remembrance were still too painful, but in a moment,
half Imiling again, added, “ The day hu produced come
ell'ecu, however; hat had tome connequencee which
mutt he considered at the very reverie of frightful.
When you had the preIence of mind to mggest that
llenwiclt would be the mperen penon to fetch a
.u eon, you could have little idea of hit being event-
“! y one of than most concerned in her recovery."

4' Certainly I could have none. But it appeal!—
I Illould hope it would he a very happy match. There
he on both sides good riociplee and good temper.”

in Y5,” said he, loo 'ng not exactly forward ; “ but
“um, I think, ends the resemblance. With nll rny

nesunsron. :87
soul I Wilh them happy, and rejoice over every circum-
nance in Favour of IL They have no diﬂicnltiel to
contend with at home, no poeition, no caprice, no
delays. ‘ The Mulgrovel areahehaving like themselves,
moot honourany and kindly, only anxious with true
parental heart: to promote their daughter’s comfort.
All this is much, very much in favour of their happi-
nean; more than perhapr—”

He A sudden recollection seemed to
occur, and to give him some tame ofthat emotion which
wa- reddening Anne’u cheeks and ﬁxing her eyes on
the ground. After clearing his throat, however, he
proceeded thin—

“I confess that I do think there is n disparity, too
great a disparity, and in a int no ice: essential than
mind. I regard Louisa mgrove as a very amiable,
tweet-hem girl, and not deﬁcient in undemnding,
but Benwrck is something more. He in a clever man,
a reading man; and I confess, that I do coneider his
atmhing himself to her with some ourprise. Had it
been the elfect of gratitude, had he learnt to love her,
because he believed her to be preferring him, it would
have been another thing. But I have no reason to
suppooe it so. It eeems, on the contrary, to have been
a perfectly lpontaneoue, untaught feeling on his side, and
this surprises me. A man like him, in hit situation!
with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken I Fanny
Harville wan a very superior creature, and his attach-
ment to her was indeed attachment. A man does not
recover from such a devotion of the heart to such a
woman ! He ought not; he does not.”

Either from the conncioumem, however, that his
friend had recovered, or from some other conscioumess,
he went no farther; and Anne who, in spite of the
ngitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered,
and in Ipilc of all the various names of the room, the

N

188 rensunswn.

Ilmod gen-elect Ilam ofthe door, and ceaIeleII buzz of
penonl walking through, had diatinguiehed every word,
was uruck, gratiﬁed, conﬁned, Ind beginning to bmtbe

- very quick, and feel In hundred thing- in I moment.
It wu impo-ible for her to mter on Inch a Iubjeet;
and et. after I pnuIe. feeling the neceleity of making,
Ind ving not the emallelt with for I total change, Ihe
only deviated Io far a to my—

“ You were a good while at Lyme, I think i ”

“ About I fortnight. I could not leave it till
Lnuin'l doing well wnI quite ascertained. I had been
too deeply concerned in the miechief to be non It
peace. It had been my doing, Iolcly mine. She would
not have been obstinate if I had not been weIk. The
country round Lyme in very ﬁne. I walked and rode

I great deal, and the more raw, the more I found to
admire.”

“ I should very much like to nee Lyme Igain,” laid
Anne.

“Indeed! I should not have suppoeed that you
could have found anything in Lyme to inspire Inch a
feeling. The horror and distren you were Involved in,
the "etch of mind, the wear of Ipirita l I Ihould have
thought your lavt impreuiom of Lyme must have been
mug dilglllt.”

“The Ian few hour. were certainly very painful,"
replied Anne; “ but when pain in over, the remem-
brance of it often become I pleavure. One does not
love a place the leII for having tuﬁ'ered in it, unleu it
ha been all suffering, nothing but mﬁeﬁng, which wan
by no means the case at Lyme. We were only in
Inxiety and dintrcu during the Ian two hours, and pre-
viouly there had been a great deal of enjoyment. So
much novelty and beauty! I have travelled Io linle,
am every freIh place would be interelting to me ; but
due is real beauty at Lyme, and in short,” with a faint

A

A _ u i .______“_e__]

 

rnasuasron. 189

blunh at tome recollections, “ altogether my impreaaione
of the place are very agreahle."

Aa ahe ceaaed, the entrance door opened again, and
the very Barty up d for whom they were waiting.
“ Lady alrymp e, Lady Dalryrnplel " waa the re-
joicing Iound; and with all the engcrncu compatible
with anxioul elegance, Sir Walter and hia two ladiea
nepped forward to meet her. Lady Dalrymple and
Mm CarteretI escorted by Mr Elliot and Colonel
Wallia, who’had luppened to arrive nearly at the nine
inatant, advanced into the room. The other: 'oined
them, and it war a grou in which Anne found enelf
alto neceuarily inclu ed. She wan divided from
Captain Wentworth. Their intereating, almoat too
intereating converntion, muat be broken up for a time,
but alight war the penance compared with the happineaa
which brought it onl She had learnt, in the lane ten
minutes, more of hit feelings toward: Louila, more of
all his feelingu, than Ihe dared to think of ; and rhe gave
hemlf up to the demands of the party, to the needful
civilitica of the moment, with exquraite, though agitated
aenutionr. She me in good humour with all. She
had received idea- which dirpoaed her to be courteoua
and kind to all, and to pity every one, a: being less
happy than hereelf.

he delightful emotions were a little Iubdued, when
on eteppin back from the group, to be joined again by
Captain entworth, Ihe law that he we gone. She
waa just in time to tee him turn into the Concert Room.
He wae gone; he had disappeared, rhe felt a moment'-
regret. But " they Ihould meet again. He would look
for her, he would ﬁnd her out long before the evening
were over, and at present, rhapa, it war at well to be
aaunder. She was in needfrf a little interval for recol-
lection."

Upon Lady Ruuell’a appearance aoon afterwards, the

19° rnsuasrorr.

wholepnrtyvm collected, and all that remained rm
to manhal thenuelvea, and proceed into the Concert
Room; and be of all the connequence in their power,
draw a many eyee. excite a many whirpen, and dia-
turh a many people as they could.

Very, very ha py were both Eliubeth and Anne
Elliot an they ked in. Eliubeth arm-in-arm with
Mira Cartaret, and looking on the broad back of the
dowager Viaoounne- Dalrymple before her, had nothing
to with for which did not Item within her reach; and
Anne—but it would he an iolult to the nature of Anoe'l
felicity to draw any comparim between it and her
aiuer’r; the origin of one all Ielﬁth vanity, of the other
all generoua attachment.

Anne raw nothing, thought noming of the brilliancy
of the room. Her ha ioeu was from within. Her
eyes were bright, an her clreeh glowed; but the
know nothing about it. She wan thinking only of the
lart half hour, and as they panned to their neon, her
mind took 3 haaty range over it. Hit choice oflubjecu,
hia expreuiool, and' Itill more hie manner and look, had
been luch al Ihe could nee in only one light. Hi:
opinion of Louiaa'Mngmve’a inferiority, an opinion
which he had leerned wlicitout to give, hiI wonder at
Captain Benwick, hit feelings as to a ﬁrst, strong
attachment; sentence: begun which he could not ﬁnish,
hil half-averted eyes and more than half-expresaive
glance, all, all declared that he had a hurt returning to
her at lean; that anger, resentment, avoidance, were no
more; and that they were succeeded, not merely by
friend-hi and regard, but by the tendemen of the
part. er, tome share of the tendcmcu of the part !.
She could not contemplate the change an implying lcu.
He moat love her.

There were thoughtc, with their attendant vision,
which occupied and ﬂurricd her too much to Ive her'

PIRSUASION. 19:

any power of observation; and she passed along the
room without having a glimpse of him, without even
I trying to discern him. When their places were deter-
mined on, and they were all roperly arranged, she
looked round to see if he shoul happen to be in the
same part of the room, but he was not; her eye could
not reach him ; and the concert being just opening, she
must consent for a time to be happy in an humbler way.
The arty was divided and disposed of on two can-
tiguous lhenchel: Anne was among those on the fore-
most, and Mr Elliot had moreovred so well, with the
assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis, as to have a
seat by her. Miss Elliot, surrounded h her cousins,
and the principal object of Colonel W lis’s gallantry,
was quite contented.

Anne’s mind was in a most favourable state for the
entertainment of the evening; it was just occupation
enough : she had feelings for the tender, spirits for the
gay, attention for the scientiﬁc, and patience for the
wearisome; and had never liked a concert better, at
least during the ﬁrst act. Towards the close of it, in
the interval succeeding an Italian song, she explained
the words of the song to Mr Elliot. They had a con-
cert bill between them.

“ This,” said she, “is nearly the sense, or rather the
meaning of the words, for certainly the sense of In
Italian love-song must not be talked of, but. it is as
nearly the meanin as I can give; for I do not pretend
to understand thellanguage. I am a very poor Italian
scholar.”

“ Yes, yes, I see you are. I see you know nothing
of the matter. You have only knowledge enough of
the language to translate at sight these inverted, trans-
posed, curtailed Italian lines, into clear, comprehensible,
elegant English. You need not say anything more of
your ignorance. Here is complete proof.”

192 rusunsxou.

“ I will not 0 pone such kind politeoeu; but I
should be lorry to be examined by a real proﬁcient."

“ I have not had the pleasure of viaiting in Camden
Place to long," replied he, “ without knowing nome-
thing of Miu Anne Elliot; and I do regard her at one

who in too mode: for the world in general to be aware ‘

of half her aecompliahmenta, and too highly accom-
pliahed for modeaty to be natural in any other woman."

“ For ahame! for ahamel this ll too much of
ﬂattery. I forget what we are to have next," turning
to the bill.

“ Perhapa," laid Mr Elliot, tpeaking low, “ I have
had a longer acquaintance with your character than you
are aware of.”

“ Indeed I How to? You can have been acquainted
with it only ainee I came to Bath, excepting as you
might har me previoully spoken of in my own family.”

“I knew you by report long before you came to
Bath. I had heard you described by time who knew
you intimately. I have been acquainted with you by
character many yean. Your penon, your dirpoaition,
accomplilhmenu, manner ; they were all described, they
were all pretent to me.”

Mr Elliot war not dilappointed in the interest he
hoped to raiae. No one can withstand the charm of
such a mymry. To have been delcribed long ago to
a recent acquaintance, by nameleaa ple, ia irretiltible;
and Anne was all curiosity. hc wondered, and
quentioned him eagerly; but in vain. He delighted in
being aaked, but he would not tell.

“ No, no, name time or other, perhaps, but not now.
He would mention no names now; but such, he could
nature her, had been the fact. He had many year: ago
received Inch 5 deacription of Miu Anne Elliot an had
impired him with the highest idea of her merit, and
excited the wamiett curioaity to know her."

PIRSUASION. r93

Anne could think of no one so likely to have ken
with partiali of her many yearl I o as the Mr ent-
worth of onkford, Captain entworth’s brother.
He might have been in Mr Elliot’s company, but she
had not courage to ask the uestion.

" The name of Anne gﬂiot," said he, “has long
had an interesting sound to me. Very long has it
possessed a charm over my fancy; and, if I dared, I
would breathe my wishes that the name might never
change."

Such, she believed, Were his words; but scarcely
had she received their sound, than her attention was
caught by other sounds immediately behind her, which
rendered everything else trivial. Her father and Lady
Dalrymple were speaking.

“A well-looking man,” said Sir Walter, “a very
well-looking man."

“A very ﬁne young man, indeed!” laid Lady
Dalrymple. “ More air than one often sees in Bath.
Irish, I dare say?"

“ No, I just know his name. A bowing acquaint-
ance. Wentworth: Captain “’entworth of the navy.
His sister married my tenant in Somersetshire, the Croft,
who rents Kell nch. ’

Before Sir alter had reached this point, Anne’s

. es had caught the right direction, and distinguished
gaptain Wentworth, standing among a cluster of men
at a little distance. As her eyes fell on him, his seemed
to be withdrawn from her. It had that appearance.
It seemed as if she had been one moment too late; and
as long as she dared observe, he did not look again:
but the performance was recommencing, and she was
forced to seem to restore her attention to the orchestra,
and look straight forward.

When she could give another glance, he had moved
away. He could not have come nearer to her if he

l 94 nusunsxox.

would; the was no nun-ounded and Ihut in: but the
would rather have taught hi- eye.

Mr Elliot’n lp¢ech, too, dinreued her. She had no
longer any inclination to talk to him. She wished him
not no nur her.

The lint act wan over. Now Ill: hoped for tome
beneﬁcial change; and, after a period of nothing-laying
among-t the party, some of them did decide on going
in queet of tea. Anne Win one of the few who did not
chooee to move. She remained in her t, and so did
Lady Kit-tell; but Ihe had the pleaaure of getting rid
of Mr Elliot; and Ihe did not mean, whatever Ihe
might feel on Lad Ruuell’l account, to ahriuk from
oonvemtiou with (gaptain Wmtworth, if he are her
the opportunity. She wan penuaded by Lady uuell’n
countenance that the hnd leen him.

He did not come, however. Anne Iometimen fancied
she dileemed him at a distance, but he never came.
The anxious interval wore away unproductively. The
other: returned, the room filled again, benchel were
reclaimed and repoueued, Ind another hour of pleasure
or of penance was to he [sat] out, another hour of music
wan to give delight or the ga a: real or affected tone
for it revailed. To Anne it chieﬂy wore the proepect
of an our of agitation. She could not quit that room
in peace without seeing Captain Wentworth once more,
without the interchange of one friendly look.

in re-eenling themselves there were now many changes,
the result of which wan favoumble for her. Colonel
Wallil declined Iitting down again, and Mr Elliot was
invited by Elizabeth and Min Carteret, in a manner not
to be refused, to sit between them ; and by some other
removnlu, and a little Icheming of her own, Anne was
enabled to place herself much nearer the end of the
bench than ehe had been before, much more within
reach of a passer-by. She could not do no, without

Pusmtswn. 195
comparing heroelf with Min Lerollee, the inimitable
Mile Lar‘ollel; but nill she did it, and not with much
happier effect; though by what oeerned p rity in
the chape of In early abdication in her next nerghbouru,
the found henelf at the very end of the bench before
the concert cloned.

Such was her Iituntion, with a vacant Ipace at hand,
when CI tain Wentworth was again in right. She saw
him not. ar off. He saw her too ; yethe looked grave,
and eeemed irreeolute, and only by ve slow degrees
urine at laet near enough to Ipuk to her. She felt that
Iornething must be the matter. The change win in-
dubitable. The difference between hie preeent air and
what it had been in the Octagon Room was strikingly
greet. Wh wan it? She thought of her father, of
Lady Rune . Could there have been any unpleaant
glance-i He began by rpealting of the concert gravely,
more like the Captain Wentworth of Uppercrou;
owned himeelf disappointed, had expected better in -
ing; and, in short, must confess that he uhould not
sorry when it wan over. Anne replied, and apoke in
defence of the perfomutnce '0 well, and et in an allow-
ance for his feelings to leanntly, that ' countennnee
improved, and he replied again with almost a Imile.
They tallied for I few minutes more; the improvement
held; he even looked down towards the bench, at: ifhe
raw 3 place on it well worth occu ing; when at that
moment a touch on her thoulder ob iged Anne to turn
round. It came from Mr Elliot. He begged her
pardon, but the must be applied tn, to explain Italian
again. Mi. Carteret wan very Inxioul to have a
general idea of what was next to be sung. Anne could
not refute; but never had the ucriﬁccd to politenes-
with a more lulfering epirit.

A few minutee, though as few on pouible, were in-
evitably consumed; and when her own mistrial again,

(Dec...

:96 mum".

vhenahleootnrnandlooknshe haddonehefore,|he
fund her-5f accented by Captain Wentworth, in a
rurved yet hurried Inn of farewell. “ He mun wish
hergood night; he urn-going; he should get home a
E II he could.”

“II not this mg worth naying for?” mid Anne,
nddenlymckbyan idea which made her yetmote
anxious to be encouraging.

“No!” he replied, impren'vely, “there in nothing
worth my I: 'n fan" and he wa- gone directly.

Jalouq o r Elliot! It was the only intelligible
motive. Captain Wentworth jealous of her affection!
Could the have believed it a week ago: three houn
ego! For a moment the gratiﬁcation um exquisite.
Milli! there were very diﬂ'erent thought: to auc-
ceed. How was ouch jealousy to be quieted? How
vat the truth to ruch him? How, in all the peculiar
diadvantagea of their respective Iituationl, would he
ever learn he ml sentiments? It wa- milery to think
of Mr Elliot’s attentiont. ThL-ir evil wu inalculahle.

chum: it].

NNE mollccted with pleasure the next morning
her Promioe of going to Mn Smith, meaning
that It should engage her from home at the time

when Mr Elliot would be moat likely to call, for to
avoid Mr Elliot wu almost a ﬁrst object.

She felt a great. deal of gooddvill towards him. In

‘ of the milchief of hit altentionl, the owed him
guide and regard, pcrha companion. She could
at help thinking much 0 the extraordinary circum-
m unending their acquaintance, of the right which
E tuned to have to interelt her, by everything in

pmsunsrow. 197

situation, by hil own sentiments, by his early pre-

'on. It was altogether very extraordinary;
ﬂattering, but painful. There wa- much to regret.
How the might have felt had there been no Captain
Wentworth in the cane, wan not worth enquiry; for
there was a Captain Wentworth; and be the con-
clusion of the preaent suepenle good or had, her aﬂ'ec-
tiou would be hit for ever. Their union, the believed,
could not divide her more From other men than their
ﬁnal aeparation. ~

Pretn'er musings of high-wrought love and etemnl
constancy could never have pasted along the Itreeta of
Bath than Anne wal Iporting with from Camden Place
to Wettgate Buildings. It was almost enough to spread
puriﬁcation and perfume all the way.

She wu lure of a pleasant reception; and her friend
seemed this morning particularly obliged to her for
coming, seemed hardly to have expected her, though it
had been an appointment.

An account of the concert was immediately claimed;
and Anne’s recollectione of the concert were quite
ha py enou h to animate her features and make her
rejoice to ta k of it. All that she could tell she told
moat gladly, but the all waa little for one who had been
there, and unsatisfactory for Inch an enquirer as Mrs
Smith, who had already heard, through the short cut of
a laundress and a waiter, rather more of the general
euccess and produce of the evening than Anne could
relate, and who now asked in vain for several particu-
lars pf the company. Everybody of any consequence
or notoriety in Bath wan well known by name to Mrs
Smith.

“ The little Durands were there, I conclude,” said
the, " with their mouths open to catch the muaic, like
unﬂedged Sparrows ready to be fed. They never min
a concert.’

198 rmunsrou.

"Yet; I did not Ieethem mynelf, but I heard Mr
Elliot any they were in the room."

“The Ihhotlonn, were they there! and the two new
huuﬁel, with the tall Irinh oﬁoer, who in talked of for
one of them? "

“ I do not know. I do not think they were."

“Old lady Muy Macln? I need not ark after
her. She never miuu', I know; and you mutt have
Ieen her. She murt have been in your own circle; for
I: you went with Lndy Dairymple, you were in the
tent- of grandeur, round the orcheetn, of coune."

" No,lthat in: what I dreaded. It would have been
very unp taunt to me in every relpect. But he ily
Lady Dalrymple alwayl chooeer to be ﬁrther aﬁwand
we were exceedingly well placed, that in, for hearing;
I rnuct not any for arcing, became I appear to have
seen very little.”

“ Oh! you aw enough for your own amuternent.
I can understand. There ll u tort of domaic enjoy-
ment to be known even in u crowd, and thin ynu had.
You were I large party in youreelven. and you wanted
nothing beyond."

I‘ But I ought to have looked about me more," laid
Anne, contciom while the spoke that there had in fact
been no want of looking about. that the object only had
been deﬁcient.

“ No, no; you were better employed. You need
not tell me that you had a pleannt evening. I nee it in
your eye. I perfectly tee how the hours pa-ed: that
you had nlwayl wmething agreeable to linen to. In
the intervals of the concert it was convemtian."

Anne hnlf uniled and laid, “ Do you Ice that in my

Pu
eyechg' I do. Your countenance perfectly infonm
m that you were in company lat night with the permit
'5“: you think the moot agreeable in the world, the

retransmit. :99

non who interests you at thin preterit time more dun
all the rent of the world put together.”

A blush ovenpread Anne'l cheeks. She could lay
nothing.

“ And uuch being the cane,” continued Mn Smith,
after a short pauee, “ I hope you believe that I do know
how to value your kindness in coming to me thil mom-
ing. It in really very good of you to come and tit with
me, when you must have so many pleaeanter demand:
upon your time." ‘

Anne heard nothing of this. She wan Itill in the
amiahruent and confuaion excited by her friend’s pene-
tration, unable to imagine how any report of Captain
Wentworth could have reached her. After another
Ihort silence—

“Pray,” eaid Mrs Smith, “in Mr Elliot aware of
your acquaintance with me i” Doet he know that I
am in Bath 2 ”

“ Mr Elliot! " repeated Anne, looking up tur-,
priced. A moment’- reﬂection showed her the min-
take the had been under. She caught it inatantane-
oualy ; and recovering courage with the feeling of safety,
noon added, more componedly, “ Are you acquainted
with Mr Elliot i”

“I have been a good deal acquainted with him,"
replied Mn Smith, gravely, “but it seem worn out
now. It in a great while unce we met."

“ I wan not at all aware of this. You never men-
tioned it before. Had I known it, I would have had
the pleasure of talking to him about you."

“ To confess the truth,” said Mn Smith, assuming
her usual air of cheerfulneu, “ that in exactly the plea-
ture I want you to have. I want you to Elk about me
to Mr Elliot. I want your intemt with him. He
can be of essential service to me; and if you would
have the goodneel, my dear Min Elliot, to make it an
object to yourself, of course it is done."

200 PENDASIOM

“I should be enremely happy; I hope you cannot
doubt my willingne- to be 0 even the Ilightet uee to
you," replied Anne; “ but I Wt that ypu are con-
Iidering me at having n higher claim on r Elliot, a
greater right to inﬂuence him, than in real! the cue.
I am lure ou hive, nomehow or other, imhi Inch a
notion. Iron mun con-ider me only a Mr Elliot'-
relacion. If in that light them il anything which you
luppoee hi. con-in might fairly Id: of him, I beg you
would not hesitate to employ me.”

Mn Smith gave her a penetrating glance, and then,
Imiling, laid—

“ I have been a little premature, I rceive; I beg
your pardon. I ought to have waited or oﬂicial infor-
mation. But now, my dear Min Elliot, at an old
friend, do give me a hint II to when I may Ipeak.
Next week? To be lure by next week 1 may be
allowed to think it all oettled, and build my own tellinh
schemel on Mr Elliot’t good fortune."

“No,” replied Anne, “ nor next week, nor next,
nor next. I nature you that nothing of the tort you are
thinking of will be tettled an week. I am not going
to marry Mr Elliot. I aho d like to know why you
imagine I am .3”

Mn Smith looked at her again, looked earneltly,
smiled, shook her head, and exclaimed—

“ Now, how I do with I undemood oul How I
do with I knew what you were atl i have a great
ida that you do not design to be cnlel, when the right
moment comes. Till it doe! come, you know, we
women never mean to have anybody. It is a thing of
coune among us, that every man in refuted, till he
oﬁ'erl. But why Ihould you be cruel? Let me plead
for my—prment friend I cannot call him, but for my
former friend. Where can you look for a more Iuit-
able match? Where could you expect .1 more gentle-

PERSUASION. 20 I

manlikc, agreeable man? Let me recommend Mr
Elliot. I am sure you hear nothing but good of him
from Colonel Wallis; and who can know him better
than Colonel Wallis i ”

“ My dear Mrs Smith, Mr Elliot’s wife has not
been dead much above half a ear. He ought not to
be In posed to be paying his addresses to any one.”

" hl if these are your only objections, ’ cried Mrs
Smith, archly, “ Mr Elliot is safe, and I shall give my-
self no more trouble about him. Do not forget me
when you are married, that 's all. Let him know me
to be a Friend of yours, and then he will think little of
the trouble required, which it is very natural for him
now, with‘so many affairs and engagements of his own,
to avoid and get rid of as he can; very natural, per-
haps. Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the
same. Of course, he cannot be aware of the import-
ance to me. Well, my dear Miss Elliot, I hope and
tmst you will be very happy. Mr Elliot has sense to
understand the value of such a woman. Your peace
will not be shiuvrecked as mine has been. You are
safe in all wo dly matters, and mfe in his character.
He will not be led astray; he will not be misled by
others to his ruin.”

“ No," said Anne, “ I can readily believe all that of
my cousin. He seems to have a calm decided temper,
not at all open to dangerous impressions. I consider him
with great respect. I have no reason, from anything
that has fallen within my observation to do otherwise.
But I have not known him long; and he is not a man, i
I think, to be known intimate] soon. Will not this
manner of speaking of him, hi,“ Smith, convince you
that he is nothing to me? Surely this must be calm
enough. And, upon my word, he is nothing to me.
Should he ever propose to me (which I have very little
reason to imagine he has any thought of doing). I shall

201 rmuasrou.

notaccepthim. Iauureyouhhallnot. Ianureyou,
Mr Elliot had not the ahare, which you have been lup-
poin in whatever leuure the concert oflaat night might
aﬂ'nnfi» not Mr Eliot; it is not Mr Elliot that—"

She topped, regletting, with a deep bluah, that the
had implied an much ; but less would hardly have been
vullicient. Mn Smith would hardly have believed to
anon in Mr Elliot'l failure, but from the perception of
there being a Iomebody clue. Aa it was, the instantly
Iubmitted, and with all the lemblance of seeing nothing
beyond ; and Anne, ager to eacape farther notice, was
impatient to know wh Mn Smith should have ﬁnded
the wan to marry r Elliot; where the could have
received the idea, or from whom she could have heard
it.

“ Do tell me how it lint came into or head 2 "

“ It lint came into my head," repied Mn Smith,
“ upon ﬁnding how much ou were together, and feeling
it to be the moat prohabe thing in the world to be
Willlcd for by everybody belonging to either of you;
and you may drnd upon it, that all your acquaintance
have diapered 0 you in the lame way. But I never
heard it apolten of till two day- ago."

“ And hat it, indeed, been spoken of? ”

“ Did you observe the woman who opened the door
to you when on called emerda i"

" No. at not it n Spec ,an usual, or the maid?
I obterved no one in particular.”

“It wan my friend Mn Rooke; Nune Rooke ;
who, «he-bye, had a great curiosity to ace you, and
was de ighted to be in the way to let on in. She came
away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday; and
she it wan who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot.
She had had it from Mn Wallis herself, which did not
seem had authority. She eat an hour with me on Mon-
day evening, and gave me the whole history."

PERSUQSION. 203

“ The whole hietoryl " Anne, laughing.
“Shecouldnotnnlte a very ong hilto ,I think,of
one such little article of unfounded newe.’

Mn Smith uid nothing.

“ Bur,” continued Anne, pretently, "though there
in no truth in my having this claim on Mr Elliot, I
nhould be extremely hwy to be of une to you, in any
we that I could. S l I mention to him your being ’
in {lath l Shall I take any menage?"

“No, I thank you: no. 'certainly not. In the
warmth of the moment, and under a miltaken impru-
eion, I might, perhape, have endeavoured to intereit you
in tome cirtumataucel; but not now. No, I thank
you, I have nothing to trouble you with.”

" I think you rpoke of having known Mr Elliot many

U
WI? did.”

“ Not before he married, I cu pose ? "

“ Yet; he wa- not married when I knew him lint."

“ And—were you much acquainted ? "

“ Intimately.” *

“Indeed! Then do tell me what he was at that
time of life. I have a great curiosity to know what
MrElliotwal unveryyoung mau. Wan he at All
Iuch as he appear: now?’

“ I have not eeen Mr Elliot thue three yearn," was
Mr- Smith’l anlwer, given no gravely that it wu im-
pouible munue the mbject farther; and Anne felt
that the gained nothin but an incmse of curiosity.
They were both silent: ii
At lut—

“ I beg your pardon, m dear Min Elliot," she cried,
in her natural tone of cordiality, “ I beg your pardon for
the ahort amwerl I have been giving you, but I have
been uncertain what I ought to do. I have been doubt-
ing and eonddering at to what I ought to tell you.

O

n Smith very thoughtful.

3°4 PIISUASION.

There were many thinga to be taken into the account.
One hate: to be olﬁcioua, to be giving had im rel-ions,
making miechief. Even the moth aurface 0 family-
union aeema worth preaervin . though there may be
nothing durable beuath. owever, I have deter-
mined; I think I am right; I think you ought to be
made acquainted with Mr Elliot’a real character.
Though I fully believe that, at present, you have not the
amalleat intenuon of accepting him, there in no laying
what may ha . You might, acme time or other, he
diﬁ‘erently a ected toward: him. Hear the truth, there-
fore. now, while you are unprejudiced. Mr Elliot in a
man without heart or contcicnce) i. deli ning, wary,
cold-blooded being. who think- only of hrmuelf; who,
for hia own intereat or ae, would be guilty of any
cruelty, or any treachery, that could be perpetrated with-
out riak of bio general character. He haa no feeling for
othen. Thane whom he has been the chief cause of
leading into min, he can neglect and due“ without the
Imallett compunciion. He in totally beyond the reach
of any sentiment of justice or companion. Oh! he ll
black at heart; hollow and black! "

Anne'a anoniahed air, and exclamation of wonder,
made her pauae, and in a calmer manner, ahe added—

“ My expreuiana nanle you. You mun allow for an
injured, angry woman. But I will to command
mytelf. I will not abuae him. I wil only tell you
what I have found him. Facta Ihall Ipeak. He wan
the intimate friend of my dur huaband, who trusted and
loved him, and thought him as good at himaelf. The
intimacy had been fomied before our marriage. I
Mod them most intimate friends; and I, too, became
extensively pleased with Mr Elliot, and entertained the
highett opinion of him. At nineteen, ou know, one
don not think ve aerioualy; but Mr lliot appeared
to me quite II at others, and much more agreeable

A

‘L

Pensunsron. 205

than mot others. and we were almost always to ether.
We were principally in town, living in very goof style.
He was then the inferior in circumnm; he was then
the poor one; he had chambers in the Temple, and it
was a much in he could do to support the appearance
of a gentleman. He had always a home with no when-
ever he chooe it ; he was always welcome; he wal like
it brother. My poor Charles, who had the ﬁnest, most
generous spirit in the world, would have divided his lut
farthing wrth him; I know that his purse was open to
him; I know that he often assisted him."

“ Thin must have been about that very riod of Mr
Elliot's life,” said Anne, “which has a ways excited
my particular curiosity. It must have been about the
same time that he became known to my father and
sitter. I never knew him myself, I only heard of him ;
but there was a something in his conduct then, with regard
to my father and sister, and afterwards in the circum-
stances of his meninge, which I never could quite re-
concile with present umes. It teemed to announce a
different sort of man.”

"I know it all,I know it all,” cried Mrs Smith.
“ He had been introduced to Sir Walter and your sister
before I was acquainted with him, but I hrd him
speak of them for ever. 1 know he war invited and
encouraged, and I know he did not choose to go. I
can satisfy you, tperhaps, on points which you would
little expect; an as to hie marriage, I knew all about
it at the time. I was privy to all the fan and againsts;
I was the friend to whom he conﬁded his hopes and
plans ; and though I did not know his wife previously,
her inferior situation in society, indeed, rendered that
impossible, yet I knew her all her life afterwards, or at
least till within the last two years of her life, and can
answer any question you wish to put.”

“le," said Anne, “I haveino particular enquiry <

ao6 PERSUASION.

to make about her. I have alway- understood
were not I happy cou le. But I should like to know
why. at that time of hIs life, he Ihould alight my father’s
acquaintance at he did. My father was certainly die-

to take very kind and proper notice of him. Why
did Mr Elliot draw back I "

“Mr Elliot,” replied Mn Smith, “ at that period of
his life had one object in view: to make hie fortune,
and by a rather quicker proce- than the law. He wan
determined to make it by man-iage. He was determined,
at least, not to mar it by an impnident marriage; and I
know it was his belief (whether justly or not, of courle
I cannot decide), that your father and sitter, in their
civilitiec and invitation, were designing a match between
the heir and the young lady, and it war impossible that
each a match should have answered his ideas of wealth
and independence. That was hit motive for drawing
back, I can auum you. He told me the whole story.
He had no concealment: with me. It was curiows, that
having ‘ust left you behind me in Both, my firnt and
[Wind acquaintance on marrying ahould be your
courin; and that, through him, I should be continually
hearing of your father and rister. He described one
Mits Elliot, and I thought very affectionately of the,
other."

“Perhaps,” cried Anne, struck by a sudden idea,
“you sometimes spoke of me to Mr Elliot?”

“To be sure I did; very often. I used to heart of
my own Anne Elliot, and vouch for your being a very
different creature from—"

She checked herself in time.

“Thin accounts for something which Mr Elliot raid
km night," cried Anne. “ This explains it. I found
he had been used to hear of me. I could not com re-
hend how. What wild ima inations one forms w ere

- dear telf is concerned! ow cure to be mistaken!

PIISUASION. 207

Butlbe our on;Ihaveiuterrupted on. Mr
Elliot dipgdcompletely for money? yThe cir-
cumstance, probably, which lint opened your eyes to hit
churneter?’

Mn Smith hesitated I little here. “Ohl thooe
things are too common. When one lives in the world,
a man or wonian’a man'ying for money iI too common
to strike one as it ought. I was very young, and anno-
cinted only with the young, and we were a thoughtless,

y act, without any strict rules of conduct. We lived
or enjoyment. I think differently now; time and-
Iickness and sorrow have given me other notiona; but
at that period, I mun own I saw nothing reprehensible
in what Mr Elliot was doing. ‘To do the best for
himself ' passed as a duty.”

“ But wu not the a very low woman ? "

“Yen; which 1 objected to, but he would not re rd.
Money, money, was all that he wanted. Her ather
was a gmzier, her grandfather had been a butcher, but
that was all nothing. She was a line woman, had had
a decent education, was brought forward by some
cousins, thrown by chance into Mr Elliot's company,
and fell in love with him; and not a difﬁculty or a
temple was there on his side with respect to her birth.
All his caution was spent in being aecured of the real
amount of her fortune, before he committed himself.‘
Depend upon it, whatever esteem Mr Elliot may have
for hir own situation in life now, u a young man he had
not the amallest value for it. Hil chance of the Kel-
l nch ertate was something, but all the honour of the
amily he held an cheap at dirt. I have often heard
him declare, that if baronctcies were saleable, anybody
ehould have his for ﬁfty poundn, arms and motto, name
and livery included; but I will not pretend to reput
half that I used to hear him my on that subject. It
would not be fair ; and yet you ought to have proof, for

aos PnsuASlou.

what in all thin but wenion, and you Ihall have
mﬁll

“ Indeed, my dear Mn Smith, I want none," cried
Anne. “You have aucrted nothing conundicto to
what Mr Elliot appealed to be tome yearn ago. E{hi-
ia all in conﬁrmation, rather, of what we need to
hr and believe. I an: more curiou- to know why he
Ihould be no different now."

“But for my anti-faction, if you will have the

nut to ring for Mary; lay: I am lure you
will have the mill greater goodneu of going ouraelf
into my bedroom, and bringing me the null inlaid
box which you will ﬁnd on the upper shelf of the
clotet."

Anne, aeeing her friend to be earneltly bent on it,
did at the w» dulled. The box wan brought and
placed before her, and Mr- Smith, Iighing over it II the
unlocked it, laid—

“Thia in full of paper: belonging to him, to my
huaband; a unall portion only of what I had to look
over when I loot him. The letter I am looking for
was one written by Mr Elliot to him before our mar-
riage, and happened to be loved; why, one can hardly
imagine. But he wan careless and immethodical, like
other men, about those things; and when I came to
examine his pa 7:, I found it with otherll still more
trivial, from di erent people Icattered here and there,
while many letters and memorandum- of real im rt-
ance had been deltroyed. Here it in ; I woul not
burn it, became being even then very little ntisﬁed with
Mr Elliot, I war determined to preeerve every docu-
ment of former intimacy. I have now another motive
for being glad that I can produce it.”

Thil war the letter, directed to “Clinrlel Smith,
E ., Tunbridgc Wells," and dated from London, II
far ck at July, 1803:—

Pnsvnsrou. aog

“ Dun Surru,—I have received yours. Your
kindness almost overpower: me. I wish nature had
made such hearts as [yours] more common, but I have
lived three-and-twenty yars in the world, and have
seen none like it. At present, believe me, I have no
need of your services, being in cash again. Give me
joy: I have got rid of Sir Walter and Miss. They
are gone back to Kellynch, and almost made me swear
tn visit them this summer; but nry ﬁrst visit to Kellynch
will be with a vurveyor, to tell me how to bring it with
best advantage to the hammer. The hnronet, never-
theless, is not unlikely to nrarry again ; he is quite fool
enough. If he does. however, they will leave me in
peace, which may be a decent equivalent for the rever-
sion. He is worse than last year.

“ I wish I had an name but Elliot. I am sick of
it. The name of alter I can drop, thank God! and
I desire you will never insult me with my second W.
again, meaning, for the rest of my life, to he only yours
tnrly,—Wss. ELLIOT."

Such a letter could not be read without putting Anne
in a glow ; and Mrs Smith, observing the high colour
in her face, said—

“ The langua e, I know, is high] disrespectful.
Though I have firgot the exact terms. {have a perfect
impression of the eneral meaning. But it shows you
the man. Mark his professions to my poor husband.
Can anything be stronger i ” '

Anne could not immediately get over the shock and
mortification of ﬁnding such words applied to her
father. She was obliged to recollect that her seeing
the letter was a violation of the hrws of honour, that no
one ought to be judged or to be known by such testi-
monies, that no rivale con’e ndence could hear the
eye of others, be me she coul recover calmness enough

a l o PIRSUASION.

to return the letter which die had been meditating over,
and u —

“ k you. Thin ia firll proof undoubtedly: Proof
of everything you were lying. But why he vauarnted
with ua now i "

“ I can explain this too," cried Mn Smith, smiling.

“ Can you really i ”

“Yet. I have Ihewn on Mr Elliot an be warn
dozen year! ago, and I wil rhew him a he in now. I
cannot Produce written proof again, but I can give an
authentic oral (antimony al you can delire, of what he
in now wanting, and what he it now doing. He in no
hypocrite now. He truly wants to ma you. Hia
grunt attention- to your family are very alncere : quite

mm the heart. I will give you my authority: hir
friend Colonel Wallis.”

“ Colonel Wallial are you acquainted with him i "

“ No. It duet not come to me in quite no direct a
line a: that; it takcl a bend or two, but nothing of
conaequence. The mm in at good at at lint; the
little mbbith it colleen in the tuminga in :35in moved
away. Mr Elliot talks unreeervedly to Colonel Wallis
of ill! view- on you, which laid Colonel Wallis, I
imagine to be, in hinuelf, a aenrible, careful, ‘diacerning
tort of character; but Colonel Wallis has a very rctty
lly wife, to whom he tell: thing: which he had tter
not, and he repeat- it all to her. She in the overﬂow-
ing spirit: of her recovery, repeats it all to her none;
and the nurse knowing my acquaintance with you, very
naturally hringa it all to me. On Monday evening, my
good friend Mr. Roche let me thus much into the
aecreu of Marlborough Buildings. When I talked of
a whole hirtory, therefore, you ace I was not romancing
Io much .11 you auppored."

" My dear Mn Smith, our authority in deﬁcient.
Thin will not do. Mr El iot’a having any viewa on

PERSUASION. I l 1

me will not in the lea-t account for the eﬂ’om he made

' towards a reconciliation with my father. That wu all
priorto mycorningtoBath. I fonndthem on themoet
friendly term when I arrived.”

“ I know you did; I know it all perfectly, but—"

“ Indeed, Mn Smith, we must not expect to get
real information in Inch 3 line. Fact: or opinionc
which are to to through the hand: of to many, to be
minconceived y folly in one, and ignorance in another,
on: hardly have much truth left."

“Only give me a hearing. You will coon be able
tojudge of the general credit due, by listening to some
particular: which you can yonnelf immediately con-
tradict or conﬁrm. Nobody supposes that you were his
ﬁm inducement. He had seen you, indeed, before he
came to Bath, and admired you, but without knowing
it to be you. So Jays my historian, at least. In this
true? Did he see you Ian tummer or autumn ‘ some-
where down in the wert,’ to use her own worda, without
knowing it to be you P"

“ He certainly did. So far it it very true. At
Lyme. I happened to be at Lyme."

“ Well,” continued Mrs Smith, trium handy,u grant
my friend the credit due to the establnhment of the
ﬁrst point Inserted. He saw you then at Lyme, end
liked you so well at to be exceedingl pleased to meet
with u again in Camden Place, as him Anne Elliot.
and ram that moment, I have no doubt, had a double
moﬁve in his visits there. But there was another, and
an earlier, which I will now explain. If there is any-
thing in my story which you know to be either faloe or
improbable, stop me. My account ltatea, that your
uiater’u friend, the lady now staying with you, whom I
have heard you mention, came to Bath with Miu
Elliot and Sir Walter as long ago as September (in
Ihort when they ﬁrst came themselves), and he been

I” PnSUASlON.
staying there ever incer that the ll a clever, insinuat-
ing, handleme woman, poor and plaul'ble, and alto-
gether such in situation and manner, as to give a
general idea, among Sir Walter's acquaintance, of her
meaning to he Lady Elliot, and at general a nun-prise
that Miss Elliot lhould he, apparently, blind to the
tin er."

ere Mn Smith pained a moment; but Anne had
not a word to say, and she continued—

“ This wet the light in which it appeared to Ihooe
who knew the famil , long before you mumed to it;
and Colonel Wallu had hit eye upon your father
enough to be sensible of it, though he did not then
visit in Camden Place; but his regard for Mr Elliot
gave him an interen in watching all that war going on
there, and when Mr Elliot came to Bath for a day or
two, so he happened to do a little before Chriatmaa,
Colonel Walli- rnade him acquainted with the appear-
ance of thinge, and the m beginning to prevail.
Now you are to understan , that time had worked a
very material change in Mr Elliot'r opinions as to the
value of a baronetcy. Upon all point: of blood and
connexion he is a completely altered man. Having
long had aamnch man an he could spend, nothing to
with for on the side 0 avarice or indulgence, he hat
been gradually learning to pin his happiness upon the
consequence he is heir to. I thought it coming on
before our acquaintance ceased, but it ll now a con-
ﬁrmed feeling. He cannot hear the idea of not being Sir
William. You may guest, therefore, that the new he
heard from hit friend could not he very agreeable, and
you may guess what it produced; the resolution of
coming back to Bath as soon at possible, and of ﬁxing
himself here for a time, with the view of renewing hia
former acquaintance, and recovering such a footing in
the family as might give him the means of ascertaining the

PIRSUASION. 2 I 3

degree of his danger, and of circumventing the lady if
he found it material. This was a reed upon between the
two friends as the only thing to done; and Colonel
Wallis was to assist in every way that he could. He was
to be introduced, and Mn Wallie was to be introduced,
and everybody was to be introduced. Mr Elliot came
back accordingly; and on application was forgiven, as

know, and re-admitted into the family; and there
It was his constant object, and his only ob'ect till your
arrival added another motive), to watch ir alter and
Mn Clay. He omitted no opportunity of being with
them, threw himself in their way, called at all hours;
but I need not be particular on this subject. You can
ima 'ne what an artful man would do; and with this
suine, perhaps, may recollect what you have seen him

0

“ Yes," said Anne, “ you tell me nothing which does
not accord with what I have known, or could imagine.
There is always something olfentive in the details of
cunning. The manoeuvres of selﬁshness and duplici
must ever be revolting, but I have heard nothing whic
really surprises me. I know those who would be
shocked by such a representation of Mr Elliot, who
would have difﬁculty in believing it, but I have never
been satisﬁed. I have always wanted some other
motive for his conduct than appeared. I should like to
know his present opinion, as to the probability of the
event he has been in dread of ; whether he considers the
danger to be lessening or not."

“ Lessening, I understand,” replied Mrs Smith.
“ He thinks Mrs Clay afraid of him, aware that he sees
through her, and not daring to proceed as she might do
in his absence. But since he must be absent some time
or other, I do not perceive how he can ever be secure
while she holds her present inﬂuence. Mrs Wallis has
an amusing idea, as nurse tells me, that it is to beput

n4 PIRSIMSION.

into the nuniage article: when you and Mr Elliot
marry, that your father is not to marry Mn Clay. A
scheme worthy of Mn Wallis’s understanding, by all
accounts; but my aenn‘ble nune Rooke sees the abaur-
dity of it. ‘Why, to be sure, ma'am,’ said she, ‘it
would not prevent hil marrying anybody else.’ And,
indeed, to own thetruth, I do not think nurse, in her
bean, is a very menuous appeal-r of Sir Walter’s making
a second match. She must be allowed tube a favourer
of matrimony, you know ; and (since Ielf will intrude)
who can say that she may not have some ﬂying visions
of attending the next Lady Elliot, through Mrs “’allia's
recommendation ? ”

“I am very glad to know all thin,” llld Anne, after
a little thoughtfulneu. “ It will be more painful to me
in some reapects to be in company with him. but I shall
know better what to do. My line of conduct will be
more direct. Mr Elliot is evidently a disingenuous,
artiﬁcial, worldl man, who has had never any better
principle to gui e him than selﬁshnen."

But Mr Elliot wan not yet done with. Mn Smith
had been carried away from her ﬁrst direction, and Anne
had forgotten, in the interest of her own family con-
cerns, how much had been originally implied against
him; but her attention was now called to the explana-
tion of those ﬁrst hints. and she livtened toa recital which,
if it did not perfectly justify the unqualiﬁed hittemell
of Mn Smith, proved him to have been very unfeeling
in hit! conduct towards her; very deﬁcient both in
justice and companion.

She learned that (the intimacy between them con-
tinuing unimpaired by Mr Elliot's marriage they had
been at before alwayl together, and Mr Elliot had led
his friend into cxpenaes much beyond his fortune. Mm
Smith did not want to take blame to hemlf, and wal moat
tender of throwing any on her husband ; but Anne

PIRSUASION. 2 I 5 _

could collect that their income had never been ull
to their style of living, and that from the ﬁrst there ad
been a gmt deal of.genernl and joint extravagance.
From his wife’s account of him she could discern Mr
Smith to have been a man of warm feelings, easy tem-
per, careless habits, and not strong understanding ; much
more amiable than his friend, and very unlike him, led
by him, and probably despised him. Mr Elliot1
raised by his maniage to great uence, and
to every gratiﬁcation of pleasure and vanity which could
be commanded without involving himself (for with all his
self-indulgence he had become a prudent man), and
beginning to be rich, just as his friend ought to have
found himself to be poor, seemed to have had no con-
cern at all {or that friend’s probable ﬁnances, but, on the
contrary, had been prompting and encouraging expenses
which could end only in ruin : and the Smiths accord-
ingly had been mined.

The husband had died 'ust in time to be spared
the full knowledge of it. hey had Previously known
embarrassment: enough to try the friendship of their
friends, and to prove that Mr Elliot’s had better not be
tried; but it was not till his death that the wretched
state of his affairs was fully known. With a con-
ﬁdence in Mr Elliot’s regard, more creditable to his
feelings than his judgment, Mr Smith had appointed
him the executor of his will ; but Mr Elliot would not
act, and the dilliculties and distresses which this refusal
had heaped on her, in addition to the inevitable suffer-
ings of her situation, had been such as could not be re-
lated without anguish of spirit, or listened to without
corresponding indignation.

Anne was shewn some letters of his on the occasion,
answers to urgent applications from Mrs Smith, which
all breathed the same stem resolution of not engaging in
a fruitless trouble, and, under a cold civility, the same

2 r6 memoir.

Ind-band indiﬂ'erenee to an oftheevill it might
bringnnber. Itwuadread pianreof ingratitude
and inhumnity; and Anne fell, at tome moments that
no ﬂagrant opech could havebeenwone. Shehad
agratdaltoliltento; anthepmicnlanofpn lad
mnlltheminutizofdiue- upon dime-,which
in former conversation had been merely hinted at. were
dwelt on now with 5 natural indulgence. Anne could
perfectly comprehend the exquilite relief, and III only
the more inclined to wonder at the compoune of her
friend’r umal are of mind. '

Threwonecircumstanneinthehimryofher
grievance- of irritation. She had good moon
to believe that wine property of her husband in the
WeltIndia, Ihiehhad been for man year: under I
tort of quueetration for the payment 0 it: own incunh
branceo, might be recoverable by proper mature” and
thin property, though not large, would be enough to
make her co rativel rich. But there wan nobody
to rtir in it. r Elliot would do nothing, and the
could do nothing hereelf, ually dibled from per-coal
exertion by her are ephedin weaknel. and from
employing othen by her want of money. She had no
natural connexion: to aariet her even with their counsel,
and the could not afford to urchue the nuisance of
the law. Thin war at cm: aggravation of actually
rueightened meant. To feel that the ought to be in
better circumstanccr, that a little trouble in the right
place might do it, Ind to fear that delay might be even
whening her claimt, war hard to bear.

It wan on this point that the had hoped to engage
Anne’r good oﬂicet with Mr Elliot. She had previ-
oully, in the antici tion of their marriage, been very
apprehendve of long her friend by it; but on being
mired that he could have made no attempt of that
rutnre, rince he did not even know her to be in Bath,

PERSUASION. 2 I 7 I

it immediately occurred, that something might be done
in her favour by the inﬂuence of the woman he loved,
and she had been hastily preparing to interest Anne’s
feelings as ﬁr as the Observances due to Mr Elliot's
characmr would allow, when Anne’s refutation of the
sup engagement changed the face of everything;

while it took from her the new-formed hope of
succeeding in the object of her ﬁrst anxiety, left her at
least the comfort of telling the whole story her own
way.

After listening to this full description of Mr Elliot,
Anne could not but express some surprise at Mrs Smith’s
having spoken of him so favourably in the beginning of
their conversation. “ She had seemed to reeommmd
and praise him! "

“My dear,” was Mrs Smith’s reply, “there was
nothing else to be done. I considered your marrying
him as certain, though he might not yet have made the
offer, and I could no more speak the truth of him, than
if he had been your husband. My heart bled for you
as I talked of happiness; and yet he is sensible, he is
agreeable, and with such I woman as you, it was not
absolutely hopeless. He was very unkind to his ﬁrst
wife. hey were wretched together. But she was
tooi nonnt and gidd for respect, and he had never
lov her. [was wil ing to hope that you must fare
better.” V

Anne could just acknowledge within herself such a
possibility of having been induced to marry him, as
made her shudder at the idea of the misery which must
have followed. It was just possible that she might have
been persuaded by Lady Russell! And under such a
en position, which would have been most miserable,
w en time had disclosed all, too late?

It was very desirable that Lady Russell should he
no longer deceived; and one of the concluding arrange-

2 I8 ensmston.

menu of thin important conference, which carried them
through the grater part of the morning, war, that Anne
had full liberty to communicate to her friend everything
relative to Mn Smith, in which his conduct. was
involved. ’

chart" #31
NNE went home to think over all that she had

heard. In one 'nt, her feelingr were relieved

by thin knowledge: of Mr Elliot. There war
no longer anything of tenderne- due to him. He
stood :- oppooed to Captain Wentwnnh, in all his own
unwelcome obtnll'veneu; and the evil of his attention:
but night, the immediahle mischief he might have done,
war con-idemd with nenaatione unqualiﬁed, nnperplexed.
Pity for him wag all over. But thin war the only point
of relief. In every other revpect, in looking around
her, or penetrating forward, she law more to dim:
.nd to apprehend. She was concerned for the die-
appointment and pain Lady Ruaell would be feeling;
for the mortiﬁcatiom which must be hanging over her
father and sitter, and had all the dirtneu of foreaeeing
many evil. without knowing how to avert any one of
them. She war moat thankful for her own knowledge
of him. She had never conridered her-elf a: entitled
w reward for not Ilighting an old friend like Mn
smith, but here war a reward, indeed, rpringing from
in Mrs Smith had been able to tell her what no one
else could have done. Could the knowledge have been
extended through her family? But thin war a vain
idea. She mun talk to Lady Ruuell, tell her, comult
Wm, her, and having done her best, wait the event with
I. much camporure an pouible; and after all, her
an.“ want of compowre would be in that quarter of

PIISUASION. 1 I 9

the mind which could not he opened to Lady Ruaaell ;
in that ﬂow of anxietiea and fear: which must be all to
heraelf.

She found, on mahin home, that the had, la the
intended, camped aeeing r Elliot; that he had called
and paid them a long momin vil't; but hardly had
the congratulated heraelf, and 1t safe, when ahe heard
that he waa coming again in the evening.

" I had not the mallelt intention of aaking him,"
mid Elizabeth, with affected carelealnelo, “ but he gave
I0 many hints; I0 Mn Clay aaya, at lean.”

"Indeed, I do say it. I never law any body in my
life tpell harder for an invitation. Poor man ! I wan
really in pain for him; for your hard-hearted sister,
Min Anne, Icem- bent on cruelty.”

“Oh!” cried Eliubeth, “I have been rather too
much used tothe mewheaoon overcomebya
gentleman’s hintl. anever, when I found how ex-
ceedvely he wan regretting that he should mi- my
father this morning, I gave way immediately, for I
would never rully omit an caportunity of bringing him
and Sir Walter together. hey appear to to much
advantage in company with each other. Each behaving
no pleaaantly. Mr Elliot looking up with no much

ct."

“Quite delightful! ” cried Mn Clay, not darin ,
however, to turn her eye! toward; Anne. “Exac y
like father and ton! Dear Min Elliot, may I not
my father and Ion ? "

“Ohl I lay no embargo on any body'a worda. If
you will have Inch idea! But, upon my word, 1 am
acarcely sensible of his attendant being beyond those of
other men."

“ My dear Min Elliot | " exclaimed Mn Clay, lift-
ing up her hand: and eyea, and linking all the rent of
her altoniahrnent in a convenient Iilence.

P

2 20 “DAMON.

“ Well, my dear Penelope, you need not be no
alarmed about him. I did Invite him, you know. I
tent him away with mile; When I found he wan
real! going to hi. friends at Thornherry Park for the
who{e day to-morrow, I had companion on him.”

Anne admired the good acting of the friend, in being
able to chew Iuch plenum, II the did, in the expecta-
tion and in the actual anival of the very penon whooe

ruence mutt really be interfering with her prime

t war im 'ble but that Mn Clay rnnlt hate the light
of Mr El int; and yet Ihe could assume I moat oblig-
ing. placid look. and a r quite ntirlied with the
curtailed liceme of devoting her-elf only htlf an much
to Sir Walter an Ihe would have done otherwile.

To Anne her-elf it wu moot dinreuing to see Mr
Elliot enter the room; and quite painful to have him
approach and apeak to her. She had been uued before to
feel that he could not he alwayl uile tincere, but now
the av inlincerity in everything. in attentive deference
to her father, contracted with hit former language, wan
odioul; and when the thought of hit cruel conduct
towards Mr: Smith, the could hardly bear the light of
his recent Imilee and mildneu, or the Iound of his
arti cinl good nenu'menu.

She meant to avoid any such alteration of manner: u
might provoke a remonttrance on hie ride. It was a
great object with her to elcape all en uiry or eclat; but
it wal her intention to be I: decided y cool to him an
might be compatible with their relationship; and to
retrace, u quietly an the could, the few “Cpl of unnecet-
ry intimacy the had been gradually led along. She
war accordingly more rded, and more cool, than the
had been the night be are.

He wanted to animate her Curimity again an to how
and where he could have heard her formerly prailed;
wanted very much to he gratiﬁed by more oolieitation,

e- __A—<1

PERSUASION. I 2 I

but the charm was broken : he found that the heat and
animation of a public room was necessary to kindle his
modest cousin's vanity; he found, at least, that it was
not to he done now, by any of those attem ts which he
could hsurd among the too-commanding c aims of the
others. He little surmised that it was a subject scting
now exactly a ainst his interest, bringing immediately to
her thoughts l those parts of his conduct which were
least excuuhle.

She had some satisfaction in ﬁnding that he-was
rally going out of Bath the next morning, going early,
and that he would be gone the greater part of two days.
He was invited again to Camden Place the very evening
of his return; but from Thursday to Saturday evening
his absence was certain. It was had enough that a Mrs
Clay should be always before her; but that a deeper
hypocrite should he added to their party, seemed the
destruction of everything like peace and comfort, It
was so humiliating to reﬂect on the constant deception
practised on her father and Elizabeth; to consider the
various sources of mortiﬁcation preparing for them!
Mrs Clay’s selﬁshness was not so complicate nor so
revolting as his; and Anne would have com unded
for the marriage at once, with all its evils, to clear
of Mr Elliot’s subtleties in endeavouring to prevent it.

On Friday morning she meant to go very early to
Lady Russell, and accomplish the necessary communica-
tion ; and she would have gone directly after breakfast,
but that Mrs Clay was also going out on some ohliging

urpose of saving her sister trouble, which determined

lier to wait till she might be safe from such a com-
panion. She aw Mrs Clay fairly olf, therefore, before
she began to talk of spending the morning in Rivers
Street.

“Very well," said Elizabeth, “I have nothing to
send but my love. Ohl you may as well the back

2 5 2 mumorv.

thattireeomebook ilewould lend me,and premnd I
have read it through. I rally cannot be plaguing myeelf
for ever with all the new poem: and Iatel ofthe nation
that come out. Lad Ru-ell quite bore: one with her
new publicatiom. ou need not tell her no. but I
thought her that hideous the other night. I used to
think the had Iometuvein dumbut I wuuhamedof
her at the concert. Something to formal and mi
in her airl and the lite no upright! My he: love, of
coune.” '

“And mine," added Sir Walter. ‘E Kindelt regarda.
And you may ﬂy, that I mean to call upon her noon.
Make a civil mange; but I rhall only leave my card.
Morning virite are never [air by women at her time of
life, who make them-elven up no little. If the would
only wear rouge the would not be afraid of being seen;
but lut time I called, I obeerved the blind: were let
down immediately."

While her father rpoke, there war a knock at the
door. Who could it be? Anne, remembering the
preconeerted viliu, at all bout, of Mr Elliot, would
have ex ted him, but for hi5 known engagement Ieven
milel o . After the usual period of nupenae, the ueual
round: of approach were heard, and “ Mr and Mn
Charlea Mangrove ” were mhered into the room.

Surpriae wu the strongest. emotion raised by their
appearance; but Anne wan really glad to lee them ; and
the other: were not no lorry but that they could put on
a decent air of welcome; and at noon an it became clear
that there, their neareet relationa, were not arrived
with any view: of accommodation in that home, Sir
Walter and Elizabeth were able to rice in cordiality,
and do the banana of it very well. They were come
to Bath for a few day: with Mn Mangrove, and were,
at the White Hart. So much was pretty soon under-
atood; but till Sir Walter and Elizabeth were walking

pensussrou. 223

Mary into the other drawing-morn, and regaling them-
selves with her admiration, Anne could not draw upon
Charles’l brain for a regular himry of their coming, or
an explanation of some smiling hints of particular buli-
neas, which had been ostentatiotu dropped by Mary,
on well as of some apparent confusion as to whom their
paréy consisted of.
he then found that it consisted of Mn Musgrove,
Henrietta, and Captain Harville, hedde their two selves.
He gave her a very plain, intelligible account of the
whole ; a narration in which she saw a great deal of most
characteristic proceeding. The scheme had received its
lint impulse by Captain Harville’s wanting to come to
Bath on busineas. He had begun to talk of it a week
ago; and by way of doing something, as shooting was
over, Charles had proposed coming with him, and Mrs
Harville had seemed to like the idea of it very much,
as an advantage to her husband; but Mary could not
bear to be left, and had made herself so unhappy about
it, that for a day or two everything seemed to be in
Impense, or at an end. But then, it had been taken up
by his father and mother. His mother had some old
friends in Bath whom she wanted to see; it was thought
a good 0 rtunity for Henrietta to come and buy
weddingvc athea for herself and her sister; and, in short,
it ended in being his mother’s party, that everything
might be comfortable and easy to Captain Harville; and
he and Mary were included in it by way of general
convenience. They had arrived late the night before.
Mrs Harville, her children, and Captain Benwick,
remained with Mr Musgrove and Louisa at U reross.
Anne’s only surprise was, that affair: shou d be in
forwardnesa enough for Henrietta’s wedding-clothes to
be talked of. She had imagined such difﬁculties of
fortune to exist there as must prevent the marriage from
being near at hand; but she learned from Charles that,

2 24 PIRSUASION.

very recently Tune Mary’l lut letter to henel ,
Charle- Hayler ad been applied to by I friend to ho d
a living for I youth who could not ponith claim it
under many yearn; and that on the mogth of thil
preterit income, with almon I certainty of Iomething
more permanent long before the term In quenion, the
two familiea had conaented to the young people’a wilhet,
and that their marriage wn likely to take place in I few
month, quite at noon aa Louiaa’a. “ And a very good
living it wan," Charla added: “only ﬁve-and-twenty-
mile: from Uppercrou, and in a very ﬁne country : ﬁne
pan of Dnnetahire. In the centre of tome of the be!
preeervea in the kingdom, eun’ounded by three great
proprietors, each more careful and jealous than the
other; and to two of the three at lean, Charla
Hayter might get a Ipecial recommendation. Not that
he will value it at he ought," he obeerved: “ Charla!
ll too cool about sporting. That '3 the wont of him."

“ I am extreme y glad, indeed," cried Anne ; “par-
ticularly glad that thin thould happen; and that of two
sister: who both deaerve equall well, and who have
always been such good friends, the pleasant protpectt of
one Ihould not he dimming tho-e of the other—that
they should he to equal in their protperity and comfort.
I hope your father and mother are quite happy with
regard to both.”

“0h yet! My father would be as well pleated if
the gentlemen were richer, but he hat no other fault to
ﬁnd. Money, you know, coming down with money—
two daughten at once—it cannot be a very agreeable
mention, and it atreightem him an to many thinga.
l-llowever, I do not mean to lay they have not a right
to it. It ll very ﬁt they ahould have daughtcra' Ihnrea;
and I am aure he lm alwayt been a very kind, liberal
father to me. Mary doel not above half like Hen-
rietta’t match. She never did, you know. But the

msuAsrorr. ' n 5

does not do him jurtice, nor think enough about Win—
throp. I cannot make her attend to the value ofth pro-

rty. It in a very fair match n time: go ; and I have
ﬁed Charlee Hayter all my life, and I Ihall not leave
olf now.”

“ Such excellent parent. no Mr and Mn Murgrove,”
exclaimed Anne, “should be happy in their children’-
marringee. They do everything to confer happiness, I
am cure. What a hleuing to young people to be in
luch handnl Your father and mothereeeln totally free
from all thoee ambitioul feelingl which have led to so
much misconduct and milery, both in young and old.
I ho you think Louin perfectly recovered now i ”

II: anlwered rather heeitatingly, “Yes, I believe I
do ; very much recovered; but the is altered; there in
no mnning or jumping about, no laughing or dancing;
it in quite different. If one happenl only to Ihut the
door a little hard, she mm and wrigglel like a young
dab-chick in the water; and Benwick lit: at her elbow,
reading vereee, or whirpen'ug to her, all day long."

Anne could not help laughing. “That 'cannotbe
much to your time, I know," said the; “but I do
believe him to be an excellent young man."

“To be cure he in: nobody douth it; and I hope
you do not think I am no illiberal as to want eve
to have the name ohjecu and pleaeuree u myee f. I
have a great value for Benwick; and when one can but
get him to talk, he ha. plenty to say. Hil reading has
done him no harm, for he has fought an well an read.
He in a brave fellow. I got more acquainted with him
last Monday than ever I did before. We had a famou-
aeuo at rat-hunting all the morning in my father’e great
haml; and he played his part so well that I have liked
him the better ever eince.’

Here they were interrupted by the nbeolute necessity
of Chnrlel’r following the other! to admire mirrors and

226 nusuasrou.

china: but Anne had hard enough to undermnd the
preaent late of Uppercroea, and rejoice in in happinela;
and though the aighed la the rejoined, her ugh had
none of the ill-will of envy in it. She would certainly
have riaen to their blessing- if the could, but ahe did not
want to leaaen their;

The viait paned oﬂ' altogether in high good humour.
Mary wan in excellent epirita, enjoying the gniety and
the change, and I) well ntirﬁed with the journey in her
mother-in-law’a carriage with [but hornet, and with her
own complete independence of Camden Place, that ahe
waa exactly in a temper to admire everything on she
ought, and enter moat readin into all the auperioritiea
of the house. ll they were detailed to her. She had
no demands on her father or litter, and her conaequence

' wu juet enough increued by their handaorne drawing-
rooms.

Elizabeth was, for a short time, Iuﬂ'ering a good
deal. She felt that Mn Muagrove and all her party
ought to be alked to dine with them; but the could
not bear to have the difference of style, the reduction of
aervanu, which a dinner mutt betray, witneued by those
who had been always so inferior to the Elliou of
Kellynch. It wat a ltmggle between propriety and
vanity; but vanity got the better, and then Elinbeth
wna happy again. These were her internal mansion“
“Old-falhioned notiona; country hot itallty; we do
not protein to give dinnen; few people in Bath do;
Lad Alicia never doel; did not even aak her own ainer’l
fami y, though they were here a month; and I dare-
Iay it would be very inconvenient to Mn Muagrove;
put her quite out of her way. I am lure the would
rather not come; the cannot feel easy with in. I will
suit them all for an evening; that will be much better;
that will be a novelty and a treat They have not teen
two tuch drawing-mama before. They will be de-

PIRSUASION. 337
lighted to come to-mon'ow evening. It ahall be a
regular party, unall, but moat elegant. And—" Thin

aatiaﬁed Elizabeth; and when the invitation wan given to
the two recent, and promiaed for the absent, Mary wan
aa com y ntiaﬁed. She wan particularly alked to
meet bl: Elliot, and be introduced to Lady Dalrymple
and Milt Carteret, who were fortunately already en-
gaged to come; and the could not have received a
more gratifying attenu'on. Min Elliot wan to have the
honour of calling on Mrs Mun ve in the course of
the morning; and Anne walk off with Charla and
M , to go and nee her and Henrietta directly.

:1?" plan of litting with Lady Run-ell muat give way
to the preaent. They all three called in Riven Street
for a couple of miuum; but Anne convinced her-elf
that a day’t delay of the intended communication could
he of no contequence, and hutened forward to the
White Hart, to nee again the friend: and oompanionl of
the [an autumn, with an eagemeu of good-will which
man aunciationl contributed to form.

'Izhey found Mn Mutgrove and her daughter within,
and by themtelves, and Anne had the kindelt wel-
come fmm each. Henrietta wan exactly in that late
of recently-improved viewc. of frelh-formed happineaa,
which made her full of regard and intereat for everybody
the had ever liked before at all; and Mn Mutgrove’a
real affection had been won by her unefulneu when they
were in dirtreu. It wan a heartineu, and a warmth,
and a rincerity which Anne delighted in the more, from
the lad want of Inch bleuingt at home. She wan in-
treated to give them an much of her time an pouible,
invited for every day and all day long, or rather claimed
aa a part of the family; and, in return, the naturally
fell into all her wanted waya of attention and animnce,
and on Charlel’l leaving them together, wan listening to
Mrt Mungrove’t history of Loui, and to Henrietta'l

228 mum".

of hertelf, giving opiniont on bntinel, tnd recom-
mendation to thopt; with interval: of every hel which
Mary required, from altering her ribbon to act ing her
accounta; from ﬁnding her keyt, and natorting her
trinkeu, to trying to convince her that the val not ill-
uted h A anybody; which Mary, well emitted at the
generally wan, in her nation at 3 window overlooking
the entrance to the Pump Room, could not but have
her momenta of imagining.

A morning of thorough confiuion wan to be ex-
pected. A large party in an hotel enlured a quick-
chtnging, untettled toene. One live minutet brought a
note, the next a parcel ; and Anne had not been there
half an hour, when their dining-room, tpaciout at it
wan. teemed more than half ﬁlled; a rty of steady
old friendl were tented round’Mrt utgrove, and
Charlet came back with Captain: Harville and Went-
worth.‘ The appearance of the latter could not be more
than the turprite of the moment. It wat impouihle for
her to have forgotten to feel that thin twin] of their
common frienda mutt he soon bringing them together
again. Their Ian meeting had been moat important in

. opening hit feelingt : the had derived from it a delight-

’ ful conviction; but the feared from hit lookt, that the
urn: unfortunate pertuation, which had hanened him
away from the Concert Room, ttill governed. He
did not teem to want to be near enough for converta-
non.

She tried to be calm, and leave things to take their
count, and tried to dwell much on thit argument of
rational dependnnce :—“ Surely, if there he conttant
attachment on each ride, our heam mutt understand
each other ere long. We are not boy and girl, to he
captioutly irritable, misled by every moment’s inadvert-
ence, and wantonly playing with our own happineu."
And yet, a few minutet afterwards, the felt at if their

PERSUASION. 3 2 9

being in company with each other, under their present
circumstances, could only be ex 'ng them to inadvert-
enciea and miacomtmctlonc o the most mischievous
kind.
“ Anne," cried Mary, still at her window, “there is
Mrs Clny, I no sure, standing under the colonnmle,
and a gentleman with her. I saw them turn the corner
from Bath Streetth now. They seem deep in talk.
Who is it? Come, and tell me. Good heavensl I
recollect. It in Mr Elliot himself.”

“ No,’ ’ cried Anne, quickly, “ it cannot be Mr
Elliot, I assure you. He was to leave Bath at nine
this morning, and does not come back till to-morrow."

AI she spoke, she felt that Captain Wentworth was
looking at her, the consciousne- of which vexed and
embarrassed her, and made her regret that she had said
.0 much, simple as it was.

Mary, resenting that she should be Iupposed not to
know her own cousin, began talking very warmly about
the family features, and protesting still more positively
that it was Mr Elliot, u ling again upon Anne to come
and look herself, but Anne did not mean to stir, and
tried to be cool and unconcerned. Her distress re-
turned, however, oo perceiving smiles and intelligent
glancea pass between two or three of the lady visitors,
as if the believed themselves quite in the secret It
wal eviJent that the report concerning her had Ipread,
and I short pause neceeded, which seemed to ensure
that. it would now spread farther.

"Do come, Anne," cried Ma , “come and look
yourself. You will he too late you do not make
haste. They are parting; theylare shaking hands. He
is turning away. Not know r Elliot, indeed] You
seem to have orgot all about Lyme.”

To pacify Mary, and perhaps screen her own embar-
rnsament, Anne dld move quietly to the window. She

2 30 PIRSUASION.

wujuatintimetouoertainthatitreallywaaMrElliot,
which ahe had never' believed, before he dinppeared on
one ride, as Mn Clay walked quickly of on the other;
and checking the aurptiae which ahe could not but feel ‘
at Itch an a nee of friendly conference between
two per-one o totally oppoaite intereata, the «:1me laid,
“ Yet, it it Mr Elliot, certainly. He he changed hia
hmnofgdnglmppoaeﬁhatia all,orI maybe mil-
taken, I might not attend;” and walked back to her
chair, recompooed, and with the comfortable hope of
having acquitted henelf well.

The viliton took their leave; and Charlea. having
civilly aeen them off, and then made a faces: them, and
aboard them for coming, began with—

“ Well, mother, I have done aomething for you that
you will like. I have been to the theatre, and lech
a box for to-morrow night. A’n’t I a good boy? I
knowyouloreaplaaandthereiaroomforul
all. It hold: nine. lyhave engaged Captain Went-
worth. Anne will not be entry to join us, I am lure.
We all like a play. Have not I dune well, mother?”

Mn Mulgrove wan good humouredly beginning to
express her perfect readiueu for the play, if Henrietta
and all the other: liked it, when Mary eagerly inter-
mpted her by exclaiming—

“ Good heaveml Charles, how can you think of
such a thing ? Take a box for to-morrow night!
Have you forgot that we are engaged to Camden Place
ta-morrow night? and that we were moat particularly
aaked to meet Lady Dalrym Ie and her daughter, and
Mr Elliot, all the principal ﬁgmin connexiont, on pur-

to be introduced to them? How can you be no
forgetful I"

" I’hoo! phoo! " replied Charlea, “ what ’a an even-
ing party? Never worth remembering. Your father
might have naked ul to dinner, I think, if he had

rmussros. 231

wanted to see us. You may do as you like, but I shall
go to the play."

“Ohl Charles, I declare it will be too abominable
if you do, when you promised to go."

“ No, I did not promise. I on ysmirked and bowed,
and said the word ‘ happy.’ There was no romise."

“But you must go, Charles. It woul be unpar-
donable to fail. We were asked on purpose to be in-
troduced. There was alwa s such a great connexion
between the Dalrymples an ourselves. Nothing ever
happened on either slde that was not announced imme-
diately. We are quite near relations, you know ; and
Mr Elliot too, whom you ought so particularly to be
acquainted with! Every attention is due to Mr Elliot.
Consider, my father's heir: the future representative of
the family."

“ Don’t talk to me about heirs and representatives,”
cried Charles. " I am not one of those who neglect
the reigning power to bow to the rising run: If 1
would not go for the sake of your father, I should
think it scandalous to go for the sake of his heir.
What is Mr Elliot name 9” The careless expression
was life to Anne, who saw that Captain Wentworth
was all attention, looking and listening with his whole
soul ; and that the last words brought his enquiring eyes
from Charles to herself.

Charles and Mary still talked on in the nme style ;
be, half serious and half jesting, maintaining the scheme
for the play, and she, invariably serious, most warmly
opposing it, and not omitting to make it known that,
however determined to go to Camden Place herself, she
should not think herself very well used, if they went to
the p‘lzy without her. Mrs M rove interposed.

‘t e had better put it off. harles, you had much
better 0 back and change the box for Tuesday. It
would’ise a pity to be divided, and we should be losing

232 PERSUASION.

Mina Anne too, if there in a part at her father’l; and
I am lure neither Henrietta nor Ihould care at all for
the play if Mi- Anne could not be with ua."

Anne felt truly obliged to her for aucll kindneu; and
ﬁnite as much no for the opportunity it gave her of

ecidedly saying—

“ If It depended only on m inclination, ma’arn, the
any at home (excepting on Nlary’l account) would not

the Imalleat impedian I have no pleaaure in the
non of meeting, and rhould be too happy to change it
for a play, and with you. But it had better not be
men ted, perhapa." She had Ipoken it; but the
trembed when it wan done, conecioua that her word.
were linened to, and daring not even to try to oboerve
their effect.

It waa noon generally agreed that Tuesday nhould be
the day; Charlet only reaerving the advantage of still
teaeing hie wife, I) perzining that he would go to the
play to-mon-ow, if’ nobody elte would.

Ca tain Wentworth left hie t, and walked to the
ﬁre-p ace; probably for the like of walking away from
it noon afterwards, and taking a station, with lens bare-
faced design, by Anne.

“ You have not been long enough in Bath," laid he,
“ to enjoy the evening partiet of the place.”

“ Oh ! no. The actual character of themhaa nothing
for me. I am no card-player.”

“ You were not formerly,I know. You did not uee
to like rardl; but time make: man changea.”

I‘I am not yet I0 much chang " cried Anne, and
at , fearing ll]: hardly knew what mitconltmction.

ter waiting a few momenta he Mid, and an if it were
the relult of immediate feeling, “ It ll 3 period, indeedl
Ei ht year: and a half is a period! ”

LL, hether he would have proceeded farther wu left
to Aunc’l imagination to ponder over in a calmer hour;

PERSUASION. 233

for while still hearing the sounds he had uttered, she was
startled to other subjects by Henrietta, eager to make
use of the present leisure for getting out, and calling on
her companions to lose no time, lest somebody else
Ihould come in. '

The were obliged to move. Anne hiked of being
perfectlyy ready, and tried to look it; but Illa felt that
could Henrietta hnve known the regret and reluctance of
her heart in quitting thst chair, in reparing to quit the
room, she would have found, in al her own sensations
for her cousin, in the very security of his aﬁ'ection,
wherewith to pity her.

Their preparations, however, were stopped short.
Alarming sounds were heard; other visitors approached,
and the door was thrown open for Sir Wslter and Miss
Elliot, whose entrance seemed to give a general chill.
Anne felt an instant oppression, and wherever she
looked law symptoms of the same. The comfort, the
freedom, the galety of the room was over, hunhed into
cold composure, determined silence, or insipid talk, to
meet the heartless elegance of her father and sister.
How mortifying to feel that it was sol

Her jealous eye was satisﬁed in one particular. Cap-
tain Wentworth was acknowledged again by each, by
Elizabeth more graciously than before. She even
addressed him once, and looked at him more than once.
Elizabeth was, in fact, revolving a great mealure. The
oequel explained it. After the wute of a few minutes
in saying the proper nothings, she began to give the in-
vitation which wan to comprise all the remaining dues
of the Mangroves. “ To-morrow evening, to meet I
few friends: no formal party.” It was all said very
gracefully, and the cards with which she had rovided

.herself, the “Mist Elliot at home," were lai on the
table, with a courteous, comprehenvive Imile to Ill, and
one mile and one card more decidedly for Captain

1 34 PIRSUASION.

Wentworth. Thetruthwnythat Elizabeth hedbeen
long enough in Bath lo undentand the importance of:
man of luch an air and nppearanoe u hi; The poet
wan nothing. The preaent was that Captain Wentworth
would move about well in her dnvnng-room. The
card wu pointedly given, and Sir Walter and Elizabeth
aroae and cheap

The interruption had been Ihort though nevere, and
eaee and animation returned to most of thoee they left
on the door shut them out, but not to Anne. She could
think only of the invitation the had with Inch amnieh-
men: witneated. and of the manner in which it had been
received: a manner of doubtful meaning, of aurprite
rather than gratiﬁcation, of polite acknowledgment nther
than aceeptanca. She knew him: the law disdain in
hie eyet, and could not venture to believe that he had
determined to accept eueh an offering an an atonement
for all the inaolence of the pan. Her tpirite mnk.
He held the card in hit hand after they were gone, at
if d ly conaidering it.

“ nly think of Elizabeth’t including everybody! "
whispered Mary, very audibly. “ I do not wonder
Captain Wentworth it delighted! You tee he cannot
put the card out of his hand.”

Anne caught hit eye, saw hit chcelu glow, and hit
mouth form itself into a momentary expreuion of con-
tempt, and turned away, that the might neither tee nor
hear more to vex her.

The party separated. The gentlemen had their own
pureuita, the ladle: proceeded on their own husineat, and
they met no more while Anne belonged to them. She
wat earneltly begged to return and dine, and give them
all the rent of the day, but her tpirite had been to long
exerted that at preeent the felt unequal to move, and ﬁt
only for home, where the might be cure of being ll
ailent at the chore. '

PERSUASION. 235

Pmmil'ng to be with them the whole of the follow-
ing morning, therefore, the cloted the fad t of the
preterit by a toilsome walk to Camden lace, there
to spend the evening cln'el'ly in littening to the busy ar-
rangements of Elizabeth and Mrs Clay for the mor'mw’t
party, the frequent enumeration of the nuns invited,
and the continually improving detail of Ithc cmbcllith-
menta which were to make it the most com let.er elegant
of its kind in Bath, while harassing hersel in secret with
the never-ending question of whether Captain Went-
wnrth would come or not? They were reckoning
him at cemin, but with her it was a gnawing tolicitude
never appeated for ﬁve minute: together. She gener-
ally thought he would come, because the generally
thought he ought; but it was a case which the could
not to thape into an potitive act of duty or discretion,
as inevitably to de the suggestions of very oppotite
feelingt.

She only routed heraelf from the broodingt of thin
restless agitation, to let Mrt Clay know that the had
been seen with Mr Elliot three hourt alter hit being
tuppoted to be out of Bath, for having watched in vain
for some intimation of the interview from the lady her-
aelf, the determined to mention it, and it teemed to her
that there was guilt in Mrs Clay’s face at the limed.
It VIII trantient: cleared away In an instant; hut Anne
could imagine the read there the consciousness of hav-

V ing, by tome complication of mutual trick, or tome
overhear-in authority of his, been obliged to attend
(perhaps {Er hall" an hour to his lectures and restric-
tiont on her designs on ir Walter. She exclaimed,
however, with a very tolerable imitation of nature :—

“Oh, dear! very true. Only think, Min Elliot, to
my great surprise I met with Mr Elliot in Bath Street.
I was never more astonished. He turned back and
walked with me 'to the Pump Yard. He had been

Q

236 mason.

prevented tettin off for Thornherry, but I rally for- -

get by what; or I van in a hurry, and could not
much attend, and I an only [answer] for hit being

.l‘termined not to be delayed in hit return. He wanted

to ltnow how early he might be admitted w-mon’ow.
He wat full of ‘to-morrow,’ and it it ve evident that
I hove been full of it too, ever time entered the
bottle and learned the extenn'on of your Ian and all
that had happened, or my teeing him cou never have
gone to entirely out of my head."

Cblnm lﬂlll

NE day only had patted tince Allan convent-
tion with Mn bmith; but a keener interest
had tucceeded, and the win new to little

touched by Mr Elliot't conduct, except by itt efectt
in one quarter, that it became a matter of courte the
next morning ttill to defer her explanatory vitit in
River. Street. She had promited to be with the
Milagroch from breakfatt to dinner. Her faith was
lighted, and Mr Elliot’t character, like the Sultaneaa
lclicheheruzade’t headl must live another day.
She could not keep her appointment punctually,
however; the weather was unfavourable, and the had
rieved over the rain on her friend’t account, and felt
rt very much on her own, before the wat able to
attempt the walk. When the reached the White
Han. and made her way to the proper apartment, the
found heraelf neither arriving quite in time, nor the lint
to arrive. T he party before llL‘r were, Mn Mutgmve
talking to Mrt Croft, and Captain Harville to Captain
Wentworthp and the immediately heard that Mary and
Henrietta, too impatient to wait, had gone out the mo-

 

‘%;Jﬁnn WJ Alloy:

my. 1.x

PERSUASION. 23 7

ment it had cleared, but would be back a ' soon, and
that the strictest injunctions had been ft with Mrs
Musgrove to keep her there till they returned. She
had onl to submit, ait down, he outwardly compoeed,
and fee herself plun ed at once in all the agitation-
which she had mcrely laid her account of tastin a
little before the morning closed; There war no de ny,
no waste of time. She was deep in the happiness of
such misery, or the misery of such happiness, Instantly.
Two minute: after her entering the room, Captain
Wentworth laid—

“ We will write the letter we were talking of, Har-
ville, now, if you will give me materials."

Materinls were all It hand, on a separate table; he
went to it, and nearly turning his back on them all,
was engrossed by writing.

Mrs Musgrove wu giving Mn Croft the history of
her eldest daughter's engagement, and just in that in-
convenient tone of voice which was perfectly audible
while it retended to be a whisper. Anne felt that she
did not long to the conversation, and yet, u Captain
Harville seemed thoughtful and not di to talk,
she could not avoid hearing many underrmhle particu-
lars; such a, “ how Mr Musgrove and my brother
Hayter had met again and again to talk it over; what
rn brother Hayter had said one day, and what Mr
Mlirsgrove had proposed the next, and what had
occurred to my sister Hayter, and what the young

le had wilhed, and what I raid at ﬁm I never
co d consent to, but was afterwards persuaded to
think might do very well,” and a great deal in the
same rtye of open-hearted communication: minntiz
which, even with every advantage of taste and delicac ,
which Mrs Musgrove could not give, could be proper y
interesting only to the oJu'incipals. Mrs Croft was
attending with great go -humour, and whenever she

a 38 PIISUASION.

he at all it wan ve aenihly. Ane hoped the
gentlemen might each 2-: too much aelf-oceupied to
hear.
“And no, ma’am, all then: things conaidered,” taid
Mn Mulgrove, in her powerful wh‘ r, “ though we
could have withed it dlﬁ'erent, yet, together, we did
not think it fair to stand out any longer, for Charlea
Hayter wu quite wild about it, Ind Henrietta waa
pretty near as bad; and to we thought they had better
marry at once, and make the heat of it, a: many othera
have done before them. At any rate, Did I, it will
he better than a long engagement."

“ That in precincly what 1 war going to obeerve,"
cried Mn Croft. “ I would rather have young people
uttle on a Imall income at once, and have to atruggle
with a few difﬁcultien together, than be involved in a
long engagement. I always think that no mutual— "

“Ohl dear Mn Croft,” cried Mn Mutgrnve, un-
able to let her ﬁniah her h, “ there ll nothing I I0
abominate for young mm: a long engagement. It
in what I alway- proteated again» for my children. It
ll all very wel , I med to nay, for young people to be
engaged, if there in a certainty of their being able to
marry in tix month, or even in twelve; but a long
engagement l— ” '

“Yes, dear ma’am," nid Mn Croft. "or an un-
certain engagement, an engagement which may be long.
To begin without knowing that at auch a time there
will be the mean- of marrying. I hold to be very un-
‘fe and unwioe, and what I think all parenta should

vent at far as they can."

Anne found an unex ted intereat here. She felt
in up icntion to herael , felt it in a nervnut thrill all
om er; and at the lame moment that her in-
‘inctively glanced toward: the dintant table, aptain
\Ventwonh't pen coed to move, hll head waa rained,

remesron. I 239

panning. listening, and he turned round the next inﬂant
to ‘ve a look, one quick, conscious look at her.

he two ladiel continued to mlk, to re-urge the
same admitted tmtha, and enforce them with such
examplee of the ill elfect of a contrary practice u had
fallen within their ohecrution, hut Anne heard nothing
dininetly; it war only I buzz of word- in her ear, her
mind war in oonful'on.

Captain Harville, who had in truth been hearing
none of it, now let} his neat, and moved to a window,
and Anne teeming to watch him, though it was from
thorough :beence of mind, became gradually Ienlible
that he was inviting her to join him where he stood.
He looked at her with a smile, and a little motion of
the head, which expressed, “ Come to me, I have
nomething to lay ; ” and the unaﬁ'ected, easy kindneu of
manner which dean the feelingl of an older acquaint-
ance than he really was, strongly enforced the invitation.
She mused heuelf and went to him. The window at
which he otood war at the other end of the room from
where the two Indie: were ﬁtting, and though nearer to
Captain Wentworth'e table, not very nar- Al she
joined him, Captain Harville’s countenance re-auurned
the eerioul, thoughtful expression, which nemed in
nature! character.

“ Look here,” said he, unfolding a parcel in his
hand, and displaying a :mall miniature painting; “do
you know who that in l ”

“Ceminl : Captain Benwick."

“ Yes, an you may gueu who it is for. But," (in a
deep tone,) “it was not done for her. Miss Elliot, do
you remember our walking together at Lyme, and
grieving for him ? I little thought then—but no
matter. Thin wae drawn at the Cape. He met with
a clever young German artist at the Cape, and in com-
pliance with a promise to my poor sitter, III to him, and

no rusunsron.

whhfingithomefurher;andlhaveoowthe
chargeo gettingitproperlyaetfaronotherl It will
eonmiuion to me! But who elee was there to employ?
I hope I an nllow for him. I am not lorry, indeed,
to make it over to mother. He undertake: itr”
ﬂooding toward: Captain Weotworth,) “he in writing

ut it now." And with a quivering lip he wound up
the whole by adding, “ Poor Fanny! the would not
have forgotten him to noon."

“ No.” replied Anne, in a low, feeling voice, “ that ‘
I can eu'ly believe."

" It wu not in her nature. She doated on him.”
“I! would not be the nature of any woman who
trul loved."

6a in Harville uniled, as much at to any, uDo
you cairn that for your text” and die amwered the
queuion, smiling also, “ Yet. We certainly do not forget

to noon at you for et m. It in, perhapl, our fate

rather than our men‘t. e cannot hel ourrelver. We
live I! home. quiet, conﬁned. and our eelinga prey upon
u. You are forced on exertion. You have always a

fusion, punuita, burineta of tome tort or other, to
at: you back into the world immediately, and continual
occnpulon and change noon weaken impreuionn."

“Granting your auertion that the world doe. all
thin l0 noon for men (which, however, I do not think
1 dull grant), it does not. apply to Benwick. He
in: not been forced upon any exertion. The peace
“med him on ohore at. the very moment, and he hal
ken living with ut, in our little family circle, ever
date."

uTme," aaid Anne, " very true; I did not re-
“,lkct; but what aluill we any now, Captain Hurvillci
[f the change be not from outward Circumstances, it.
u be from within ; it must be nature, man'r nature,
which has done the husineal for Captain BenwicL'f

PENDASIDR. ' 241

“No,no,it it not man’a nature. Iwillnotallow
it to be more man'e nature than woman’u to be in-
conatant and forget than they do love, or have loved.
I believe the reverie. I believe in a true analogy
between our bodily framee and our mental ; and that an
our bodiea are the Itrongeet, to are our feelingu; capable
of bearing moat rough image, and riding out the heaviest
weather.’

" Your feelingl may be the mongeet,” replied Anne,
“but the same lpirit of analogy will authoriee me to
alert that our: are the mod tender. Man i- more
robust than woman, but he in not longer lived; which
exactly ex lain: my view of the nature of their attach-
menta. lily, it would be too hard upon you, ifitwere
otherwiae. You have difﬁculties, and privationl, and
dangen enough to Itruggle with. You are always
labouring and toiling, expooed to every rink and
hardahip. Your home, country, friends, all qnitted.
Neither time, nor health, nor life, to be called your
own. It would be too hard, indeed " (with a faltering
voice , “if woman’l feelingr were to be added to all
thia.’ v .

“ We shall never agree upon this quenion," Captain
Harv-ille wa- beginning to lay, when a slight noiee
called their attention to Captain Wentworth’a hitherto
perfectly quiet diviaion of the room. It wan nothing
more than that his pen had fallen down ; but Anne was
startled at ﬁnding him nearer than the had suppoeed,
and half inclined to Iurpect that the pen had only
fallen because he had been occu ied by them, ltriving
to catch noundI, which yet she did not think he could
have caught.

“an2 you ﬁniahed your letter?” aid Captain
Harville.

“ Not quite, a few lines more. I shall have done in
live minutel.” r

a4: ' PERSUASIOK.

“ There in no hurry on my ide. I am only ready
whenever you are. I am in very good anchorage here, ’
(amiling at Anne,) “ well Iupplied, and want for nothin .
No hurry for a aignal at Ill. Well, Mile Elliot,’
(lowering hie voice.) “at I was a: ing, we ahall never
agree, I auppoae, upon thie point. 0 man and woman,
wouldl probably. But let me oheerve that all hiatoriea
Ire Igninat you—all Itoriee, prose and verae. If I had
Illcl'l a memory a Benwick,l could bring you lift

uotatinnr in I moment on my ride the argument, and
do not think I ever opened a hook in my life which
had not aomething to my upon woman’e inconuncy;
Song: and proverhe, all talk of woman’a ﬁckleoeal.
Buglperhapt, you will lay, these were all written by
men.

" Perhape I shall. Yes, yet, if you pleue, no
reference to examplea in booka. Men have had every
advantage of us in telling their own awry. Education
ha been thcin in to much higher a degree; the pen
ha: been in their handa. I will not allow book- to
prove anything."

“ But how thall we prove anything I ”

“We never ihall. We never can expect to prove
anything upon Iuch a point. It in a difference of
opinion which does not admit of proof. We each
begin, probably, with a little biae wwarde our own tex ;
and u n that biat build every circumstance in favour of
it which ha- occurred within our own circle; many of
which circumnancee (perhapa those very canes which
mike u: the moat) may be precitely such an cannot be
brought forward without betra ing a conﬁdence, or in
mm reapect, laying what Ihou d not be laid."

“ Ah I " cried Captain Hurvillc, in a tone of atrong
feeling. “if I could but mke you comprehend what a
men Iuﬂ'en when he takes 5 lat: look at hit wife and
children,und watcher the boat that he ha- aent them off

rnsuasion. ‘ 243

in, as long as it is in sight, and then turns away and
says, ‘ God knows whether we ever meet againl ' And
then, if I could convey to you the glow of his soul when
he does see them again; when, coming back after a
twelvemonth’s absence, perhapa, and obliged to ut into
another port, he calculates how soon it be 1) eto get
them there, pretending to deceive himsel , and uyin ,
‘ They cannot be here till such a day,’ but all the wbi e
hoping for them twelve hours sooner, and seeing them
arrive at last, as if Heaven had given them wings, by
many hours sooner still I If I could explain to you all
this, and all that a man can hear and do, and glories to
do, for the sake of these treasures of his existencel I
speak, you know, only of such men a. have heartal ”
preasing his own with emotion.

“ Oh I " cried Anne, eagerly, “ I hope I do justice
to all that is felt by you, and by those who resemble
you. God foxbid that I should undervalue the warm
and faithful feelings of any of my fellow-creatures l I
should deserve uner contempt if I daredtosuppose that
true attachment and constancy were known only by
woman. No, I believe you capable of everything great
and good in your married lives. I believe you equal to
every important exertion, and to every domestic for-
bearance, so long as—if I may be allowed the expres-
vion, so long as you have an object. I mean while the
woman you love lives, and lives for you. All the
privilege I claim for my own sex it is not a very en-
viable one: you need not covet It), is that of loving
longest, when existence or when hope is gone I "

She could not immediately have uttered another sen-
tence ; her heart was too full, her breath to much

reused. "

“ You are a good soul,” cried Captain Harville, ut-
ting his hand on her am, quite affectionately. “ T re
is no uarrelling with you. And when I think of
Benwicqh~ my tongue is tied."

244 MANOR.

Their mention wu called towaidl the other;
Mn Croft we: taking leave.

“Here, Frederick, you and I part company, I be-
lieve,” nid ahe. “ I am going home, and you have an
engagement with your friend. Todnight we may have
the lea-ure of all meeting again at your rty,” tuming
to nne.) “ We had your Aimr’e ca yeste y, and
I undentood Frederick had a card too, though I did
not lee it ; and you are diaengaged, Frederick, are you
not, a: well an ounelvec ? "

Captain Wentworth wu folding up a letter in glut
halte, and either could not or would not anlwer ﬁrlly.

“ Yea,” kid he, “ very true; here we lepame, but
Harrille and I Ihnll soon be aﬁer you; that is, Har-
ville, if you are ready, I am in half a minute. I know
you will nor be uorry to be of. I shall be at your eer-'
vice in half: minute.”

Mn Croft left them, and Cumin Wantworth, having
Iealed hll letter with great rapidit , wu indeed ready,
and had even a hurried, agitated air, which ohewed im-
patience to be gone. Anne knew not how to under-
stand it. She had the kindest “ Good morning, God
bleu you I " from Captain Harville, but from him not
a word, nora look! He had paued out of the room
without a look I

She had only time, however, to move cluer to the
table where he had been writing, when foot: were
heard retuming ; the door opened, it wan himoe f. He
begged their pardon, but he had forgotten hi- loves,
and inmntly crosaing the room to the writing ta e, and
rtanding with hie back toward: Mn Mutgrove, he drew
out a letter from under the Icattered paper, placed it
before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty ﬁxed on her
for a time, and hanin collecting hll glovel, war again
out of the room, almon before Mn Muugrove wa-
aware of his being in it : the work ofan instant!

PERSUASION. ' 245

The revolution which one instant had made in Anne
was almost beyond expression. The letter, with I direc-
tion hardly legible, to “ Miss A. E-———," was evidently
the one which he had been folding so hastily. While
supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick he had
been also addressing her I On the contents of that
letter depended all which this world could do for her.
Anything was possible, anything might be deﬁed rather
than sulpense. Mrs Musgrove had little arrangements
of her own at her own table; to their protection she
must mm, and, sinking into the chair which he had
occupied, succeeding to the very spot where he had
leaned and written, her‘ eyes devoured the following
words:

“I can listen no longer in silence. I must speak to
you hy such means as are within my reach. You pierce
my soul. I am half agony, half hope. Tell me not
that I am too late, that such precious feelings are gone
for ever. I offer myself to you again with a heart even
more your own than when you almost broke it, eight
years and a half ago. Dare not say that man forgets
sooner than woman, that his love has an earlier death.
I have loved none but you. Unjust I may have been,
weak and resentful I have been, but never inconstant.
You alone have brought me to Bath. For you alone,
I think and plan. Have you not seen this? Can an
fail to have understood my wishes? ~ I had not waited
even these ten days, could I have read your feelings, as
I think you must have penetrated mine. I can hardly
write. I am eve‘ry instant hearing something which

. overpowers me. on sink your voice, but I can dis-
tinguish the tones of that voice when they would be
lost on others. Too good, too excellent creaturel
You do us justice, indeed. You do believe that there is
true attachment and constancy among men. Believe it
to be most fervent, most undeviating, in “ F. W.

:46 PIRSUASIOI.

"I Imago, unmhinofmyfm; but I shall return
hither, or to low our party, u noon on poolible. A
word, I look, w‘ be enough to decide whether I enter
your father's houoe thin evening or never.”

Such aletter wan not to be Ioon recovered from.
Half an hour’l nolitude and reﬂection might have tran-
quillized her; but the ten minute: only which now
panned before the was interrupted, with all the restraint:
of her ritution, could do nothing toward! tnn uillity.
Every moment rather brought fresh agitation. t wan
an overpowering ha 'neu. And before the wu beyond
the lint m of ll Ienution, Charles, Mary, and
Henrietta, :1 came in.

The abnolute neceuity of aeeming like henelf pro-
duced then an immediate «mggle ; but after a while Ihe
could do no more. She began notm undemand a word
they laid. and wan obliged to plead indinpolition and
excuae henelf. They could then see that the looked
very ill, were shocked and concerned, and would not
Itir without her for the world. Thin wan dreadful.
Would they only have gone away, and left her in the
quiet poneuion of that room it would have been her
cure; but to have them all ﬁnding or waiting around
her war distracting, and in deIperation, she laid the
would go home.

“ By all means, my dear," cried Mn Mangrove, “ go
home directly, and take care of yournelf, that you may
be ﬁt for the evening. I wish Sarah was here to doctor
you, but I am no doctor mytelf. Charles, ring and
order a chair. She must not walk.”

But the chair would never do. Wone than nlll
To lone the of tpcaking two word: to Cap-
tain Wentwonh in the court: of her quiet, solitary
progreu up the town (and she felt almort certain of
meeting him) could not be borne. The chair wan

PIRSUASION. :47

umeutly pr!)de again, Ind Mrv Muvglnve, who
thought only of one Iort of illnell, having I-ured her-
Ielf with come Inxiet , that there had been no fall in
the cue; that Anne not at any time lately clipped
down, and got a blow on her head; that the was per-
fectly convinced of having had no fill ; could n with
her cheerfully, and depend on ﬁnding her r at
night

Anxioua to omit no precauﬁon, Anne atmggled, and

“ I am afraid, ma’am, that it in not perfectly under-
Itood. Pny be Io good u to mention to the other
gentlemen that we hope to see your whole party this
evening. 1 um afraid there ha: been home minake;
and I wiah yon particulnrly to auure Captain Harville
and Captain Wentworth, that we hope to lee them
both. ’

“Oh! my dear, it in under-mood, I give you my
word. , Captain Harville has no thought but of

mg.’

“ Do you think no? But. I am afraid; and I Ihould
he In very sorry. Will you promiue me to mention it
when you Ice them ngnin? You will Ice them both
again thi- moming, I dare lay. Do promile me.”

“To be vure I will, if you wish it. Charles, if you
see Captain Harville anywhere. remember to give Min
Anne’u menu e. But, indeed, m dear, you need not
be uneasy. Captain Hnrv'ille hold. himself quite en-
gaged, I’ll Inlwer for it; and Captain Wentworth
mine, I dare nay."

Anne could do no more; but her heart pro belied
tome miechance to damp the perfection of her elicity.
It could not be very lasting, however. Even if he did
not come to Camden Place himself, it would be in her
power to end an intelligible sentence by Captain Har-
ville. Another momentary vexation occurred. Charles,

248 PERSUASION.

in his real concern and good nature, would go home
with her; there waa no preventing him. 'I‘hia wan
almort cmel. But the could not be long ungrateful;
he was Iacriﬁcing an engagement at a gunamith’l, to be
of uae to her; and Ihe let off with him, with no feeling
but gratitude apparent.

' hey were In Union Street, when a quicker wep
behind, a nomething of familiar lound, gave her two
mmenu’lprepamtion for the light of Ca in Went-
worth. e Joined them; but, an if irreao u - whether
to join or to pan on, nid nothing, only looked. Anne
could command hereelf enough to receive that look, and
not repullively. The cheek. which had been pale now
glowed, and the movements which had hesitated were
decided. He walked by her aide. Preoently, truck
by a wdden thought, Charla Bld—

“ Captain Wentworth, which way are you going?
Only to Gay Street, or farther up the town i"

“I hardly know," replied Captain Wentwnrth,
lurpriaed.

“ Are you going at high as Belmont? Are you
going nar Camden Place? Because, if you are, I ahall
have no acruple in aaking you to take my place, and give
Anne your arm to her hither'l door. She in lather
done for thin morning, and must not go so far without
help, and I ought to be at that fellow'a in the Market
Place. He promiled me the light of a capital gun he
in juat going to lend of; said he would keep it unpacked
to the lat pouible moment, that I might nee it ; and if
I do not turn back now, I have no chance. By hia
deacription, a good deal like the aecond aized double-
barrel of mine, which you shot with one day round
Winthrop."

There could not be an objection. There could be
only a moat roper alacrity, a moat obliging compliance
for public View; and Imilcn reined in and epiriu danc-

 

PIRSUASION. 149

ing in private 1: are. In half I minute Charles was at
the bottom of nion Street again, and the other two
roceedin together : and soon words enough hadpassed
between them to decide their direction towards the com-
paratively quiet and retired gnvel walk, where the power
of convemtion would make the present hour a blessing
indeed, and prepare it for all the immortality which the
happiest recollections of their own future lives could
bestow. There they exchanged a in those feeling. snd
those promises which had once be ore seemed to secure
everything, but which had been followed b so many,
many years of divirion and estrungemenr. here they
returned again into the past, more exquisitely hap y,
perhaps in their re-union, than when it had been rat
rejected; more tender, more tried, more fixed in n
- Enowledge of each other’s character, truth, and attach-
ment; more etpual to act, more justiﬁed in acting. And
there, as they s owly paced the gradual atcent, heedlees
of every group around them, seeing neither sauntering
politicians, bustling housekeepers, ﬂirting girls, nor
nurtery-mnids and children, they could indulge in those
tetrospections Ind acknowledgments, and especially in
those explanations of what had directly preceded the
resent moment, which were so poignant and so cease-
ess in interest. All the little variations of the last week
were gone through ; and of yesterday and to-day there
could scarcely be an end.

She had not mistaken him. Jealousy of Mr Elliot
had been the retarding weight, the doubt, the torment.
That had begun to operate in the ve hour of ﬁrst
meeting her in Bath; that had return ,after a short
suspension, to min the concert; and that had inﬂuenced
him in everything he had said and done, or omitted to
say and do, in the last four-and-twenty hours. It had
been gradually yielding to the better hopes which her
looks, or words, or actions occasionally encouraged; it

250 runsua$rom

had been vanquished at last those aentimenta and
those tones which had rach him while the talked
with Captain Harville; and under the irresiIible gover-
nance of which he had seized a Iheet of paper, and
poured out his feelinga.

Of what he had then written nothing wan to be re-
tracted or qualiﬁed. He persisted in huvin loved none
but her. She had never been supplanted. e never even
believed himself to see her equal. Thus much, indeed,
be war obliged to acknowledge: that he had been con-
nnt nncontciously, nay unintentionally; that he had
meant to forget her, and believed it to be done. He had
imagined himaelf indifferent, when he had only been
angry; and he had been unjust to her merits, becauae
he had been a sufferer fi'om them. Her character wan
now ﬁxed on his mind as perfection itself, maintaining -
the loveliest medium of fortitude and gentlenm; but he
WI! obliged to acknowledge that only at Uppercrosa
had he learnt to do her justice, and only at Lyme had
he begun to understand himself. At L me he had
received lessons of more than one sort. yI‘he paesing
admiration of Mr Elliot had at least mused him, and the
tcenea on the Cobb and at the Harvilles’ had fixed her
superiority.

In his preceding attempts to attach himself to Louiaa
Mingrove (the attempts of angry pride), he protested
that he had for ever felt it to be impossible; that he
had not cared, could not care, for Louisa; though till
that day, till the leisure for reﬂection which followed
it, he had not understood the rfect excellence of the
mind with which Louise’s cou d so ill bear a comparison,
or the perfect unrivalled hold it potaensed over his own.
There, he had learnt to distinguish between the eteadi-
nets of principle and the ohatinacy of self-will, between
the darings of heedlenneu and the resolution of a
collected mind. There he had seen everything to

rmuasron. a 5 r

exalt in hia eetirnation the woman he had lost; and
there begun to deplore the pride, the folly, the madness
of resentment, which had kept him from trying to regain
her when thrown in hia way.

From that period his penance had become severe.
He had no aooner been free from the horror and
remorse attending the ﬁrst few do of Louisa'a accident,
no mner begun to feel himsel alive again, than he
had began to feel himself, though alive, not at liberty.

"I found," aaid he, “that I was considered by
Harville an engaged man! That neither Harville nor
his wife entertained a doubt of our mutual attachment.
I waa startled and ahoclted. To a degree, I could
contradict thin instantly; but, when I began to reﬂect
that other: might have felt the same—her own family,
nay, perhaps herself—I wan no longer at my own dis-

. I wu hen in honour if she wished it. I had

n unguarded. I had not thought seriouely on thin
subject before. I had not considered that my excee-
aive intimacy most have ite danger of ill consequence in
many wa ; and that I had no right to be trying
whether could amch myself to either of the girls, at
the risk of raising even an unpleasant report, were there
no other ill effects. I had been grossly wrong, and
mut abide the consequences.”

He found too late, in short, that he had entangled
hirnaelf ; and tint precisely as he became fully satisﬁed
of his not caring for Louisa at all, he mun regard him-
self as bound to her, if her sentiments for him were
what the Harvillea aupposed. It determined him to
lve Lyme, and await her complete recovery elaewhere.
He would gladly weaken, by any fair means, whatever
feelings or speculations concerning him might exist;
and he went, therefore, to his brother’r, meaning after
a while to return to Kellynch, and act at circumatances
might require. ,

R

2 5 2 PIRSUASION.

“I'vna ix weeh with Edward," laid he, “ and

law him happy. 1 could have no other plaeure. I

none. He enquired after you very particu-

larly; aalted even if you were peraonally altered, little
Impacting that to m eye you could never alter.”

Anne uniled, an let it I. It was too pleaaing a
blunder for a reproach. if in nomething for a woman
to be anured, in her eight-and-twenu'eth ear, that the
haa not lol one charm of earlier youth: ut the value
of each homage wu inexpreuihly increaaed to Anne,
by comparing it with former words, and feeling it to he
the result, not the cance, of a revival of his warm
attachment

He had remained in Shro hire, lamenting the blind-
ness of hit own pride, an the blunders of hit own
calculations, till at once released from Louin by the
amniahing and feliciqu intelligence of her engagement
with Benwiclt.

"Here." said he, “ended the wont of my late;
for now I could at lent put myaelf in the way of
happincu; I could exert myaelf; I could do some-
thrng. But to be waiting 00 long in inaction, and
waiting only for evil, had been dreadful. Within the
lint five minute! I aid, ‘ I will be at Bath on Wednes-
day,’ and I um. War it unpardonable to think it
worth in while to come! and to arrive with name
degreeo hope? You were aingle. It wu pouible
that you might retain the feelings of the put, an I did:
md one encouragement happened to be mine. I could
never doubt that you would be loved and nought by
othera, but I Itnew to a certainty that you had refund
one man, at lent, of better pretendom than myaelf ; and
I could not help often laying, ‘ Wan thin for me P ’ ”

Their lint meeting in Milanm Street afforded much
to be aid, but the concert ctill more. That evening
seemed to be made up of exquirite momenta. The

rensuasron. 253

moment of her "typing forward in the Gong” Room
to Ipeak to him: the moment of Mr Elliot’l appearing
and tearing her away, and one or two luboeqnent mo-
ments, marked by returning hope or increaaing deepen-
denc , were dwelt on with energy.

“ o nee you,” cried he, “ in the midat of tho-e who
could not be my well-wiahen; to lee your couain cloee

you, convening and Imiling, and feel all the horrible
e igihilitiee and proprietien of the match I To cmlider
it u the certain wieh of every being who could to
inﬂuence youl Even if your own feeling: were re uct-
Int or indifferent, to concich what powerful au
would be hie! Wu it not enough to make the fool of
me which I appeared? How could I look on without
agony? Was not the very sight of the friend who at
behind you, wan not the recollection of what had been,
the knowled of her inﬂuence, the indelible, inmovahle
impreuion 0 what rerun-ion had once done—wa- it
not all against me 2 ’

“ You Ihould have diltinguiahed," replied Anne.
" You Ihould not have ted me now; the ﬁle no
different, and my age so different. If I wan wrong in
yielding to penuaaion once, remember that it was to
Vim-ion exerted on the aide of safety, not of riak.
‘ hen I yielded, I thought it we. to duty, but no duty
could be called in aid here. In marrying a man in-
different to me, all rick would have been incurred, and
all duty violated.”

“ Perhaps I ought to have reasoned thus,” he replied,
“ but I could not. I could not derive beneﬁt from the
late knowledge I had acquired of your character. I
could not bring it into play; it wan overwhelmed,
buried, lost in thoee earlier feelingl which I had been
Imarting under year after year. I could think of you
only a: one who had ielded, who had given me up,
who had been inﬂuenc by any one rather than by me.

254, rmuasrou.

Iuwyouwiththe who had guided you in
that year of d no reaoonto believe her of
le- authority now. The fame of habit wan to he
added.”

“I aboqu have thought,” eaid Anne, “ that m
$322,343 younelf might have opened you much or 1

“No, no! your manner might be ml the use
which your engagement to another man w d give. I
left you in (hit belief ; and yet, I wu determined to

ou again. My irita rallied with the momin .
and felt that I had Itlll a motive for remaining here. ’

At laet Anne wan at home again, and happier than
any one in that houee could have conceived. “All lb?
Iurpriee and nae, and eve other inf rt 0
the moming by thi:y convergalion, all: -re-
entered the houee I0 happy as to be obliged to ﬁnd an
alloy in Iome momentary apprehensiona of ita being im-
pouible to Ian. An interval of meditation, Ierioul and
grateful, wan the but corrective of everything dangemua
in auch high-wrought felicity; and the went to her
room, and grew aleadfaet and fear-lea in the thankfulneu
of her enjoyment.

The evening came, the drawing-room were lighted
up, the company assembled. It was but a card party,
it wan but a mixture of thooe who had never met
before, and thoee who met too often: a common-
place buainen, too numerous for intimacy, too email for
variety; but Anne had never found an evening charter.
Glowing and lovely in aenaibility and happiness, and
more generally admired than the thought about or cared
for, the had cheerful or forbearing feeling. for ev
creature around her. Mr Elliot wan there; ahe avoid ,
but she could pity him. The Walliaea, the had amule-
ment in undenranding them. Lady Dalrymple and
Min Carteret—they would soon be innoxioul couainl to

reasussron. 25 5

her. She cared not for Mrs C]: , and had nothing to
blush for in the public manners 0 her father and sister.
With the [MusgrovesJ there was the happy chat of per-
fect ease ; with Capuin Harville, the kind-hearted inter-
course of brother and sister; with Lady Russell, at-
tempts at conversation, which a delicious consciousness
cut short; with Admiral and Mrs Croft, everything of
peculiar cordiality and fervent interest, which the same
consciousness sought to conceal ; and with Captain
Wentworth, some moments of communication continu-
ally occurring, and alwa s the hope of more, and always
the knowledge of his being there.

It was in one of these short meetings, each apparently
occupied in admiring a ﬁne display of greenhouse plants,
that she said——

“ I have been thinking over the past, and trying im-
partially to judge of the right and wrong, I mean with
regard to myself; and I must believe that I was right,
much as I suffered from it, that I was perfectly ri ht in
being guided by the friend whom you will love tter
than you do now. To me, she was in the place of a

renL Do not mistake me, however. I am not say-
ing that she did not err in her advice. It was, perhaps,
one of those uses in which advice is good or had only
as the event decides; and for myself, I certainly nenr
should, in any circumstance of tolerable similarity, give
such advice. But I mean, that I was right in submit-
ting to her, and that if I had done otherwise, I should
luve suffered more in continuing the engagement than I
did even in giving it u , because I’ should have suffered
in my conscience. I sve now, as far as such I senti-
ment is allowable in human nature, nothing to reproach
myself with; and if I mistake not, a strong sense .of
dut is no bad part of a woman’s portion."

e looked at her, looked at Lady Russell, and look-
ing again at her, replied, as if in cool deliberation—

a 56 PRISUASION.

“ Not yet, but there are hope- of her being forgiven
in time. I trout to being in charity with her Joan.
But I too have been drinking over the put, and a quel-
tion ha: lugge‘ed iuelf, whether there may not have
been one penon more my enemy even than that lady?
My own Ielf. Tell me if, when I returned to Eng-
land, in the year eight. with a few thouund pounds,
and we poled into the Laconia, if] had then written
to you, would you have amwered my letter? Would
you, in abort. have renewed the engagement then i"

“ Would I 2” wan all her answer; but the accent
wan decilive enough.

“ Good God! ” he cried, “ you would! It ll not
that I did not think of it, or desire it, no what could
alone crown all my other Iucceu; but I win proud, too
proud to ask again. I did not undemand you. I
that my es. and would not undernand you, or do you
juntice. hit in a recollection, which ought to make
me forgive every one sooner than myself. Six year- of
Ieparation and suffering might have been apared. It in
I tort of in, too, which ll new to me. I have been
med to e gratiﬁcation of believing myaelf to earn
every blessing that I enjoyed. I have valued myself
on honourable toill and rewards. Like other great
men under reveneo," he added, with a unile, " I moat
endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune. I muot
learn to brook being happier than I delerve."

Chapter any.

HO can be in doubt of what followed? When
any two young people take it into their head-
to many, they are pretty lure by persever-

ance to carry their point, be they ever to poor, or ever

PERSUASION. 25 7

so impnrdent, or ever so little likely to be neoeseary to
each other’s ultimate comfort. This ma he laud motility
to conclude with, but I believe it to truth; and if
such parties aueoeed, how should a Captain Wentworth
and an Anne Elliot, with the advantage of maturity
of mind, conscioucness of right, and one independent
fortune between them, fail of bearing down every oppo-
sition? They might, in fact, have borne down a great
deal more than they met with, for there was little to
distress them beyond the want of graciousness and
wanuth. Sir Walter made no objection, and Elizabeth
did nothing worse than look cold and unconcerned. Ca‘p-
tsin Wentworth, with ﬁve-and-twenty thousand poun I,
and u high in his profession as merit and activity could
place him, war no longer nobody. He war now
esteemed quite worthy to address the daughter of a
fooliah, spendthrift baronet, who had not had principle
or Iense enough to maintain hirntelf in the situation in
which Providence had laced him, and who could give
his daughter at present ut a amall part of the share of
ten thousand pounds which must be hen hereafter.
v Sir Walter, indeed, though he had no affection for
Anne, and no vanity ﬂattered, to make him really
' happy on the occasion, was very far from thinking it a
bad match for her. On the contrary, when he saw
more of Captain Wentworth, uw‘him repeatedly b
daylight, and e d him well, he was very much struch
by his person claims, and felt that hit superiority of
appearance might be not unfairly balanced against her
ruperiority of rank; and all this, emitted by his well-
lounding name, enabled Sir Walter, at last, to p re
hil pen, with a very good grace, for the insertion o the
marriage in the volume of honour.

The only one among them whose opposition of feel-
ing could excite any serious anxiety wal Lndy Russell.
Anne knew that Lady Russell must be luﬂ'ering come

:58 PIISUASION.

' in understanding and relinquishing Mr Elliot, and
making tome atrugglee to become tnily acquainted
with, and do juatice to Captain Wentwnrth. Thie,
however, was what Lady Ru-eil had now to do. She
mutt lam to feel that the had been minaken with
regard to both; that the had been unfairly inﬂuenced
by: ceaineach;thatbecauaeCa inWent-
worthamannenhadnot united herown‘ eaa,thehad
been too quick in wept-cling them to indicate a character
of dangerous impetaolity; and that because Mr Elliot’t
manner. had precilely pleued her in their propriety and
correctnett, their general politeneu and luavity, the had
been too quick in receiving them an the certain result of
the most correct opinion: and well-regulated mind.
There wan nothing let: for Lady Ruuell to do, than to
admit that the had been pretty completely wrong. and
totakeupanewaetofo nioneandofhopee.

There in a quickness o perception in come, I nioety
in the diacemment of character, a natural penetration,
in Ihort, which no experience in other! can equal, and
Lady Ruuell had been leu gifted in thin than her young
friend. But the wan a very good woman, and if her
tecond object woe to be tensible and well-judging, her
ﬁrm wan to aee Anne happy. She loved Anne better
than the loved her own abilitiel; and, when the awk-
wardneu of the beginning war over, found little hard-
thip in attaching henelf u a mother to the man who
wan aecuring the happineat of her other child.

Of all the famil , Mary wan probably the one mott
immediately grati ed by the circumnance. It wal
creditable to have a liner married, and the might ﬂaner
henclf with having been gmtly intu'umental to the
cnnnexion, by keeping Anne with her in the autumn r
and as her own litter mutt be better than her humand'l
cistern, it waa very agreeable that Captain Wentworth
Ihould be a richer man than either Captain Benwick or

ansussrorr. 259

Charles Hsyter. She had something to suﬂ'er, perhaps,
when they came into contact again, in seeing Anne
restored to the rights of seniority, and the mistress of a
very pretty landaulette; but she had a future.to look
forward to, of powerful consolation. Anne had no
Uppercross Hall before her, no landed ante, no head-
ship of a family; and if they could but keep Ca tain
Wentwonh from being made a baronet, she woul not
change situations with Anne.

It would be well for the eldest sister if she were
equally satisﬁed with her situation, for a change is not

probable there. She had soon the rnom'lication of
seeing Mr Elliot withdraw, and no one of proper con-
dition has since presented himself to raise even the un-
founded hopes which sunk with him.

The news of his cousin Anne’s engagement bunt on
Mr Elliot most unexpectedly. It deranged his belt

In of domestic happiness, his best hope of keeping
git Walter single by the watchfulnesl which a son-in-
law's rights would have given. But, though discom-
lited and disappointed, he could still do something for
his own interest and his own enjoyment. He soon
quitted Bath; and on Mrs Cla ’s quitting it soon alter-
wards, and being next heard 0 no established under his
protection in London, it was evident how double a

he had been playing, and how determined he was
to save himself from being cut. out by one artful woman,
at least.

Mrs Clay’s affections had overpowered her interest1
and she had ncrilioed, for the young man's sake, the
possibility of scheming longer for Sir Walter. She has
abilities, however, as well as aﬂ'ections; and it is now a
doubtful point whether his cunning, or hers, may ﬁnally
carry the days whether, after preventing her from be-
ing the wife of Sir Walter, he may not be wheedled and.
caressed at last into making her the wife of Sir -

S

260- ensumox.

It cannot be doubted that Sir Welter and Elizabeth
were ahocked and mortiﬁed the loc- of their com-
w, and the diacovery 0 their deception in her.

yhad their great connian he anre,to martin
for comfort ; but they molt long feel that to ﬂatter and
follow othen, without being ﬂattered and followed in
turn, in but a state of half enjoyment.

Anne, anti-lied at a very early iod of Lady
Ruuell’l meaning to love Captain “lazy/01th u the
ought, had no other nlloy to the happine'u of her pro-
Qecta than what am from the conlcnoutneu of having
no rehtiona to heetow on him which I man of acute
could value. There the felt her own inferiority keenly.
The dieproportion in their fortune wan nothing ; it did
not give her a moment't regret; but to have no family
to receive and estimate him roperiy, nothin of reapecb
ability, of harmony, of g will, to offer in return for
all the worth and all the prompt welcome which met
her in hll hrothen and eiuen, win a tource of :u lively
pain at her mind could well be sensible of under circum-
mncee of otherwiee strong felicity. She had but two
friends in the world to add to hll lint, Lady Run-ell and
Mn Smith. To thoae, however, he wu very well
to attach himaelf. Lady Rue-ell, in lpite of
all her former tmnogreuiona, he could now vnlue from
his heart. While he was not obliged to nay that he
believed her to have been right in originally dividing
them, he wa- ready to lay almost everything clue in her
favour, and as for Mn Smith, the had claim- of various
kindt to recommend her quickly and permanently.

Her recent good oﬁicel by Anne had been enough in
themtelvea, and their maniage, inetead of depriving her
of one friend, Iccured her two. She wan their earliett
yieitor in their aettled life, and Captain Wentworth,
putting her in the way of recovering her huahand’a pro-
perty in the West Indies, by writing for her, acting for

PERSUASION. 26x

her, and seeing her through all the pet! diﬁiculliel of
the case with the activity and exertion of}: fearlen man
and a determined friend, fully'requited the Iervicee
which the had rendered, or ever mean: to render, to
his wife.

Mn Smith’s enjoymente were not spoiled by this
improvement of income, with tome improvement of
health, and the acquititiou of such friendl to he often
with, for her cheerfulneu and mental alacrity did not
fail her; and while these prime uuppliee of good re-
mained, she might have bid deﬁance even to greater
accession: of worldly pros erity. She might have been
absolutely rich and perfec y health , and yet be happy.
Her spring of felicity was in the glow of her upiritr, as
her friend Anne’l was in the warmth of her heart.
Anne was tendemeu iteelf, and the had the full worth
of it in Caphin Wentworth’a affection. His profession
Will all that could ever make her friends wilh that
tendemeu his, the dread of a future war all that could
dim her vunahine. She gloried in bein a aailor’l wife,
but Ihe must pay the tax of quick a arm for belong-
ing to that profeuion which is, if possible, more diu-
tinguished in its domestic virtues than in its national
importance.
