T is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single
man in possession of a good fortune must be in
want of a wife.

However little known the feelings or views of such a
man may be on his ﬁrst entering a neighbourhood, this
truth is so well ﬁxed in the minds of the surrounding
families, that he is considered as the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.

“ My dear Mr Bennet," said his lady to him one
:13; have you heard that Nedierﬁeld Park is let at

t

Mr Bennet replied that he had not.

“ But it is,” returned she; “for Mrs Long has just
been here, and she told me all about it.”

Mr Bennet made no answer.

“Do not you want to know who his taken it?"
cried his wife impatiently.

“ Tau Want to tell me, and I have no objection to
hearing it”

This was invitation enough.

" Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs Long says
that Netherﬁeld is taken by a oung man of large
fortune from the north of Eng and; that he came

2 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place,
and was so much delighted with itI that he agreed with
Mr Morris immediately; that he is to take possession
before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
in the house by the end of next wee "

“ What is his name?”

“ Bingley.”

“ Is he married or single ? ”

“Oh! single, my dear, to he sure! A single man
of large fortune; four or ﬁve thousand n-year. What
a ﬁne thing for our girls! ”

“ How so? how can it aﬂect them ?"

“My dear Mr Bennet,” replied his wife, “how can
you be so tiresome! you must know that I am thinking
of his marrying one of them."

“ Is that his design in settling here ? "

“Design! nonsense, how can you talk so! But it
is very likely that he may fall in love with one of them,
and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes."

“ I see no occasion for that You and the girls may
go, or you may send them by themselves, which per-
haps will be still better, for as you are as handsome as
any ogthem, Mr Bingley might like you the heat of the

“ My dear, you ﬂatter me. I certainly 5m had my
share of beauty, hutI do not pretend to be anything
extraordinary now. When a woman has ﬁve grown-up
daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own
heaut .”

“ n such cases, a woman has not often much beauty
to think of.”

“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr
Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.”

“ It is more than I engage for, I assure you.”

“But consider your daughters. Only think what
an establishment it would be for one of them. Sir

PRIDE AND PREIUDICE. 3

William and Lady Lucas are detennined to go,
merely on that account, for in general, you know,
they visit no new-comers. Indeed you must go, for
it will be impossible for u: to visit him if you do not.”

“You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr

Bingle will be very glad to see you; and I will send
a few ines by you to assure him of my hearty consent
to his marrying whichever he chum of the girls:
though I must throw in a good word for my little
Lizzy.”
“ desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is
not a bit better than the others; and I am sure she
is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-
humouled as Lydia. But you are always giving Err
the preference."

“ They have none of them much to recommend
them," replied he; " they are all silly and ignorant,
like other girls; but Lizzie has something more of
quickness than her sisters."

“ Mr Bennet, how can you abuse your own children
in such a way ! You take delight in vexing me. You
have no compassion on my poor nerves."

“ You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect
for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have
heard you mention them with consideration these twenty
years at least.”

“ Ah ! you do not know what I suﬁ‘er.”

“But I hope you will get over igmdhvetosee
many young men of four thousand s-year come into the
neighbourhood."

“ It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come,
since you will not visit them."

“D d upon it, my deer, that when there are
twenty, will visit them all.”

Mr Bennet was so odd amixture of quick parts,
sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experi-

4 PRIDE AND PRBIUDICE.

ence of threeqnd-twenty yarn had been inlnﬂicien: to
make hi- wil'e under-mod his character. Her-mind wan
leudiﬂicnltlode Shewuawonnnof
“demanding, little in ormation, and uncertain temper.
When the was dilcommted, Ihe Ended henelf nervous.
Thehidne-ofherlifewuwgetherdaughmenmarried;
iu Iolaoe was visiting and news.

than": ‘3'].

R BENNET was among the earlim of Lhoae
who waited on Mr Bingley. He had alway-
intended to visit him, though In the In :1ny

auuringhilwifelhaxheehouldnotgo;andtillthe
evening after the vidtwu ' Ihe had no knowledge
of it. I! w lhen dinclo in the following manner :—
Ohserving his Iecond daughter employed in trimming I
hat, he suddenly addruned her with,

“ I hope Mr Bingley will like it, Lizzy."

" We are not in a way to know what Mr Bingley
likes,” hid her mother ruentﬁnlly, “time we are not
Io vilit."

“But. you forget, mamma,” said Eliubcth, “that
we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that. Mn Long
has [ammin to introduce him."

“I donot believe Mn Long will do anymchthing.
Shehaatwonicceiofherown. Sheiranelﬁah,
hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her."

“No more have I,”nid Mr Bennet; “and I am
gladwﬁnddmyondonotdependonheruving
will: Bennet deigncd not to make any reply, but,
unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her
daughters.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 5

“Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven’s
sake! Haven little compassion on my nerves. You
tear them to pieces.”

“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her
father; “ she times them ill."

“ I do not cough for my own amusement,” reylied
Kitty frett'ully. “When is your next ball to be,
Lizzy ? "

“ To-morrow fortnight.”

“Ay, so it is," cried her mother, “and Mrs Long
does not come back till the day before; so it will be im-

ssihle for her to introduce him, for she will not know

im herself.”

“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of
your friend,and introduce Mr Bingley to her."

“Impossible, Mr Bennet, impossible, when I am not
acquainted with him myself; how can you be so
teazing P ”

“I honour your circumspection. A fortnight’s IC—
quaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know
what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if
we do not venture somebody else will; and after all,
'Mrs Long and her nieces must stand their chance;
and, therefore, as she will think it. an act of kindness, if
you decline the ofﬁce, I will take it on myself."

The girls stared at their father. Mrs Bennet said
only, “ Nonsense, nonsense! "

“ What can be the meaning of that. emphatic excla-
mation?" cried he. “ Do you consider the forms of
introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as non-
sense? I cannot uite agree with you (but. What
my u, Ma 2 or ou are a ung lad ofd
reﬂecyti’on, I 210W, and read greaytobooks aynd mack:
extracts."

Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew
not how.

6 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ While Mary is adjusting her ideas,” he continued,
“ let us return to Mr Bingley."

“ I am sick of Mr Bingley," cried his wife.

“I am sorry to hear that ,- but why did not you tell
me so before? If I had known as much this morning
I certainly would not. have called on him. It is very
unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we can-
not escape the acquaintance now."

The astonishment of the ladies was just what he
wished; that of Mrs Bennet perhaps surpassing the
rest; though, when the ﬁrst tumult of joy was over,
she began to declare that it was what she expected all
the while.

“How good it was in you, my dear Mr Bennet!
But I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sure
you loved your girls too well to neglect such an ac-
quaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is sucha
good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning
and never mid a word about it till now.”

“ Now, Kit! , on may cough as much as you
chuse," said MI ll’ennet; and, as he spoke, he left
the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.

“ What an excellent father you have, girls! ” said
she, when the door was shut. “I do not know how
you will ever make him amends for his kindness ; or me
either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so
pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance
every day; but for your sakes, we would do anything.
L dia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say

r Bingley will dance with you at the next ball,”

“Oh!” said Lydia stoutly, “I am not afraid; for
though I am the youngest, I’m the tallest.”

The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how
soon he would return Mr Bennet’s visit, and determining
when they should ask him to dinner.

 

Mp1

riune sun PREJUDICE. 7

Chapter 13].

OT all that Mrs Bennet, however, with the
assistance of her live daughters, could ask on
the subject, was suﬂicient to draw from her

husband any satisfactory description of Mr Bingley.
They attacked him in various ways—with barefaned
questions, ingenious su positions, and distant surmises;
but he eluded the Ikil of them all, and the were at
last obliged to acce t the second-hand intel igence of
their neighbour, L y Lucas. Her report was highly
favourable. Sir William had been delighted with him.
He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at
the next assembly with a large party. Nothing could
be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a

in me towards falling in love; and very lively
hopes of r Bingley’s heart were entertained.

“ If I can but see one of my daughters ha pily settled
at Netherﬁeld," said Mrs Bennet to her hus d, "and
all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing
to wish for.” -

In a few daya Mr Bingley retumed Mr Bennet’s
visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library.
He hadlentertained hopes of being admitted to a sight
of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were
somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of
ascertaining from an upper window that he wore a blue
coat, and rode a black horse.

An invitaan to dinner was soon afterwards dis-
patched; and already had Mrs Bennet planned the
courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when
an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr Bingley
was obliged to be in town the following day, and, con-

8 PRIDE AND Pnnjumcs‘.

sequently, unable to accept the honour of . their invita-
tion, ate. Mrs Bennet was quite disconcerted. She
could not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began
to fear that he might be always ﬂying about from one
place to another, and never settled at Netherﬁeld as he
ought to be. Lad Lucas quieted her fears a little by
starting the idea 0 his being gone to London only to
get a large part for the ball ; and a report soon followed,
that Mr Bing ey was to bring twelve ladies and seven
gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved
over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he
had brought only six with him from London,—h.is ﬁve
sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the
assembly room it consisted only of ﬁve all together,-—Mr
Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
another young man.

Mr Bingley was good-looking and gendemanlike; he
had a pleamnt countenance, and easy, unaﬁ‘ected manners.
His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided
fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr Hurst, merely looked
the gentleman; but his friend Mr Darcy soon drew the
attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome
features, noble mien, and the report which was in general
circulation within ﬁve minutes after his entrance, of his
having ten thousand 3-year. The gentlemen pronounced
him to be a ﬁne ﬁgure of a man, the ladies declared he
was much handsomer than Mr Bingley, and he was
looked at with great. admiration for about half the
evenin , till his manners gave a disgust which turned the
tide 0 his popularity ; for he was discovered to be
proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased;
and not all his large estate in Derbyshire could then
save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable
countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with
his friend.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 9

Mr Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with
all the principal people in the room; he was lively and
unreserved, need every dance, was angry that the ball
closed so early, and talked of iving one himself at
Netherlield. Such amiable q ities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his
friend ! Mr Darcy danced only once with Mrs Hurst
and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced
to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, king occasionally to one
of his own party. His c aracter was decided. He
was the mudest, most disagreeable man in the world,

and eve dy hoped that he would never come there
again. Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs

ennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was
sharpened into particular resentment by his having
sligth one of her daughters.

Eliubeth Bennet had been obliEd, by the scarcity
of gentlemen, to sit down for two noes, and during
part of that time, Mr Darcy had been standing near
enou h for her to overhear a convemtion between him
and r Bingley, who came from the dance for a few
minutes, to press his friend to join it.

“ Come, Darcy,” said he, “ I must have you
dance. I hate to see you standing about by our-
self in this stupid manner. You had much tier
dance.”

“ I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it,
unless I am particularly acquainted with my pamer. At
such an assembly as this it would be insupportable.
Your listen are engaged, and there is not another woman
in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me
to stand up with.”

“ I would not be so fastidious as you are,” cried
Bingley, “ for a kingdom! Upon my honour, I never
met with so many pleasant girls in my life as I have

I. n

! 0 PRIDE AND PREIUDICIL

this evening; and there are several of them you see
uncommonly pretty.”

"Tau are dancin with the only handsome girl in
the room," said Mr ﬁlmy, looking at the eldest Miss
Bennet.

“Oh! she is the most beautiful creature I ever
beheld! But there is one of her sisters sitting down
just behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare say very
agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce

u.

“ Which do you mean?” and turning round he
looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye,
he withdrew his own and coldly said, “ She is tolerable,
but not handsome enough to tempt m: ,- and I am in no
humour at present to give consequence to young ladies
who are slighted by other men. You had better return
to your partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting
your time with me.”

Mr Bingley followed his advice. Mr Darcy walked
oﬂ' ; and Elizabeth remained with no very cordial
feelings towards him. She told the story, however,
with great irit among her friends; for she had a
lively, play disposition, which delighted in anything
ridiculous.

The evening altogther passed 05 pleasantly to the
whole family. Mrs ennet had seen her eldest daughter
much admired by the Netherlield party. Mr Bingley
had danced with her twice, and she had been distin-
guished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratiﬁed by
this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way.
Elizabeth felt Jane’s leasure. Mary had heard herself
mentioned to Miss Eingley as the most accomplished
girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia
had been fortunate enough to be never without partners,
which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a
ball. They returned, therefore, in good spirits to Long-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I!

bourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr Bennet
still up. With a book he was regardless of time; and
on the resent occasion he had a good deal of curioeity
as to e event of an evening which had raised such
Inlandid expectations. He had rather hoped that all
his wife’s views on the stranger would be disappointed;
but he soon found that he had a verydiﬁerent story to hear.

“ Oh! my dear Mr Bennet,” as she entered the
room, “ we have had a most delightful evening, a most
excellent ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was
so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said
how well she looked; and Mr Bingley thought her
quite beautiful, and danced with her twice! Only
think of that, my dear; he actually danced with her
twice! and she was the only creature in the room that
he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Misc
Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her!
but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed,
nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck
with one as she was going down the dance. So he
inquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked
her for the two next. Then the two third he danced
with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas,
and the two ﬁfth with Jane again, and the two sixth
with Lizzie and the Boulanger."

“ If he had had any compassion for me," cried her
husband impatiently, “ he would not have danced half
so much! For God’s sake, say no more of his

rtnere. O that he had sprained his ankle in the
mt dance I ”

“Oh! my dear,” continued Mrs Bennet, "I am
quite delighted with him. He is so excessively hand-
some! and his sisters are charming women. I never
in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses.
I dare my the lace upon Mrs Hurst's gown —- "

H PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE

Here the wan interrupted again. Mr Bennet pro-
tected againtt any description of ﬁnery. She wan there-
fore obliged to neck another branch of the subject,
and related, with much bitterness of irit and come
exag elation, the Ihocking mdeneu of r Darcy.

“ ut I can insure you," she added, “that Lizzie
doe: not lose much by not suiting bi: fancy; for he in
a moat diuagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth
pleasing. So high and so conceited that there wan no
enduring him! He walked here, and he walked there,
fancying himself so very great! Not handaome enough
to dance with! I with you had been there, or dmr,
to have given him one of your net-downs. {quite
detest the man."

chapter 317.

HEN Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the
former, who had been cautious in her purine
of Mr Bingley before, expreued to her sitter

how very much the admired him.

“He in 'uat what a young man ought to be," laid
Ihe, “tenable, good-humoured, lively; and I never
saw such hagpy manneril—so much care, with Inch
perfect good- reeding! ”

“ He is alto handsome,” replied Elizabeth, “ which
a young man ought likewisa to be, if he possibly can.
Hu character is thereby complete.”

“I was very much ﬂattered by hi: asking me to
dance a aecond time. I did not expect nuch a
compliment.”

“Did not you? I did for you. But that in one
great difference between us. Com liments always take
you by aurprize, and In: never. hat could be more

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 13

natural than his asking you again? He could not help
seeing that you were about ﬁve times as pretty as every 1
other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallan

for that. Well, he certainly is very agreeable, and
give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
stupider person."

“ Dear Lizzy 1 ”

“Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to
like people in general. You never see a fault in any-
body. All the world are good and agreeable in your
eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in
my life."

“I would wish not to be hasty in oensuring any
one; but I always speak what I think.”

“ I know you do; and it is that which makes the
Wonder. With your good sense, to be so honestly
blind to the follies and nonsense of othersl Affecta-
tion of candour is common enough—one meets it
eve here. But to be candid without ostentation
or esign—to take the good of everybody’s character
and make it still better, and say nothing of the bad—-
belongs to you alone. And so you like this man’s
sisters, too, do you? Their manners are not equal to
his.

“ Certainly not—at ﬁrst. But they are very pleas-
ing women when you converse with them. Miss
Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his
house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not ﬁnd
a very charming neighbour in her."

Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced 3
their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated
to please in general; and with more quickness of
observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,
and with I judgment too unassailed by any attention
to herself, she was very linle disposed to approve
them. They were in fact very ﬁne ladies; not

l4 PRIDE AND PREJUDICF.

deﬁcient in good humour when they were pleased,
nor in the power of being agreeable when they Chose
it, but roud and conceited. They were rather hand-
some, had been educated in one of the ﬁrst private
seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they
ought, and of associating with people of rank, and
Were therefore in every respect entitled to think well
of themselves, and meanly of others. They were
of a respectable family in the north of England; a
circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories
than that their brothers fortune and their own had
been ac uired by trade.

Mr iingley inherited property to the amount of
nearly an hundred thousand pounds from his father,
who had intended to urchase an estate, but did not
live to do it. Mr Brngley intended it likewise. and
sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was
now provided with a good house and the liberty of
s manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best
knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not
spend the remainder of his days at. Netherﬁeld, and
leave the next generation to purchase.

His sisters were very anxious for his having an
estate of his own; but, though he was now established
onl as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no means un-
wil ing to preside at his table—nor was Mrs Hurst,
who had married a man of more fashion than fortune,
less disposed to consider his house as her home when
it suited her. Mr Bingley had not been of age two
years, when he was tem ted by an accidental recom-
mendation to look at etherﬁeld House. He did
look at it, and into it for half-an-hour—was pleased
with the situation and the principal rooms, satisﬁed
with what the owner said in its praise, and took it
immediately.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICF. 15

Between him and Darcy there was a ve steady
friendship, in spite of great o sition of c cter.
Bingley was endeared w Darcy y the easineas, open-
ness, and ductility of his temper, though no dispoution
could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though
with his own he never appeared dissatieﬁed. On the
Itrength of Darcy’l regard, Bingley had the limes!
reliance, and of hia judgment the highee't o inion. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. Iiiingley was
by no means deﬁcient, but Darcy was clever. He
was at the came time haught , reserved, and fastidious,
and his mannerc, though wed-bred, were not inviting.
In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage.
Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared,
Darcy was continually giving offence.

The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton
assembly wae unﬁiciently characteristic. Bingley had
never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in
his life; everybod had been most kind and attentive
to him; there ha been no formality, no ltilfness; he
had noon felt acquainted with all the room; and u
to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen
a collection of people in whom then was little beauty
and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the
nnallent interest, and from none received either atten-
tion or pleasure. Miss Benuet he acknowledged to
be retty, but the smiled too much.

u Hurst and her aimr allowed it to be so—but
still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced
her to be a sweet girl, and one whom they ahould not
object to know more of. Miss Bennet wan therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt
authorised by such commendation to think of her a
he chose.

16 PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE'.

Cbsptt: 17.

ITHIN a short walk of Longbourn lived a
family with whom the Bennets were par-
ticularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had

been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he had
made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour
of kni hthood by an addreu to the king, during his
mayora ty. The distinction had perhaps been felt
too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his
business, and to his residence in a small market town ;
and, quitting them both, he had removed with his
family to a house about a mile from Meryton, de-
nominated from that period Lucas Lodge, where he
could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,
unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being
civil to all the world. For, though elated by his
rank, it did not render him supercilions; on the
contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By
nature moffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation
at St. James' had made him courteous.

Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not
too clever to be a valuable neiglhbour to Mrs Bonnet.
They had several children. he eldest of them, a
sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven,
was Elizabeth’s intimate friend.

That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Benncts should
meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary 3 and
the morning after the assembly brought the former to
Longboum to hear and to communicate.

“ Tau began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs
Bennet with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. “ Tau
were Mr Binglcy’s ﬁrst choice."

“ Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.”

“ Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [7

with her twice. To be sure that M seem as if he
admired her—indeed I rather believe he (id—I heard
something about it—but I hardly know what—some-
thing about Mr Robinson.”

“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him
and Mr Robinson; did not I mention it to you? Mr
Robinson’s asking him how he liked our Meryton
asoemblies, and whether he did not think there were a
great many pretty women in the room, and which he
thought the prettiest? and his answering immediately
to the loot question—‘Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that
pomL’ "

“ Upon my wordl—Well, that was very decided
indeed—that does seem as if but, however, it may
all come to nothing, you know."

“My overhearings wen more to the purpose than

I, Eliza,” said Charlotte. “Mr Darcy is not so
well worth listening to as his friend, is he l—Poor
Eliu !-——t.o be only ust talent/t.”

“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy’s head to
be vexed by his ill-treatment, for he is such I disagree-
nhle man, that it would be quite n misfortune to be
liked by him. Mrs Long told me last night that he
sat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening
his lips."

“Are you quite sure, ma’am l—is not there a little
mistakel’ said Jane. “I certainly saw Mr Darcy
speaking to her.”

“Ay—because she asked him at last how he liked
Netherﬁeld, and he could not help answering her; but
she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to.”

" Miss Bingley told me,” said Jane. “ that he never
Wak‘ much, unless among his intimate acquaintance.

ith than he is remarkably agreeable.”

“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he

 

 

18 mini: AND Pnsjumcs.

had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to
Mrs Long. But I can guess how it was; everybody
says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
heard somehow that Mrs Long does not keep a car-
riage, and had come to the ball in a hack chaise.”

“I do not mind his not talking to Mn Lon ” said
Miss Lucas, “but I wish he had danced with lint.”

“Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, “I would
not dance with Iain, if I were you.”

“ I believe, ma’am, I may safely promise you never
to dance with him."

“ His pride," said Miss Lucas, “does not offend In:
so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse
for it. One cannot wonder that so very ﬁne a young
man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
should think highly of himself. If I maon express
it, he has n rigb/ m be pron .”

“That is very true," replied Elizabeth, “ and I
could easily forgive bi: pride, if he had not mortiﬁed
mine."

“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon
the solidity of her reﬂections, “is a very common
failing, I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am
convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are
very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self-
complacency on the score of some quality or the other,
real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymoual .
A person may be proud without being vain. Pri
relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what
we would have others think of us.”

“ If I were as rich as Mr Darcy," cried a young
Lucasrwho came with his sisters, “I should not care
how roud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhonnds,
and rink a bottle of wine every day."

PRIDE AND PREJVDICE. 19

“Then you would drink a great deal more than you
on ht,” said Mrs Bennet; “ and if I were to see you
at it, I should take away your bottle directly.”

The boy protested that she should not; the con—
tinued to declare that she would, and the argument
ended only with the visit.

chaottr H].

HE ladies of Longboum soon waited on those
of Netherﬁeld. The visit was retumed in due
form. Miss Bennet’s pleasing manners grew

on the goodwill of Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley; and
though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the
younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being
better acquainted with than was expressed towards the
two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with
the greatest pleasure; but Elizabeth still saw super-
ciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly
excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a
value as arising in all probability from the inﬂuence of
their brother's admiration. It was generally evident
whenever they met, that he did admire her; and to ber
it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the
reference which she had begun to entertain for him
mm the first, and was in a way to be very much in
love; but she considered with p easure that it was not
likely to be discovered by the world in general, since
Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure
of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of manner which
would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent.
She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.
“It may perhaps be pleaunt," replied Charlotte,

10 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“to be able to impose on the public in such a cue;
but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very
guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the
same skill from the object of it, she may lose the
opportunity of ﬁxing him; and it will then be but J13m
consolation to believe the world equally in the k.
There is so much of gmtitudc or vanity in almost :3?
attachment, that it is not. safe to leave any to i .
We can all begin freely—a slight preference is natural
enough: but there are very few of us who have hart
enough to be really in love without encouragement.
In nine cases out. of ten a woman had better show more
sﬁ'ection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister, un-
doubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if
she does not help him on."

“ But she does help him on, 3| much as her nature
will allow. If I can erceive her regard for him, he
must be a simpleton, in eed, not to discover it too."

“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane’s
disposition as you do."

" But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not
endeavour to conceal it, he must ﬁnd it out."

“Perha s he must, if he sees enough of her. But,
though Bingley and Jane meet tolerany often, it is
never for many hours together; and as they always
see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible
that every moment should be employed in conversing
together. Jane should therefom make the most of
every half-hour in which she can command his atten-
tion. When she is secure of him, there will be leisure
for falling in love as much as she chooses.”

“Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth,
“ where nothing is in question but the desire of being
well married; and if I were determined to get a rich
husband, or any husband, I dare my I should adopt it.
But these are not Jane’s feelings; she is not acting by

PRIDE AND PREJUDICF. 2!

design. As yet, she cannot even be certain of the
degree of her own regard, nor of its reasonableness.
She has known him on] a fortnight. She danced
four dances with him at eryton; she saw him one
morning at his own house, and has since dined in
company with him four times. This is not quite
enou h to make her understand his character."

“ at as you represent it. Had she merely ﬁnd
with him, she might only have discovered whether he
had a good appetite; but you must remember that four
evenings have been also spent together—and {our
evenings may do a great deal.”

“Yes; these four evenin I have enabled them to
ascertain that they both like \Fingt-un better than Com-
merce; but with respect to any other leading charac-
teristic, I do not. ima 'ne that much has been unfold .”

“ Well," said Charﬁlotte, “ I wish Jane success with all
my heart; and if she were married to him to-morrow.
I should think she had as good a chance of happiness as
if she were to be studying his character for a twelve-
month. Hap iness in marriage is entirely a matter of
chance. If e dispositions of the parties are ever so
well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand,
it does not advance their felicity in the least. They
always continue to grow sufﬁciently unlike aﬂerwards to
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know
as little as possible of the defects of the person with
whom you are to pass your life.”

“ You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound.
You know it is not sound, and that you would never
act in this wa yourself."

Occupied in observing Mr Bingley’s attentions to
her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she
was herself becoming an ob'ect of some interest in the
eyes of his friend. Mr arcy had at ﬁrst scarcely
a lowed her to be pretty ; he had looked at her without

ﬂ PRIDE AND HINDICL

admiration at the ball; and when they next met.he
looked at her only to criticise. But no sooner had he
made it clnr to himself and his friends that she had
hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find
it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the handful
expression of her dark eyes. To this dincovery uccoeded
some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected
with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect
symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge
her ﬁgure to be light and plasing; and in spite of his
asserting that her manners were not those of the fashion-
able world, he was caught by their easy playfulness.
Of this she was perfectly unaware ;—to her he was
only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and
who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with.

He began to wish to know more of her, and as a
step towards conversing with her himself, attended to
her conversation with others. His doing so drew her
notice. It was at Sir William Lucas’s, where a large
party were assembled.

“ What does Mr Darcy mean,” raid the to Charlotte,
“ by listening to my convemtion with Colonel Forster l ”

" That in a question which Mr Darcy only can
answer."

“ But if he does it any more I shall cemiinly let him
know that I see what he is about. He has a very
satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent
myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him."

On his approaching them soon afterwards, though
without seeming to have any intention of speaking, Miss
Lucas deﬁed her friend to mention such a subject to
him ; which immediately Irovoking Eliubeth to do it,
she turned to him and sai —

" Did not you think, Mr Darcy. that I expressed
myself uncommonly well now, when I was teasing
Colonel Fomer to give us a ball at Meryton I"

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 23

" With great energy ;-—but it is a subject which
alwa s makes a lady energetic."

“h’ou are severe on us."

“ It will be bar turn soon to be teased," said Miss
Lucas. " I am going to open the instrument, and you
know what follows."

" You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!
—always wanting me to play and sing before anybody
and everybodyl If my vanity had taken a musical
turn, ou would have been invaluable; but as it is, I
would, really rather not sit down before those who must
be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.”
0n Miss Lucas’s persevering, however, she added,
" Very well; if it must be so, it must.” And gravely
glancing at Mr Darcy, “ There is a ﬁne old as ing,
which everybody here is of course familiar with—‘ 12
you breath to cool your porridge,’—and I shall keep
mine to swell my song."

Her performance was pleasing, though by no means
capital. After a song or two, and before she could
reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing
again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instnlment by
her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being
the only plain one in the family, worked hard for know-
ledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for

dilpllay.

ary had neither genius nor taste; and though
vanity had given her application, it had given her like-
wise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would
have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had
reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been
listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing
half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto,
was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch
and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters,
who, with some of the Lucases, and two or three

24 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

ofﬁcers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the
room.

Mr Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at
Inch a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of
all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his
thoughts to erceive that Sir William Lucas was his
neighbour, til Sir William thus began,

“ What a charming amusement for young people this
is, Mr Darcy! There is nothing like dancing after
all. I consider it as one of the first reﬁnements of
polished societies."

“ Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of
being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of
the world. Every savage can dance.”

Sir William only smiled. " Your friend performs
delightfully," he continued after a pause, on seeing
Bingley join the grou ;—-“ and I doubt not that you
are an adept in the scrence yourself, Mr Darc .”

“You saw me dance at Merymn, believe,
sir."

“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure
from the sight. Do you often dance at St James's? "

“ Never, sir.”

“ Do you not think it would be a proper compliment
to the place i "

“ It is a compliment which I never pay to any place
if I can avoid it."

“ You have a house in town, I conclude?”

Mr Darcy bowed.

“ I had once some thoughts of ﬁxing in town myself
—for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel
quite certain that the air of London would agree with
Lad Lucas.”

e paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion
was not diposed to make any; and Eliubeth at that
instant moving towards them, he was struck with the

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 25

notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
her—

" My dear Miss Eliza, why are not you dancing ?—
Mr Darcy, you must allow me to preterit this young
lady to you as a very desirable partner. You cannot
refuse to dance, I am sure, when so much beauty is
before you." And, taking her hand, he would have
given it to Mr Darcy, who, though extremely surprized,
was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantl
drew back, and said with some discompolure to Sir
William—

" Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of danc-
ing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this
wa in order to beg for a partner.”

r Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be
allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain. Eliubeth
was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her

b his attem t at ersuasion.
Pullingu {xcel so niJuCh the dance, Miss Eliza, that
it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you ; and
though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general,
he can have no objection,] am sure, to oblige us for
one half-hour.”

“ Mr Darcy is all politeness," said Eliubeth, smiling.

“ He is indeed; but considering the inducement, my
dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonder at his complainance
—for who would object to such a partner ? "

Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her
resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and
he was thinking of her with some complacency. when
thus accosted by Miss Bingley—

“ I can ucss the subject of your reverie.”

" I Ihou d imagine not.”

“ You are considering how insupponable it would be
:npans many evenings in this manner—in such society ;

- indeed I am quite of your opinion. I was never

I. C

:6 Hum: AND PREJUDICL

more annoyed! The inripidity, and yet the noise—
the nothingness, and et the self-importance of all these
peoplel What we d I give to hear your stricture. on
them ! "

“ Yonr conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My
mind was more agreeabl engaged. I have been meditr
atiug on the very great p easure which a pair of line eyes
in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”

Miss Bingley immediately ﬁxed her eyes on his face,
and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit
of inspiring such reﬂections. Mr Darcy replied with
great in idity——-

“ Miss liubeth Bennet.”

" Miss Elizabeth Bennet! ” repeated Miss Bingley.
“I am all astonishment. How long has she been such
a favourite ?—and pray, when am I to wish you joy ? "

“ That is exactly the question which I expected you
to ask. A lady’s imagination is very rapid; it jumps
from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a
moment. I knew you would he wishing me joy.’ ’

“ Nay, if you are so serious about it, I shall consider
the matter as absolutely settled. You will have a
charming mother-in—law, indeed; and, of course, she
will be always at Pemberley with you."

He listened to her with rfect indiﬁ‘erence while
she chose to entertain hersel in this manner; and as
his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit
ﬂowed long.

¢hlpttr 1733.

R BENNET’S property consisted almost on-
tirely in an estate of two thousand a-year,
which, unfortunately for his daughters, was

entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; ~

PRIDE AND PREJUDICB. 27

and their mother's fortune, thou h ample for her
situation in life, could but ill suppfy the deﬁciency of
his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
had left: her four thousand pounds.

She had a sister married to a Mr Philips, who had
been a clerk to their father and suoceeded him in the
budness, and a brother settled in London in a respect-
able line of trade.

The village of Longhoum was only one mile from
Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young
ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four
times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a
milliner’s shop 'ust over the way. The two youngest
of the family, atherine and Lydia, were particularly
frequent in these attentions; their minds were more
vacant than their sisters’, and when nothing better
otf'ered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse
their morning hours and furnish conversation for the
evenin ; and however bare of news the country in

nenfmight be, they always contrived to leam some

rorn their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well
supplied both with news and happiness by the recent
amval of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it
was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
had-quarters.

Their visits to Mrs Philips were now productive of
the most interesting intelligence. Every day added
something to their knowledge of the oﬂicers’ names and
connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length they began to know the officers them-
selves. Mr Philips visited them all, and this opened to
his nieces a source of felicity unknown before. They
could talk of nothing but ofﬁcers; and Mr Bingley s
large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to
their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed
to the regimental! of an ensign.

28 PRIDE Arm summon.

After listening one morning to their eﬂ'usions on this
subject. Mr Bonnet coolly observed—

“ From all that I can collect by ur manner of
talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the
country. I have suspected it some time, but I am now
convinced.”

Catherine was disooncened, and made no answer;
but Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to ex-
press her admiration of Ca‘ptain Caner, and her hope of
seeing him in the course 0 the day,as he was going the
next morning to London.

“I am astonished, my dear,’ ’ uid Mrs Bennet, “that
you should be so ready to think your own children silly.
If I wished to think Ilightingly of anybody’s children,
it should not he of my own, however.”

“ If my chilan are silly, I must hope to be always
sensible of it."

“Yes—but as it happens, they are all of them very
clever."

“ This is the only point, I ﬂatter myself, on which
we do not agree. I had hoped that our sentiments
coincided in every particular, but I must so far dilfer
from you as to think our two youngest daughters un-
commonly foolish.”

“My dear Mr Bennet, you must not expect such
girls to have the sense of their father and mother.
When they get to our age, I dare say they will not
think about otlicers any more than we do. I remember
the time when I liked a red coat myself very well—
and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart
young colonel, with live or six thousand a-year, should
want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I
thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the
other night at Sir William’s in his regimentals.”

“ Mamma," cried Lydia, “ my aunt says that Colonel
Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Miss

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 29

Watson's as they did when they ﬁrst came; she sees
them now very often standing in Clarke’s library."

Mrs Bennet was prevented r lying by the entrance
of the footman with a note for cKline Bennet; it came
from Netherlield, and the servant waited for an answer.
Mrs Bennct’s eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was
eager‘ly calling out, while her daughter read-—

“ ell, Jane, who is it from? what is it about?
what does he say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell
us: make haste, my love.”

" It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read
it aloud.

“ MY om FRIBHDr—

“ If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day
with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating
each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day’s
lite-34?” between two women can never end without
a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of
this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with
the oﬂicem—Yours ever, Cancun: BINGLEY."

“ With the ofﬁcers! ” cried Lydia. “ I wonder my
aunt did not tell us of 11m."

“ Dining out,” said Mrs Bennet, “ that is very
unlucky.”

“ Can I have the carriage ? ” said Jane.

“ No, my dear, ou had better go on horseback,
because it seems likely to rain ; and then you must stay
all ni ht."

“ hat would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth,
“ if you were sure that they would not offer to send her
home.”

“ Oh ! but the gentlemen will have Mr Dingley’s
chaise to go to Meryton; and the Hunts have no
horses to theirs.”

“ I had much rather go in the coach."

3° PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

“ But. my dear, your father cannot spare the lumen,
I am sure. They are wanted in the farm, Mr Bennet,
are not they I ”

“They are wanted in the farm much oﬁenerthanl
can get them.”

“But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth,
“ my mother's purpose will be answered.”

She did at last extort from her father an acknowledg-
ment that. the horses were engaged; Jane was therefore
obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her
to the door with many cheerful prognostic. of I bad
day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been
gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were un-
easy for her, but her mother was delighted. The rain
continued the whole evening without intermission ; Jane
certainly could not come back.

“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed! " said Mrs
Bennet more than once, as if the credit of making it
rain were all her own. Till the next morning, however,
she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance.
Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Nether-
ﬁeld brought the following note for Elizabeth :—

“Mv DEAKBT LIZZY,—

“I ﬁnd myself very unwell this morning, which,
I suppose, is to be im uted to my getting wet through
csterday. My kind riends will not hear of my retum—
mg home till I am better. They insist also on my
seeing Mr Jones—therefore do not be alarmed if you
should hear of his having been to me—and, excepting
a sore-throat and headache, there is not much the matter
with me.—Yours, ate.”

“ Well, my dear,” said Mr Bennet1 when Elizabeth
had read the note aloud, “ if your daughter should have
it dangerous ﬁt of illness—if she should die, it would be

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 31

a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Mr
Bingle , and under your orders.”

“Oh! I am not at all afraid of her dyinp. People
do not die of little triﬂing colds. She wil be taken
good care of. As long as she eta s there, it is all very
well. I would go and see her if could have the car-
ria e.”

Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to
go to her, though the carriage was not to be had ; and
as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only
alternative. She declared her resolution.

“ How can you be so silly," cried her mother, “ as
to think of Inch a thing, in all this dirt! You will not
be {it to be seen when on get there.”

“I shall be very t to see Jane—which is all I
want."

“ Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said her father, “ to
send for the horses?”

“No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk.
The distance is nothing when one has a motive; only
three miles. I shall be back by dinner.”

“I admire the activity of your benevolence,”
observed Mary, “ but every impulse of feeling should
be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion
should always be in proportion to what is required.”

“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said
Catherine and Lydia. Elizabeth accepted their com-
pany, and the three young ladies set off together.

“If we make haste,’ said Lydia, as the’y walked
along, “perhaps we may see something 0 Captain
Carter before he goes."

In Me ton they arted; the two youngest 'red
to the lordgings ofpone of the ofﬁcer’s wivlegmand
Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing ﬁeld after
ﬁeld at a quick pace, jumping over stile: and springing
over puddles with impatient activity, and ﬁnding herself

32 PRIDE AND PREMICL

at last within view of the house, with weary anclee,
dirty nockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of
exercise.

She was shown into the breakfastpparlour, where all but
ane were assembled, and where her appearance coated
s grat dnl of surprise. That she should have walked
three miles so early in the day, in such dirty weather,
and herself, was almost incredible to Mrs Hunt and
Miss ingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they
held her in contempt for it. She was received. how-
ever, very politely by them ; and in their brother's
manners there was something better than lireness;
there was good humour and kindness. Mr SB): said
very little, and Mr Hurst nothing at all. The ormer
was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which
exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to
the occasion’s justifying her coming so far alone. The
latter was thinking only of his breakfast.

Her inquiries after her sister were not very favour-
sny answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though
up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her
room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immedi-
ately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the
fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing
in her note how much she longed for such a wait, was
delighted at her entrance. She was not e ual, how-
ever, to much conversation, and when Miss ingley left
them together, could attempt little beside expressions
of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was
treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her.

When breakfast was over they were joined by the
sisters; and Elizabeth began to like them herself, when
she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed
for Jane. The apmhecary came, and having examined
his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had
caught a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to

rnmz nun PREJUDICE 33

get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and
promised her some draughts. The advice was followed
readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her
head ached acutely. Eliubeth did not quit her room
for a moment, nor were the other ladies often absent:
the entlcmen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to
do e sewhere.

When the clock stmck three, Elizabeth felt that she
must go, and very unwillineg said so. Miss Bingley
altered her the carriage, and she onl wanted a little
pressing to accept it, when Jane testi led such concern
in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to
convert the oﬂ'er of the chaise into an invitation to
remain at Netherﬁeld for the present. Elizabeth most
thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to
Longboum to acquaint the family with her stay and
bring back a supply of clothes.

chapter 173]].

T live o’clock the two ladies retired to dress, and
at half-past six Elizabeth was summoned to
dinner. To the civil inquiries which then

poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of
distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr
Bingley’s, she could not make a very favourable answer.
Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing
this, repeated three or four times how much the were
grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad co d, and
how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and
then thought no more of the matter: and their indif-
ference towards Jane when not immediatel before
them restored Eliubeth to the enjoyment 0 all her
original dislike.

34 PRIDE AND "EJUDICK

Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the
whom she could regard with any complacency. His
anxiety for Jane was evident, and he attentions to
h rsel most pleasing. and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intmder as she believed the was
considered by the others. She had very little notice
from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed Mr
Darcy, her sister scarcely lea so; and as for Mr unt,
by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who
lived only to eat. drink, and play at cards; who, when
he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, bad noth-
in to say to her.

hen dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane,
and Miss Bingley be an abusing her as soon as she was
out of the room. er manners were pronounced to be
very had indeed, a mixture of pride and impem'nenoe;
she had no convemtion, no style, no taste, no beauty.
Mn Hurst thought the same, and added—

“ She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but
being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her
ap arance this rimming. She really looked almost
wi d.”

“She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep
m countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all!
Why must :be be scam ring about the country, because
her sister had a cold ? ﬁler hair, so untidy, so blowsy! ”

“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her
pctticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely
cemin; and the gown which had been let down to
hide it not doing its ofﬁce.”

“Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,” said
Bingley; “ but this was all lost upon me. I thought
Miss Elizabeth Bonnet looked remarkably well when
she came into the room this morning. Her dirty
petticoat quite escaped m notice.”

“Tau observed it, r Darcy, I am sure," mid

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 35

Miss Bingley; “ and I am inclined to think that
you would not wish to see your sister make such an
exhibition."

. “ Certainly not.”

“ To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or
whatever it is, above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite
alone! what could she mean by it? It seems to me to
show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a
man. country-town indiﬁerence to decorum.”

“It shows an affection for her sister that is very
pleasing," said Bin Ie .

“I am afraid, r arcy," observed Miss Bingley,
in a half whisper, “ that this adventure has rather
aﬂected your admiration of her line eyes.”

“ Not at all,’ ’ he replied; “ they were brightened
by the exercise.” A short pause followed this speech,
and Mrs Hurst began again-—

“ I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet, she is
rally a very sweet irl, and I wish with all my heart
she were well sett ed. But with such a father and
mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is
no chance of it."

“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an
attorney in Meryton."

" Yes ; and they have another, who lives somewhere
near Chespside."

“That is capital,” added her sister, and they both
laughed heartily.

“If the had uncles enough to fill all CheaPside,"
cried Bingley, “it would not make them one Jot less
agreeable.”

“ But it must very materially lessen their chance of
marryin men of any consideration in the world,”
replied srcy.

To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his
sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their

36 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

mirth for some time at the expense of their dear
friend’s vulgar relations.

With a renewal of tenderness, however, th
to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, an sat with
her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly,
and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the
evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep,
and when it appeared to her rather right than pleaunt
that she should go downstairs herself. On entering the
drawing-room she found the whole party at 100, and
was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making
her sister the excuse, mid she would amuse herself, for
the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr
Hurst looked at her with astonishment

“ Do you prefer reading to cards?” mid he; “that
is rather singular.”

“Miss Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, “ despises
cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in
anything else."

“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,"
cried Elizabeth; “ I am not a great reader, and I have
pleasure in many things."

“ In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,”
said Bingley; “and I hope it will soon be increased by
seeing her quite well."

Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then
walked towards a table where a few books were lying.
He immediately offered to fetch her others—all that
his library afforded.

“ And I wish my collection were larger for your
beneﬁt and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow,
and though I have not many, I have man: than I ever
look into."

Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself
perfectly with those in the room.

PIIDE AND PREJUDICE. 37

“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my
father should have left so small a collection of books.
What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr
Dare I"

“ Ill. ought to be good," he replied; " it ha: been
the work of many generations.”

“And then you have added so much to it yourself;
you are always buying books.”

“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family
library in such days as these.”

“ Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can
add to the beauties of that noble place. Charles, when
you build your house, I wish it may be half as delight-
ful as Pemberley.”

“ I wish it ma .”

" But I we d really advise you to make your
purchase in that nei hbourhood, and take Pemberley
for a kind of mode. There is not a liner county
in En land than Derbyshire.”

“ ith all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if
D will sell It."

“ am talking of possibili ‘es, Charles.”

“ Upon my word, Cnrollnc, I should think it
more pouible to get Pemberley by purchase than by
imitation.”

Elirabeth was so much caught by what passed, as
to leave her very little attention for her book; and
soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-
tahle, and stationed herself between Mr Bingley and
his eldest sister, to observe the game.

“ Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?”
said Miss Bingley; “will she be as tall as I am 2 ”

“ I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth
Bennet’s hei ht, or rather taller.”

“How I ong to see her again! I never met with
anybody who delighted me so much. Such a counten-

38 Puma AND PREJUDICI’.

ance, such manners! and so extremdy seconth
for her age! Her perfonnanoe on the piano is
exquisite.’

“ It is amazing to me,” said Dingley, “how young
ladies can have patience to be so very accomplinhed as
they all are.”

“ All young ladies accomplished E My dear Charles,
what do you mean i”

“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables,
cover skreem, and net purses. I scarcely know any
one who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never
heard a young lady spoken of for the lint u'me, without
being informed that she was very accomplished."

“ Your list of the common extent of accomplish-
ments,” said Darcy, “ has too much truth. The word
is applied to many a woman who deserves it no other-
wise than by netting a purse or covering a slueen. But
I am very far from agreeing with you in your estima-
tion of ladies in general. I unnot boast of knowing
more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my
acquaintance, that are really accom lished.”

“ Nor I, I am sure,” said Miss ingley.

“ Then," observed Eliubeth, “ you must com-
prehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished
woman."

“ Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.”

“Oh! certainly,” cried his faithful assistant, “no
one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not
greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman
must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing,
drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve
the word; and besides all this, she must possess a
certain something in her air and manner of walking,
the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or
the word will be but half deserved.”

“ All this she must. possess,” added Darcy, “ and m

PRIDE AND PREJUDICIL 39

all this she must yet add something more substantial, in
the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.”

" I am no longer surprised at your knowing any six
accomplished women. I rather wonder now at your
knowing my.”

“ Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt
the possibility of all this ?”

“I never saw such a woman. I never saw such
capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as
you describe united."

Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against
the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both
protesting that they knew many women who answered
this description, when Mr Hurst called them to order,
with hitter complaints of their inattention to what was
going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an
end, Elisabeth soon afterwards left the room.

"Eliza Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door
was closed on her, “ is one of those young ladies who
seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by
undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare
say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry
device, a very mean art.”

“ Undoubtedly,” replied Darcy, to whom this remark
was chieﬂy addressed, “ there is meanness in all the
arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for
captivation. Whatever bears aﬂinity to cunning is

d icahle.”
eﬂiss Bingley was not so entirely satisﬁed with this
reply as to continue the subject.

Eliubeth joined them again only to say that her
sister was worse, and that she could not leave her.
Bingley urged Mr Jones’s being sent for immediately;
while his sisters, convinced that no country advice
could be of any service, recommended an express to
town for one of the most eminent physicians. This

4O PRIDE AND PREJUDICI'.

thewould not bar of; butshewas not to unwilling
to comply with their brother’s pmpoal; and it was
letded that Mr Jonet should be sent for early in the
morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better.
Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared
that they were miserable. They solaced their wretched-
neu, however, by duets after supper, while he could
ﬁnd no boner relief to his feelings than by giving his
housekeeper directions that every possible attention
might be paid to the sick lady and her litter.

Cblli'" 3*.

LIZABETH passed the chief of the night in
her sister’s room, and in the morning had the
pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer

to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr
Dingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards
from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters.
In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to
have a note sent to Longboum, desiring her mother to
visit Jane, and form her own judgment of her situation.
The not: was immediately dispatched, and its contents
as quickly complied with. Mrs Bennet, accom uied
by her two ouugest girls, reached Netherliel soon
after the fami y breakfast.

Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs
Bennet would have been very nusenble; but being
satisﬁed on seeing her that her illness was not. alarming,
she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
restoration to health would probably remove her from
Netherﬁeld. She would not listen, therefore, to her
daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did
the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 4!

it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with
Jane, on Miss Bingley's appearance and invitation, the
mother and three daughters all attended her into the
breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that
Mrs Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she
expected.

“ Indeed I have, Sir," was her answer. " She is a
great deal too in to be moved. Mr Jones says we
must not think of moving her. We must trespass a
little longer on your kindness.”

“ Removed!” cried BingIey. “It must not be
thought of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her
removal.”

“ You may de d upon it, Madam,” said Miss
Bingley, with cod civility, " that Miss Bennet shall
receive every possible attention while she remains
with us.”

Mrs Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.

“I am sure,” she added, “if it was not for such
good friends I do not know what would become of
her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal,
though with the greatest patience in the world, which
is always the way with her, for she has, without excep-
tion, the sweetest temper I ever met with. I often
tell my other girls they are nothing to her. You have
a sweet room here, Mr Bingley, and a charming pros-
pect over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in
the country that is equal to Netherlield. You will not
think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have
but a short lease."

“ Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he;
“ and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherﬁeld,
I should probably be of in ﬁve minutes. At present,
however, I consider myself as quite ﬁxed here.’

“ That is exactly what I should have supposed of
you," said Elizabeth.

I. D

41 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

“ You begin to comprehend me, do you ? " cried he,
turning towards her.

“ 0h l yes—I understand you perfectly."

“ I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to
be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful."

“ That is as it happens. It does not necessarily
follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less
estimable than such a one as yours.”

“ Lizzy,” cried her mother, “ remember where you
are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are
mﬁ‘ered to do at home."

“I did not know before,” continued Bingley imme-
diately, “ that you were a studier of character. It
must be an amusing study.”

“ Yes, but intricate characters are the mar! amusing.
The have at least that advantage.”

“ he country,” said Darcy, “can in general supply
but few subjects for such a study. In a country neigh-
bourhood you move in a very conﬁned and unvarying
societ .”

“ ut people themselves alter so much, that there is
something new to be observed in them for ever.”

“Yes, indeed," cried Mrs Bennet, offended by his
manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. “ I
umre you there is quite as much of that going on in the
country as in town."

Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking
at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs
Bonnet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory
“a hint, continued her triumph.

is 1 minor see that London has any gmt admtage
"a an coon , for my part, except the shops and

‘ he country is a vast deal pleasanter, is
‘ ﬁr Dinghy?"

.M I an in the country,” he replied, “ I never

ﬂ. by: it; and when I am in town it ispretty

PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE. 43

much the same. They have each their advantages, and
I can be equally happy in either.”

“ Ay—that is because you have the right disposition.
But that gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to
think the country was nothing at all.”

" Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken,” said Eliza-
beth, blushing for her mother. “ You quite mistook

' Mr Darcy. He only meant that there was not such
a variety of people to he met with in the country
as in, town, which you must acknowledge to be
true.’

“ Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but
as to not meeting with many people in this neighbour-
hood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I
know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”

Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable
Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less
delicate, and directed her eye towards Mr Darcy with
a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might tum her mother’s thoughts,
now asked her if Charlotte Lucas had been at Long-
boum since her coming away.

“ Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What
an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr Dingley—is not
he? so much the man of fashion! so genteel and so
easy !—He has always something to say to every-
body—Tbs! is my idea of good breeding; and those
persons who fancy themselves very important, and never
open their mouths, uite mistake the matter."

“ Did Charlotte 'ne with you ? "

“ No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted
about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr Bingley, I
always keep servants that can do their own work; my
daughters are brought up differently. But everybody
is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very
good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are

44 PRIDE AND rnsmmcs.

not handsome! Not that I think Charlotte so very
plain—but then she is our particular friend.”

“She seems a very pleasant young woman,” said
Bingley.

“Oh! dear, yes 3—but you must own she is very
plain. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and
envied me Jane’s beauty. I do not like to boast of
my own child, but to be sure, Jane—one does not often
see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says.
I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only
ﬁfteen, there was a gentleman at my brother Gardine s
in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law
was sure he would make her an offer before we came
away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought
her too young. However, he wrote some verses on
her, and very pretty they were.”

“And so ended his affection,” said Elizabeth im-
patiently. “There has been many a one, I fancy,
overcome in the same way. I wonder who ﬁrst dis-
covered the eﬂicacy of poetry in driving away lovel ”

“ I have been used to consider poetry as the food of
love,” said Darcy.

“Of a ﬁne, stout, healthy love it may. Everything
nourishes what is strong alread . But if it be only a
slight, thin sort of inclination, am convinced thst one
good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”

Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which
ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should
be exposing herself again. She lon ed to speak, but
could think of nothing to say; and n ter a short silence
Mrs Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr Bingley
for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling
him also with Lizzy. Mr Dingle-y was unaﬁectcdly
civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She
performed her part indeed without much graciousness,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICL 45

but Mr: Bennet was ntisﬁed, and soon afterwards
ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest
of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls
had been whispering to ach other during the whole
visit, and the result of it was, that the youngest should
tax Mr Bingley with having promised on his ﬁrst
coming into the country to give a ball at Netherﬁeld.

Lydia was a stout, well-gmwn girl of ﬁfteen, with a ﬁne
complexion and good-humoured countenance; a favourite
with her mother, whose affection had brought her into
public at an early age. She had high animal spirits,
and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the atten-
tions of the ofﬁcers, to whom her uncle’s good dinners
and her own easy Inanners recommended her, had in-
creased into assurance. She was very us], therefore,
to address Mr Bingley on the subject (if the ball, and
Wareminded him of his promise; adding, that it

d the most shameﬁrl thing in the world if he
did not keep it. His answer to this sudden stuck was
delightful to her mother’s ear—

“ I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to R my
engagement; and when your sister is recovere , ou
shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. hut
you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill.”

Lydia declared herself satis red. “ Oh ! yes—it
would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and
by that time most likely Captain Carter would be at
Meryton again. And when you have given your hall,"
she added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I
shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he
does not."

Mrs Bennet and her daughters then departed, and
Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own
and her relations’ behaviour to the remarks of the two
ladies and Mr Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her,
in spite of all Miss Bingley’s witticisms on ﬁne yer.

46 manor-um

Cb!!!" f.

HEdayx-pand nnchudlethyheforehddooe.
Mn um and Min Dinghy had gent lame

hoursoflhe morning'ilh Iheinvalid,vhooon—
slowly,m mend;andin
Elhaheth joined their party in the drawing-room. The
loo-cable,however,didnot .MrDarcym
writing, and Mia: Bingley, m him. ramb-
inglhepmgreuofhia letter and reputedlycalling off
hirauenrionbymengesmhis sister. Mr Hunt and
Mr Bingley were a! Pail”, and Mn Hun: wag
oblerving their game.

Elimbeth took up some needlework, and was Iuﬂi-
ciemly amused in unending to what pruned between
Darcy and hi: cmnpaniou. The perpetual commenda-
tionr of the lady, either on his hand-writing. or on the
evenneu of hi- liuea, or on the length of his letter, with
the perfect unooncern with which her praizeo were
received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in
unison with her opinion of each.

“ How delighted Min Darcy will be to receive such
a letter! "

He made no answer.

“ You write uncommonly fast."

“ You are mimken. I write rather slowly."

“ How many letters you must have occasion to write
in the course of a year 1 Letters of buriness, we !
How odious I should think them ! "

" I: is fortunate, then, chat they fall to my lot instead
of to yours.” ‘

“ Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.”

“I have already told her so once, by your desire.”

“ I am afraid you do not like your . Let me
mend it. for you. I mend pen: remarkab y well."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 47

“ Thank you—vbut I always mend my own.”

“ How can you contrive to write so even 2”

He was silent.

“ Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her
improvement on the harp; and pray let her know that
I am quite in raptures with her beautiful! little design
for a table, and I think it inﬁnitely superior to Miss
Grantley’s.”

“Will you give me leave to defer your mptures till
I Write again ! At present I have not room to do
them justice."

“Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in
January. But do on always write such charming long
letters to her, Mr garc ? "

“ They are general y long ; but whether always
charming it is not for me to determine.’ ’

“ It is a rule with me, that a person who can write
a long letter with ease, cannot write ill."

“ That will not do for a compliment to Darcy,
Caroline," cried her brother—“ because he does no!
write with ease. He studies too much for words of
four syllables. Do not you, Darcy P ”

“ My style of writing is very different From yours."

“ 0h ! ’ cried Miss Bingley, “ Charles writes in the
most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his
words, and blots the rest.”

“ My ideas ﬂow so rapidly that I have not time to
express them—by which means my letters sometimes
conve no ideas at all to my correspondents.”

“ {our humility, Mr Bingley,” said Elizabeth, “ must
disarm reproof.”

“Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, " than the
appearance of humility. It is often only carelessness of
opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.”

“And which of the two do you call In, little recent
piece of modesty ? "

r.

48 rams AND PRIJUDICB.

“The indirect boat; for you are really proud of
your defects in writing. because you consider them as
proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelcsmeu
of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least
highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quican is always much prized by the r, and
often without aieyattention to the im rigour: of the
perfomiance. hen you told Mrs nnet this morn-
ing, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherﬁeld
you should be gone in live minutes, you meant it to he
a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself—and et
what is there so very laudable in a precipitanw which
must leave very necessary businem undone, and can be
of no real advantage to yourself or any one else? "

“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to re-
member at night all the foolish things that were said
in the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I be-
lieved what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it
at this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume
the character of needless precipitance merely to show
off before the ladies.”

“ I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means
convined that you would be gone with such celerity.
Your 'conduct would be quite as dependent on chance
as that of any man I know; and if, as you were mount-
ing your horse, a friend were to say, ‘ Bingley, you had
better stay till next week,’ you would probably do it,
you ,would probably not go—and at another word, might
stay a month."

“You have only proved by this,” cried Elizabeth,
“that Mr Bingley did not do justice to his own dis-
position. You have shown him off now much more
than he did himself.”

“I am exceedingly gratiﬁed," said Bingley, “by
your converting what my friend sa 3 into a compliment
on the sweetness of my temyer. ut I am afraid you

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 49

are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no
r'neans intend; for he would certainly think the better
of me, if under such a circumstance I were to give a ﬂat
denial, and ride of as fast as I could.”

“Would Mr Darcy then consider the rashness of

our original intention as atoncd for by your obstinacy
In adhering to it? "

“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the
matter; Darcy must speak for himself."

“ You ex ct me to account for opinions which you
chuse to cal mine, but which I have never acknow-
ledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand accord-
ing to your represenmtion, you must remember, Miss
Bennct, that the friend who is supposed to desire his
return to the house, and the dela of his plan, has
merely desired it, asked it without ofliering one argument
in favour of its propriety."

“ To yield readily—easily—to the per-rumba of a
friend is no merit with you.”

“ To yield without conviction is no compliment to
the understanding of either.”

“ You appear to me, Mr Darcy, to allow nothing for
the inﬂuence of friendship and affection. A regard for
the requester would often make one readily yield to a
request, without waiting for arguments to reason one
into it I am not particularl speakin of such a case
as on have supposed about r Bingliey. We may as
weil wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs before
we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon.
But in general and ordinary cases between friend and
friend1 where one of them is desired by the other to
change a resolution of no very great moment, should
you think ill of that person for complying with the
desire, without waiting to be argued into it P ”

“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this
subject, to arrange with rather more precrsion the degree

5° PRIDE AND PREJUDICF.

of importance which is to appemin to this um, as
well this as the degree of intimacy subsiuinge‘between
the parties .’ ”

“ By all means," cried Bingley; “let us hear all the
particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and
size; for that will have more weight in the argument,
Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you,
that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in com-
parison with myself, I should not pay him half so much
deference. I declare I do not know a more awful
object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in par-
ticular places; at his own house especially, and of a
Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do."

Mr Darcy smiled ; but EliL-ibeth thought she could
perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore
checked her laugh. Miss Binglcy warmly resented the
indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.

“ I see your design, Bingley,” said his friend.—
“ You dislike an argument, and want to silence this."

“ Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like dis-
putes. If you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I
am out of the room, I shall be very thankful ; and then
you may say whatever you like of me.”

“ What you ask," said Elizabeth, “is no sacriﬁce on
my side; and Mr Darcy had much better ﬁnish his
letter.”

Mr Darcy took her advice, and did ﬁnish his letter.

When that business was over, he applied to Miss
Bingley and Elizabeth for the indulgence of some music.
Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to the piano-forte;
and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly
negatived, she seated hersel .

Mrs Hurst sang wiﬂi her sister, and while they were
thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 5!

she turned over some music-books that lay on the
instrument, how fre uently Mr Darcy’s eyes were ﬁxed
on her. She ha y knew how to suppose that she
could be an object 'of admiration to so great a man;
and yet that he should look at her because he disliked
her, was still more strange. She could only imagine
however at last, that she drew his notice because there
was a something about her more wrong and reprehen-
sible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other

rson present. The supposition did not pain her. She
iked him too little to care for his approbation.

After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley
varied the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon
afterwards Mr Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said
to her—

“ Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet,
to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel 2 "

She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the
question, with some surprize at her silence.

“ Ohl ” said she, “ I heard you before, but I could
not immediately determine what to y in reply. You
wanted me, I know, to say ‘ Yes,’ that on might have
the pleasure of dcspising my taste ; but l, always delight
in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a

n of their premeditated contempt. I have, there-
mmade up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to
dance a reel at all—and now despise me if you dare.”

“ Indeed I do not dare.”

Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was
amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of
sweetness and archness in her manner which made it
diﬁicult for her to aﬂ'ront anybody; and Darcy had
never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by
her. He really believed, that were it not for the
inferiority of her connections, he should be in some
danger. '

52 PRIDE AID mm'mcz.

MhBingiey-v,wuqnndmghlohejalon;
andluyalaxietyfordremmyd'herdarﬁiend
Janerweivednomeaimnoefromhaﬁireofgeuing
ridoflil'aaheth,

Sheoflentn'edla provoke Darcyimodisﬁkinghu
hulnpplnelmuchan

“Ihope,"aidehe,alheyverevalkingtog§herin
dumbberythenextday,“yonwillgiveymrmha-
in-lawafenlhintywhenlhiadelinhleeventnkuphce,
allolheadnntageof holdinghermngue; and ifyou
mmmpaniydocuredreyoungergirlsofrunning
aﬁertheoﬂiml—Andﬁflmzy mendenuodeliatea
abject, endeavour to check that linle something, bor-
dering ounconcelt and impedance, which your lady

“ Have you anything clue to propose for my domenu:
{elicit 2”

“ 6h! yet—D0 let the portrait. of your uncle and
aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put
them next to ynur grab-uncle the judge. They are in
the name profession, you know; only in different lines.
A; for your Elizabeth’s picture, you mun not amp!
m have it taken, [or what painter could do justice to
(hone beautiful eyes I ”

“ It would not be caly, indeed, to catch their
expression, but their colour and shape, and the eye-
]uheu, so remarkably line, might be copied."

A: that moment they were met from another walk
by Mn Hurst and Elizabeth hemlf.

«I did not know that you intended to walk,” aid
Min Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been
overheard.

a You used ua abominany ill,” answered Mrs Hum,
u running away without tellmg us that you were coming

out."

rams AND examples. 5 3

Then taking the disengaged ms of Mr Darcy, she
left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just
admitted three. Mr Darcy felt their rudeness, and
immediatdy said—

“ This walk is not wide enough for our party. We
had better go into the avenue.”

But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to
remain with them, laughineg answered—

“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly
grouped, and ap r to uncommon advantage. The
picturesque wo d be spoilt by admitting a fourth.
Good—bye."

She then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled
about, in the hope of being at home again in a day
or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to
intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that
evening.

chapter *3.

HEN the ladies removed after dinner, Eliza-
beth ran up to her sister, and seeing her
well guarded from cold, attended her into

the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her
two friends with many professions of pleasure; and
Elisabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they
were during the hour which passed before the gentle-
men appeared Their powers of conversation were
considerable. They could describe an entertainment
with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and
laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.

But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no
longer the ﬁrst object; Miss Bingley’a eyes were
instantly turned towards Darcy, and she had some-
thing tn say to him before he had advanced many

54 PRIDE AND PREJUDICB.

steps. He addressed himself directl to Miss Bennet,
with a polite congratulation; Mr hunt also made
her a slight bow, and said he was “ very glad;” but
difl’ilseness and warmth remained for Bingley’s luta-
tion. He was full of joy and attention. The ﬁrst
half-hour was spent in piling up the ﬁre, lest she should
suffer from the change of room; and she removed at
his desire to the other side of the ﬁreplace, that she
might be farther from the door. He then t down by
her, and talked scarcely to any one else. Elizabeth, at
work in the opposite comer, w it all with great
delight.

When tea was over, Mr Hurst reminded his sister-
in-law of the card-table—but in vain. She had
obtained private intelligence that Mr Darcy did not
wish for cards; and Mr Hurst soon found even his
open petition rejected. She assured him that no one
intended to play, and the silence of the whole party
on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr Hunt had
therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one
of the sophas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book ;
Miss Bingley did the same; and Mrs Hurst, principally
occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, join
now and then in her brother’ s conversation with Miss
Bennet.

Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged
in watching Mr Darcy’s progress through bi: book, as
in reading her own; and she was perpetually either
making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
could not win him, however, to any conversation; he
merely answered her question, and read on. At length,
quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her
own book, which she had only chosen because it was
the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and
said, “ How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this
way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like

mum AND PREJUDICE. 55

reading! How much sooner one tires of anything
than of a book l—When I have a house of my
own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent
library.”

No one made any reply. She then yawned again,
threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the
room in quest of some amusement; when hearing her
brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned
suddenly towards him and said—

“By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in
meditating a dance at Netherﬁeld ?—I would advise
you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes
of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are
not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a
punishment than a leasure."

“ If you mean Igarcy,” cried her brother, “he may
go to bed, if he chuses, before it begins—but as for
the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and as soon as
Nicholls has made white soup enough, 1 shall send
round my cards."

“I should like balls inﬁnitely better," she replied,
“if they were carried on in a different manner; but
then: is something iancr'nbl tedious in the usual
process of such a meeting. t would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing made
the order of the day.”

“ Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare
say, but it would not be near so much like a ball."

Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards
got up and walked about the room. Her ﬁgure was
elegant, and she walked well ;-—but Darcy, at whom it
was all aimed, was still inﬂexibly studious. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort
more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said—

“ Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow
my example, and take a turn about the room—I assure

56 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

you it is very reli'eshing after sitting so long in one
attitude.”

Eliubeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately.
Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object of
her civility; Mr Darcy looked up. He was as much
awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be. and unconsciously closed his
book. He was directly invited to join their party,
but he declined it, observing, that he could imagine but
two motives for their chusing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his
joining them would interfere. “What could he mean?
she was dying to know what could be his meaning "—
and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand
him ?

“Not at all," was her answer; “ but depend upon
it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way
of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about
it.”

Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disap int-
ing Mr Darcy in anything, and persevered there are in
requiring an explanation of his two motives.

“I have not the smallest objection to explaining
them," said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak.
“ You either chuse this method of passing the
evening because you are in each other’s conﬁdence,
and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you
are conscious that your ﬁgures appear to the greatest
advantage in walking ;—if the ﬁrst, I should be com-
pletely in your way, and if the second, I can admire
you much better as I sit by the ﬁre."

“Oh! shocking! " cried Miss Biogley. “I never
heard anything so abominable. How shall we punish
him for such a speech 2”

“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inelinau'on,”
said Elizabeth. “We can all plague and punish one

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 57

another. Tease him—laugh at him—Intimate as you
are, you must know how it is to be done.’ ’

“ But upon my honour I do not. I do assure you
that my intimacy has not yet taught me (but. Tease
calmness of temper and presence of mind! No, no—
I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we
will not expose ourselves, if you lease, by attempting
to Ian h without a subject r Darcy may hug
himsel .”

“Mr Darcy is not to be laughed at! ” cried Eliza-
beth. “That is an uncommon advantage, and un-
common I hope it will continue, for it would be a
great loss to m: to have many such acquaintance. I
dearl love alaugh.”

“ iss Bingley,” said he, “has given me credit for
more than can be. The wisest and the best of men—
nay, the wisest and best of their actions—may be
rendered ridiculous by a person whose ﬁrst object in
life is a joke.”

“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth—" there are such
people, but I hope I am not one of 16m. I hope I
never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies and non-
sense, whims and inconsistencies, (Ia divert me, I own,
and I laugh at them whenever I can—But these, I
suppose, are precisely what you are without.”

“ Perhaps that is not possible for any one. But it
has been the study of my life to avoid those weaknesses
which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule.”

“ Such as vanity and pride.”

“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride—
where there is a real superiority of mind, pride will be
always under good regulation.”

Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

“ Your examination of Mr Darcy is over, I pre-
sume,” said Miss Bingley; “and pray what is the
result?"

I. 1:

58 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr Darcy has
no defect. He owns it himself without disguise.”

“No”—said Darcy, “ I have made no such pre-
tension. I have faults enough, but they are not, I
hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding—certainly too
little for the convenience of the world. I cannot for-
get the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought,
nor their offences against myself. My feelings are not
puffed about with every attempt to move them. My
temper would perhaps be called resentful.—My good
opinion once lost, is ost for ever."

“Tbat is a failing indeed!”-——cried Elizabeth.
“Implacable resentment i: a shade in a character.
But you have chosen your fault well. I really cannot
lung/J at it. You are safe from me.”

“ There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency
to some parﬁcular evil—a natural defect, which not
even the best education can overcome.’ ’

“ And your defect is a propensity to hate everybody."

“ And yours,” he replied, with a smile, “is wilfully
to misunderstand them.’ ’

“ Do let us have a little music,” cried Miss Bingley,
tired of a conversation in which she had no share.
“ Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr Hurst?”

Her sister made not the smallest objection, and
the pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after a few
moments’ recollection, was not sorry for it. He began
to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much
attention.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 59

V . Chant" i3].

N consequence of an agreement between the sisten,
1 Elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother,
to beg that the carriage mi ht be sent for them in
the course of the day. But Iii/{rs Bennet, who had
calculated on her daughters remaining st Nethen‘ield
till the following Tuesda , which would exactly ﬁnish
Jane's week, could not ring herself to receive them
with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not
propitious, at least not to Elizabeth’s wishes, for she
was impatient to get home. Mrs Bennet sent them
word that they could not possibly have the carriage
before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added,
that if Mr Dingley and his sister pressed them to stay
longer, she could spare them very well. Against stay-
ing longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved
—oor did she much expect it wou d be asked; and
fearful, on the contrary, u_ being considered as in-
truding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to .
borrow Mr Binglcy’s carriage immediately, and it was
at length settled that their original design of leaving
Netherﬁeld that morning should be mentioned, and the
re nest made.

the communication excited many professions of
concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay
at least till the following day to work on Jane; and
till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss
Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the
delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much
exceeded her affection for the other.

The master of the house heard with real sorrow that
they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to per-
suade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her——
that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was ﬁrm
where she felt herself to be right.

60 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

To Mr Darcy it via welcome intelligence—Eliza-
beth had been at Netherlield long enough. She
attracted him more than he liked—and Min Bingley
mundviltc‘er.und morexusingthanu-nltohim-
calf. He wiaely reanlved to be particularly careﬁrl that
no of admiration ahould weaeape him, nothing
that could elevate her with the hope of inﬂuencing
hiafelicity;aemihlethatifauchanideahadheen
queued, hit behaviour during the lat day Inuit. have
Innerill weight in conﬁrming or cnnhing it. Steady
to hia purpooe, he larcer Ipoke ten word. to her
through the whole of Saturday, and though they were
at one time left by Lhcmnelm for half-an-hour, he
“bend most conscientiously to his book, and would
not even look at her.

On Sunday, after morning service, the cparation, ao
unable to almost all, took place. Mira Bingley‘n
civility m Eliuhcth incmacd at last very rapidly, at
well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after naming the latter of the pleasure it would always
give her to ace her either at Longhoum or Netherfield,
and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands
with the former. Eliutheth took leave of thewhole
Put in the liveliest spirits.

'IYhey were not welcomed home very cordially by
their mother. Mn Bennet wondered at their coming,
and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble,
md was lure Jane would have caught cold again—But.
‘heir father, though very laconic in his expressions of

ensure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their
mportance in the family circle. The evening con-
mrion, when they were all assembled, had lost much
of in animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence
of Jane and Elizabeth.

found Mary, as usual, deep in the ltudy of
“tough bus and human nature; and had come new

PRIDE AND summers. 6r

extracts to admire, and some new observations of
threadbare moralit to listen to. Catherine and L dia
had information fiir them of a. diﬂ'ereut sort. ueh
had been done and much had been said in the regiment
since the preceding Wednesday; several of the oﬂicers
had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been
ﬂogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel
Forster was going to be married.

Chapter £33].

“ HOPE, my dear," said Mr Bennet to his wife,
as they were at breakfast the next morning, “ that
you have ordered a good dinner w-day, because

I have reason to expect an addition to our family

n 'n

“ Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody
that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should
happen to call in—and I ho In] dinners are good
enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such
at home.”

“ The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a
stranger."

Mrs Bennet’s eyes sparkled—“A gentleman and a
stranger! It is Mr Bingley, I am sure. Why, Jane
-—you never dropt a word of this; you sly thing!
Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr
Bingley.—But—good Lord! how unluckyl there is
not a bit of ﬁsh to be got 00-day. Lydia1 my love,
ring the bell—I must speak to Hill this moment.”

“ It is not Mr Bingley,” said her husband; “it is
F‘p‘e’rson whom I never saw in the whole course of my
I

This mused a general astonishment; and he had the

62 PRIDE mm exam!)ch

pleuue of being eagerly questioned by his wife and ﬁve
daughter: at once.

After amusing himself some time with their curiosity,
he thus explained—

“ About a month ago I mind this letter; and
about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I thought it a
case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It
is from my cousin, Mr Collins, who, when I am dead,
may tu’r’n you all out of this house as soon as he

“ Oh! my dear," cried his wife, “I cannot hear to
hm that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious
man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that
your estate should be entailed away from your own
children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should
lug: tried long ago to do something or other about
IL

Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the
nature of an entail. They had often attempted it
before, but it was a subject on which Mrs Bennet was
beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling so cute away
from a family of ﬁve daughters, in favour of a man
whom nobody cared anything about.

“ It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr
Bennet, “and nothing can clear Mr Collins from the
guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen
to his loner, you may perhaps be a little softened by his
manner of expressing himself."

“ No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was
very impcrtinent of him to write to you at all, and very
hypocritial. I hate such false friends. Why could
not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father did
before him i ”

“Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some
EEI temples on that head, as you will hear."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 63

" Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent,
“ 1 5th October.
“Dm Sm,

“ The disagreement subsisting between yourself
and my late honoured father always gave me much
uneasiness, and since I have had the misfortune to lose
him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but
for some time I was kept back by my own doubts,
fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory
for me to be on good terms with any one with whom it
had always pleased him to be at variance.—“ There,
Mrs BenneL”—My mind, however, is now made up
on the subject, for having received ordination at Easter,
I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the

atronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine dc
gourgh, widow of Sir Louis de Bourgh, whose bounty
and beneﬁeence has preferred me to the valuable rectory
of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to
demean myself with grateful respect towards her Lady-
ship, and be ever ready to rform those rites and cere-
monies which are institu by the Church of England.
As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my dut to pro-
mote and establish the blessing of peace in al families
within the reach of my inﬂuence; and on these grounds
I ﬂatter myself that my present overtures of good-will
are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of
my being next in the entail of Longboum estate will be
kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject
the offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than
concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable
daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to
assure you of my readiness to make them every possible
amends,—4bnt of this hereafter. If you should have no
ob‘ection to receive me into your house, I propose my-
ne f the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family,
Monday, November I8th, by four o’clock, and shall

64 PRIDE sun PREJUDICI.

probably trespass on you] hospitality till the Saturday
se’nnight following, which} can do without any incon-
venience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to
my occasional absence on a SundayI provided that some
other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.
—I remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to
your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
“Winusu COLLINS."

“ At four o’clock, therefore, we may expect this
peace-making gentleman," said Mr Bennet, as he
folded up the letter. " He seems to be a most con-
scientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I
doubt not will rove a valuable acquaintance, ecially
if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to et him
come to us again."

“ There is some sense in what he says about the
girls, however, and if he is disposed to make them any
amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him.”

“ Though it is difﬁcult,” said Jane, “ to guess in what
way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks
our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.”

Elizabeth was chieﬂy stmck with his extraordinary
deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intendon
of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners
whenever it were required.

“ He must be an oddity, I think," said she. “ I
cannot make him out—There is something very pomp-
ous in his style.—And what can he mean by apologising
for being next in the entail i—We cannot su pose he
would help it if he could.—Ca.n he be a sensible man,
sir e ”

“ No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of
ﬁnding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of
servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises
well. I am impatient to see him."

prams sun PREJUDICE. 65

“In point of composition,” said Mary, “ his letter
does not seem defective. The idea of the olive-branch
perhaps is not wholly new, yet I think it is well
ex ressed."

0 Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its
writer were in any degree interestin .' It was next to
impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet
coat, and it was now some weeks since they had re-
ceived pleasure from the society of a man in any other
colour. As for their mother, Mr Collins’s letter had
done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing
to see him with a degree of composure which astonished
her husband and daughters.

Mr Collins was punctual to his time, and was received
with great politeness by the whole family. Mr Bennet
indeed said little ; but the ladies were ready enough to
talk, and Mr Collins seemed neither in need of en-
couragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was
a tall, heavy-looking young man of ﬁve-and-twenty.
His air was grave and stately, and his manners were
very formal. He had not been long seated before he
complimented Mrs Bennet on having so ﬁne a family of
daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but
that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth ;
and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in
due time well disposed of in marriage. This gallantry
was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but
Mrs Bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments,
answered most readily.

“ You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all
my heart it may prove so, for else they will be destitute
enough. Things are settled so oddly.”

“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”

“Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to
my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to
ﬁnd fault with pa, for such things I know are all chance

‘6 PRIDE AND PREIUDICI’.

in this world. There is no knowing how estates will
go when once they come to be entailed.”

“I am very senrihle, madam, of the hardship to my
fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that
I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate.
But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared
to admire them. At present I will not say more; but,
perhaps, when we are better acquainted —”

He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and
the girls smiled on each other. They were not the
only objects of Mr Collins’s admiration. The hall, the
dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and
praised; and his commendation of everything would
lone touched Mrs Bennet’s heart, but for the mortify-
ing lupponition of his viewing it all as his own future
property. The dinner too in its turn was highly
admired; and he [mggctl to know to which of his fair
cousins the excellency of its cooking was owing. But
here he was set right by Mrs Bennet, who assured him
with some asperity that they were very well able to keep
I goocl cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do
in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having diqileaaed
her. In a softening tone the declared hemlf not at all
offended; but he continued to apologise for about a
quarter of an hour.

dlibspttt £317.

URING dinner, Mr Bennet scarcely spoke at
all ; but when the servants were withdrawn, he
thought it time to have some conversation with

his guest, and therefore started a mbject in which he
expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very
fortunate in his patronees. Lady Catherine de Bourgh’n

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 61

attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort,
appeared very remarkable. Mr Beonet could not have
chosen better. Mr Collins was eloquent in her praise.
The subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity
of manner, and with a most important aspect he pro-
tested that “ he had never in his life witnessed such
behaviour in a person of rank—such afl'ability and con-
descension, as he had himself experienced from Lady
Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve
of both the discourses which he had already had the
honour of preaching before her. She had also asked
him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only
the Saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in
the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by
many peo le he knew, but be had never seen anything
but aﬂ'abi ity in her. She had always spoken to him as
she would to any other gentleman; she made not the
smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally
for a week or two, to visit his relations. She had even
condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he
could, provided he chose with discretion ; and had once
paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had
perfectl approved all the alterations he had been making,
and had, even vouchsafed to suggest some herself—-s0me
shelves in the closets upstairs.”

“ That is all very proper and civil, I am sure."
said Mrs Bennet, “ and I dare say she is a very
agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies in
general are not more like her. Does she live near
you, sir I ”

“The garden in which stands my humble abode is
separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her lady-
shtp’s residence.”

“ I think you said she is a widow, sir? has she any
family 2 "

68 PRIDE AND PRIJUDICI’.

“ She has one only daughter, the heiress of Ruling;
and of very extensive property.”

“ Ahl ’ cried Mrs Bennet, shaking her head, “that
she is better off than many girls. And what sort of
young lady is she ? is she handsome l ”

“ She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady
Catherine herself says that, in point of tnie beauty, Miss
de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex,
because there is that in her features which marks the
young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortun-
ately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented her
making that progress in man accomplishments which
she could not otherwise have ailed of, as I am informed
by the lady who superintended her education, and who
still resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable,
and often condescendt to drive by my humble abode in
her little plmeton and ponies."

“Has she been presented? I do not remember her
name among the ladies at court."

“Her indifferent state of health unhappin lprevents
her being in town; and by that means, as I to d Lady
Catherine myself one day, has de rived the British court
of its brightest ornament. Her adyship seemed pleased
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am hap y
on every occasion to offer those little delicate comp i-
ments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have
more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and
that the most elevated rank, inmd of giving her con-
sequence, would be adorned by hen—These are the
kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is
a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly
bound to pay.”

“ You Judge very properly,” said Mr Bennet, “ and
it is happy for you that you possess the talent of ﬂatter-
ing with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 69

attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or
are the result of previous study?”

“ They arise chieﬂy from what is paling at the time,
and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting
and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be
adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give
them as unstudied an air as possible."

Mr Bennet’s expectations were fully answered. His
cousin was as absurd as he had hoped, and he listened
to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the
mine time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elisabeth, requiring
no rtner in his pleasure.

tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and
Mr ennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-
room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him
to read aloud to the ladies. Mr Collins readily assented,
and a book was produced ; but on beholding it (for
everything announced it to be from a circulating library),
he started back, and begging pardon, protested that he
never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia
exclaimed.—Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce’s Sermons. Lydia gaped
as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very
monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted
him with—

“ Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phili s talks
of turning away Richard; and if he does, olonel
Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on
Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear
more about it, and to ask when Mr Denny comes back
from town."

Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her
tongue; but Mr Collins, much offended, laid aside his
book, and said——

“I have often observed how little young ladies are

7° PRIDE AND PRIJUDICI.

interested by books of a serious stamp, though written
solely for their beneﬁt. It amazes me, I confess;—
for, certainly, there can be nothing so admtageous to
them an instruction. But I will no longer importune
my oung cousin.”

'Ixhen turning to Mr Bennet. he oﬂ'ered himself as his
antagonist at backgammon. Mr Bennet accepted the
challenge, observing that he acted very wisel in leaving
the girls to their own triﬂing amusements. rs Bennet
and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia’s
interruption, and promised that it should not occur again,
if he would resume his book; but Mr Collins, after
auuring them that he bore his young cousin no ill-will,
and should never resent her behaviour asany affront,
nested himself at another table with Mr Bennet, and
prepared for backgammon.

chasm £17.

R COLLINS was not a sensible man, and the
deﬁciency of Nature had been but little assisted
by education or societ ; the greatert part of

ltll life having been spent un er the guidance of an
“literate and miserly father; and though he belongedm
one ofthe universities, he had merely kept the necessary
wrml, without forming at it any useful acquaintance.
'l‘ho Iubjcction in which his father had brought him up
lml given him originally great humility of manner; but
it was now a good deal counteracted by the self-conceit
«I. I weak head, living in retirement.| and the consequen-
MI lbelings of urly and unexpected prosperity. A
Minute chance had recommended him to Lady
\‘leline de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was
meant. and the respect which he felt for her high rank,

72 PRXDE AND PREJUDICE.

Mrs Bennet treasured u the hint, and trusted that
she might soon have two aughters married; and the
man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before
was now high in her good graces.

Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not
forgotten; every sister except Mary agreed to go with
her; and Mr Collins was to attend them, at the request
of Mr Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself ; for thither Mr Collins
had followed him after breakfast, and there he would
continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest
folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr Bennet,
with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunc-
forcL Such doings discomposed Mr Bennet exceed-
ingly. In his library he had been always sure of leisure
and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told Eliza-
beth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room
in the house, he was used to be free from them .there;
his civility, therefore, was most prom t in inviting Mr
Collins to join his daughters in their walk; and Mr
Collins, being in fact much better ﬁtted for a walker
than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his
large book, and go. _

In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on
that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered
Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then
no longer to be gained by Era. Their eyes were im-
mediately wandering up In the street in quest of the
ofﬁcers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet
indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could
recall them.

But the attention of every lady was soon caught by
a young man, whom they had never seen before, of
most gentlemanlike ap earance, walking with an oﬂicer
on the other side 0 the way. The ofﬁcer was the
very Mr Denny concerning whose return from London

PRIDE AND PRIJUDICL 1!

and his veneration for her as his patrnness, mingling
with I very good opinion of himself, of his authority as
a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him alto-
gether a mixture of pride and obsequiousneu, self-
im ﬁance, and humility.

aving now a good house and very tuﬂicient income,
he intended to mar ; and in seeking a reconciliation
with the Longbourn amily he had a wife in view,» he
meant to chose one of the daughters, if he found them
as handsome and amiable as they were represented by
common report. This was his plan of amends—of
atonement—for inheriting their father’s estate; and he
thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitable-
ness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his
own rt.
His Ian did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet’s
lovely dice conﬁrmed his views, and established all his
strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for
the ﬁrst evening :5: was his settled choice. The next
morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour’s téte-ii-téte with Mrs Bennet before break-
fast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house,
and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that a
mistress for it might be found at Longboum, produced
from her, amid very complainant smiles and general en-
couragement, a caution against the very .lnne he had
ﬁxed on. “ As to her younger daughters, she could not
take upon her to say—she could not positively answer
-—but she did not [new of any prepossession ;—her
elder! daughter, she must just mention—she felt it
incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon
engaged.”

Mr Collins had only to change from Jane to Elin-
beth—and it was soon done—done while Mrs Bennet
was stirring the ﬁre. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane
in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICI’. 73

Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed.
All were struck with the stranger’s air, all wondered
who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, dctemrined if
possible to find out, led the way across the street,
under pretence of wanting something in an opposite
shop, and fortunate] had just gained the pavement
when the two gentremen, turning back, had reached
the same spot. Mr Denny addressed them directl ,
and entreated permission to introduce his friend, r
Wickham, who had returned with him the day before
from town, and he was happy to say had accepted
a commission in their corps. This was exactly as it
should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals
to make him completely charming. His appearance
was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part
of beauty, a ﬁne countenance, a good ﬁgure, and very
pleasing address. The introduction was followed up
on his side by a happy readiness of conversau'on—a
readiness at the same time perfectly correct and un-
assuming; and the whole party were still standing
and talking together very agreeably, when the sound
of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley
were sccn riding down the street. On distinguishing
the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came
directly towards them, and began the usual civilities.
Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet
the principal object. He was then, he said, on his
way to Longbourn on pin-pose to inquire after her.
Mr Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was be-
ginning to determine not to ﬁx his eyes on Elizabeth,
when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the
stranger, and Eliubeth happening to see the counte-
nance of both as they looked at each other, was all
astonishment at the eﬁ'ect of the meeting. Both
changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr
Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat—

I. F

74 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

a salutation which Mr Darcy 'nst deigned to return.
What could be the meaning 0" it P—It was impossible
to imagine; it was im ssible not to long to know.

In another minute, gr Bingley, but without seeming
to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on
with his friend.

Mr Denny and Mr Wickham walked with the
young ladies to the door of Mr Philips’s house, and
then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's pressing
entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of
Mrs Philips’s throwing it the parlour window and
loudl seconding the invitation.

rs Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and
the two eldest, from their recent absence, were par-
ticularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her
surprize at their sudden return home, which, as their
own carriage had not fetched them, she should have
known nothing about, if she had not happened to see
Mr Joncs’s shop-boy in the street, who had told her
that they were not to send an more drauth to
Netherﬁeld because the Miss gennets were come
awa , when her civility was claimed towards Mr
Col ins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received
him with her very best politeness, which he returned
with as much more, apologizing for his intmsion,
without any previous acquaintance with her, which he
could not help ﬂattering himself, however, might be
justiﬁed by his relationship to the young ladies who
introduced him to her notice. Mrs Philips was quite
awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her
contem lation of one stranger was soon put an end to
by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of
whom, however, she could only tell her niece- what
they already knew, that Mr Denny had brought him
from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant’s
commission in the shire. She had been watch-

 

PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE 75

ing him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and
down the street, and had Mr Wickham appeared,
Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the
occupation, but unluckin no one passed the windows
now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison
with the stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable
fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the
Philipses the next day, and their aunt promised to
make her husband all on Mr Wickham, and give
him an invitation also, if the family ﬁ'om Longboum
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and
Mrs Philips protested that they would have a nice com-
fortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of
hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights
was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good
spirits. Mr Collins repeated his apologies in quitting
the room, and was assured with unWearying civility
that they were rfectly needless.

As they w ked home, Elizabeth related to Jane
what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen;
but though Jane would have defended either or both,
had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more
ex lain such behaviour than her sister.

r Collins on his return highly gratiﬁed Mrs Bennet
by admiring Mrs Philips’s manners and politeness. He
protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter.
he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she
had not only received him with the utmost civility
but had even pointedly included him in her invitation
for the next evening, although utterly unknown to
her before. Something, he supposed, might be auri-
buted to his connection with them, but yet he had
never met with so much attention in the whole course
of his life. '

76 PRIDE AND PREJU'DICE

tbspttt SH].

8 no objection was made to the young people’s
engagement with their aunt, and all Mr
Collins’s samples of leaving Mr and Mrs

Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most
steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him and his live
cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girls
had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawin -
room, that Mr Wickham had accepted their uncles
invitation, and was then in the house.

When this information was given, and they had
all taken their seats, Mr Collins was at leisure to look
around him and admire, and he was so much struck
with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he
declared he might almost have supposed himself in the
small summer breakfast parlour at Ratings; 3 com-
parison that did not at first convey much gratiﬁcation;

ut when Mrs Philips understood from him what
Rosings was, and who was its proprietor—when she
had listened to the description of only one of Lady
Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-
piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of die compliment, and would hardly have
resented a comparison with the housekeeper‘s room.

In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady
Catherine and her mansion, with occasional digressions
in praise of his own humble abode, and the im rove-
ments it was receiving, he was happily employed) until
the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs
Philips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his
consequence increased with what she heard, and who
was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen
to their cousin, and who had nothing to do but to wish

mums AND PREJUDICE. 77

for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent
imitations of china on the mantlepiece, the interval of
waiting a peared very long. It was over at last, how-
ever. he ntlemen did approach, and when Mr
Wickham w ked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she
had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him
since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admira-
tion. The oﬂicers of the ————shire were in general a
very creditable, gentlemnnlike set, and the best of them
were of the present party; but Mr Wickham was as
far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as (be, were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy
uncle Philips, breathing port wine, who followed them
into the room.

Mr Wickham was the happy man towards whom
almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth was
the happy woman by whom he ﬁnally seated himself;
and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell
into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet
night, and on the probability of a rainy season, made her
feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic
might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.

With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr
Wickham and the ofﬁcers, Mr Collins seemed to sink
into insigniﬁcance; to the young ladies he certainly was
nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in
Mrs Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most
abundantly supplied with colfce and muﬂin.

When the card-tables were placed, he had an oppor-
tunity of obliging her in return, by sitting down to
whisL

“I know little of the game at present," mid he,
“but I shall be glad to improve myself, for in my
situation in life ” Mrs Philips was very thankful
for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.

Mr Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready

 

78 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

delight was he received at the other table between
Elizabeth and Lydia. At ﬁrst there seemed danger of
Lydia'l engrossing him entirel , for she was a most
determined talker; but being ikewise extremely fond
of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in
the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after
prizes to have attention for any one in particular.
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr
Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth,
and she was very willing to hear him, though what she
chieﬂy wished to hear she could not hope to be told—
the history of his acquaintance with Mr Darcy. She
dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity,
however, was unexpectedl relieved. Mr Wickhnm
began the subject himsei’f. He inquired how far
Netherﬁeld was from Meryton; and, after receiving
her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr
Darcy had been staying there.

“About a month,” said Eliubeth; and then, un-
willing to let the subject drop, added, “ He is a man of
very large propert in Derbyshire, I understand."

“ Yes,” rcplie Wickham;-—“ his estate there is a
noble one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You
could not have met with a person more capable of 'ving

u certain information on that head than mysel —for

have been connected with his family in a particular
manner from my infant ."

Eliubeth could not but look surprizcd.

“ You may well be surprized, Miss Bennet, at such
an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the
very cold manner of our meeting ycsterday.—Are you
much acquainted with Mr Darcy ? ”

“As much as I ever wish to be,” cried Eliubeth
warmly.—“ I have spent four days in the same home
with him, and I think him very disagreeable.”

“ I have no right to give my opinion.” said Wick-

PRIDE AND rumbles; 79

ham, “as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am
not qualiﬁed to form one. I have known him too
long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible
for m: to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of
him would in general asmnish—and perhaps you would
not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here
you are in your own family.’

" Upon my word, I say no more bar: than I might
say in any house in the neighbourhood, except Nether-
ﬁeld. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Every-
bodyis disgusted with his pride. You will not ﬁnd
him more favourably spoken of by an one.”

“ I cannot pretend to be sorry, ’ said Wickharn,
after a short intermption, “ that he or that any man
should not be estimated beyond their deserts ; but with
Li»- I believe it does not often happen. The world is
blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened
by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only
as he chuses to be seen.”

“ I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance,
to be an ill-tempered man.” Wickham only shook his
had.

" I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of
speaking, “ whether he is likely to be in this country
much longer.”

“ I do not at all know; but I beard nothing of his
going away when I was at Netherlield. I hope your
plans in favour of the —shire will not be affected by
his being in the neighbourhood."

“ Oh! no—it is not for m: to be driven away by
Mr Darcy. If be wishes to avoid seeing nu, he must
go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives
me pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding
171'»: but what I might proclaim before all the world,—a
sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at
his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the

80 mos AND PREJUDICI'.

late Mr Darcy, was one of the best men that ever
breathed, and the truest friend I ever had ; and I can
never be in compan with this Mr Darcy without being
‘ grieved to the so by a thousand tender recollections.
His behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but I
verily believe I could forgive him anything and every-
thing, mther than his disappointing the hopes and dis-
gracing the memory of his father.”

Eliubeth found the interest of the subject incrtase,
and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it
prevented farther inquiry.

Mr Wickham bean to speak on more general topics,
Mer n, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing
high y plused with all that he had yet seen, and speak-
in of the latter especially with gentle but very intellig-
ihfe gallantry.

“It was the rospect of constant society, and good
society,” he ad ed, “ which was my chief inducement
to enter the —shire. I knew it to be a most respect-
able, agreeable corps, and my ﬁ'iend Denny tempted rise
further by his account of their present uarters, and the
very great attentions and excellent acquaintance Meryton
had procured them. Societ , I own, is necessary to
me. I have been a dis: pointed man, and my spirits
will not bear solitude. I must have employment and
society. A military life is not what I was intended
for, but circumstances have now made it eligible. The
church ought to have been my profession—I was brought
up for the church, and I shou d at this time have been
in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased
the gentleman we were speaking of just now.”

“ Indeed! "

“ Yes—the late Mr Darcy bequeathed me the next
presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my
godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot
do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for

PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE. 8!

me am ly, and thought he had done it; but when the
living ell, it was given elsewhere.”

“ Good heavens! ” cried Elizabeth; “ but how
could Ilia-l be P—How could his will be disregarded 2—
Why did not you seek legal redress ? ”

“ There was just such an informality in the terms of
the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man
of honour could not have doubted the intention, but Mr
Darcy chose to doubt it—or to treat it as a merely
conditional recommendation, and to assert that I had
forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, impmdence—
in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the
living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of
an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man ;
and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of
having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I
have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may perhaps
have sometimes spoken my opinion of him, and ta him,
too freely. I an recall nothing worse. But the fact
is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he
hates me."

“ This is quite shockingl—He deserves to be publicly
disgraced."

“ Some time or other he will be——but it shall not be
by m. Till I can forget his father, I can never defy
or ex bin.”

Elllabeth honoured him for such feelings, and
thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.

“ But what," said she, after a pause, “ can have
been his motive ?—what can have induced him to behave
so cmelly ? "

“A thorough, determined dislike of me—a dislike
which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy.
Had the late Mr Darcy liked me less, his son might
have borne with me better: but his father’s uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in

83 nun-Drum

K: chnawuhlkmd'm

ranch-jun..-
“IHHWEMDHIIB—

Mlhnmﬂdth-ﬂw-

i
i
fr
5%;
E
5‘

Iimecxdaimnd, "Tequila-iamth-
m,d:cﬁ-icnd,thcﬁm'neofhiﬁtha!"—She
couldhanadded,“Aymngnnn,mo,like’u-,vhn¢
wrymnmuncemyvmndlforywrbénganiaﬂe”
—h|tlhccuntentndhcndfvidn,“Andom,mo,vho
hadprolnblyhomhisovn
mnnecmdmgdhtr,uldzinkymnid,intheckll
mm!”

“Wewcte bomintbemparish,vithindt
amprk;theglumpanofmryomhmpa-ad
wgetha; inmtu of the am: home, d:
ameammmcnn,
My Ether began life in the pmfulion which
uncle,MrPhilips,appcanmdosomuchuaditm—hn
hegavenpevcrythingwbeofuacmlhclateMr
Damy,and (‘1qu all his time to the can: ofthe Pun-
bedeyproperty. He was most higun Mr
Darcy, a most intimatc, conﬁdential friend. Mr
afmnacknowledgcd himadftobeundcrtbegnatm

PRIDE AND PREJUDICL 83

obligations to my father’s active superintendance, and
when, immediately before my father’s death, Mr Darcy
gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am
convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of grati-
tude to him, as of affection to myself.”

“ How strange! ” cried Elizabeth. “ How abom-
inablel—I wonder that the very pride of this Mr Darcy
has not made him ’ust to you !—If from no better
motive, that he should not have been too proud to be
dishonesy—for dishonesty I must call it."

“ It 1': wonderful,” replied Wickham,—“ for almost
all his actions may be traced to pride ;—-and pride has
often been his best friend. It has connected hlm nearer
with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are
none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me, there
were stronger impulses even than pride.”

“Can such abominable pride as his have ever done
him good i”

“ Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and gener-
ous,—to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to
assist his tenants, and relieve the poor. Family pride,
and ﬁlial pride,—for he is very proud of what his father
was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his
family, to degenerate from the po ular qualities, or lose
the inﬂuence of the Pemberley Il‘lousc, is a powerful
motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with mu:
brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful
guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally
cried u as the most attentive and best of brothers.”

“ hat sort of a girl is Miss Darcy ? ”

He shook his head.—-“ I wish I could call her ami-
able. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But
she is too much like her hrother,—very, very proud.
As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and ex-
tremely fond of me; and I have devoted hours and
hours to her amusement. But she is nothing so me

34 mm: mm nuumc:

now: Ismhshandmﬁgirhabout ﬁﬁtenor ixtem,
and. "land. hig y accomphdied.’ since her
fudiei’a death, her home has been Ltmdon, where a
lady liven with her, and her eduation."

After many pause: and many trials of other
Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the
ﬁrst, and laying—

“I am monithed at his intimacy with Mr Bingley!
How can Mr Bingley, who oeerm good-humour itlelf.
and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship
with such a man? How can they suit each other ?-—~
Do you know Mr Bingley?”

" Not at all."

" He ll 3 tweet-tempered, amiable, charming nun.
He cannot know what Mr Darcy is.”

I‘ Probably not ;~—-but Mr Darcy can plane where
he chuset. He does not want abilities. He can be a
vunvenible companion if he thinks it worth his while.
Among those who are at all his equals in consequence,
he ll 1 very different man from what he in to the less
lmuperous. Hit ride never deserts him: but with
“to rich he il Ii raI-minded, sincere, rational,
luumunthle, and t{urbane agreeable,—allowing something
fur fortune and gun."

The whist party noon afterward: breaking u , the
PM or! gathered round the other table, and Mr ollim
mu hit tuition between his cousin Elizabeth and Mn
l‘hlllpl. The usual inquiries as to his success was made
N the lumr. It had not been very great; he had lost
“on win” but when Mrs Philips began to express
Inn wmevrn thereupon, he assured her with much
“mm “why that it was not of the least importance,
‘3‘“ he uanlidered the money as a mere triﬂe, and
k | .Iw would not make herself uneasy. '

m hum very wall, madam," said he, “ that when
NW it \luwn to a card table, they mutt take their

nun: AND PREJUDICE. 85

chance of these thingy—and happily 1 am not in such
circumstances as to make live shillin s any object.
There are undoubtedly many who co d not say the
same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Bourgh, I am
removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little
matters.”

Mr Wickham’s attention was caught; and after ob-
serving Mr Collins for a few moments, he asked
Elisabeth in a low voice whether her relation were very
intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.

“ Lady Catherine de Bourg ” she replied, “has
very lately given him a living. I hardly know how
Mr Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he
certainly has not known her long.”

“You know of course that Lady Catherine de
Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters; conse-
quenthy that she is aunt to the resent Mr Darcy.”

“ o, indeed, I did not.-——iJ knew nothing at all of
Lady Catherine’s connections. I never heard of her

_ existence till the day before yesterday."

“ Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very
large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin
will unite the two estates."

This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought
of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her
attentions, vain and useless her aﬂ‘ection for his sister
and her praise of himself, if he were already self-
destined to another.

“Mr Collins," said she, “speaks highly both 01
Lady Catherine and her daughter; but from some par-
ticulars that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect
his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being
his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.”

“ I believe her to be both in a great degree,” replied
Wickham; “ I have not seen her for many years, but
I very well remember that I never liked her, and that

86 mm: m Pumice.

her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She hasthe
reputation of being remarkably terrible and clever; but
I rather believe she derives part ofher abilitieefrorn her
rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner,
and the rest from the pride of her nephew. who chutes
that every one connected with him should have an
understanding of the ﬁrst class."

Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational
account of it, and the continued talking together with
mutual satisfaction supper put an end to cards, and
gaVe the rest of the ladies their share of Mr Wickham'l
attentions. There could be no conversation in the
noise of Mrs Philips’s supper party, but his manners
recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said,
was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully.
Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She
could think of nothing but of Mr Wickham, and of
what he had told her, all the way home; but there
was not time for her even to mention his name as they
went, for neither Lydia nor Mr Collins were once
silent. Lydia talked incessant! of lottery tickets, of
the ﬁsh she had lost and the sh she had won; and
Mr Collins in describing the civility of Mr and Mrs
Philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his
losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and
repeatedly fearing that he crouded his cousins, had
more to say than he could well manage before the
carriage stopped at Longboum House.

chasm £113].

LIZABETH related to Jane the next day what
had passed between Mr Wickham and herself.

Jane listened with astonishment and concern ;—

she knew not how to believe that Mr Darcy could be

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 87

so unworthy of Mr Bingley’s regard; and yet, it was
not in her nature to question the veracity of a young
man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having really endured such unkindness,
was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and
nothin therefore remained to [be] done, but to think
well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever
could not be otherwise explained.

“They have both,” said she, “ been deceived, I
dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form
no idea. Interested ple have perhaps misre resented
each to the other. t is, in short, impossible or us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may
have alienated them, without actual blame on either
side.”

" Very true, indeed ;—-and now, my dear Jane, what
have you got to say in behalf of the interested people
who have robably been concerned in the business i—
Do clear I nu too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody.”

“Laugh as much as you chusc, but you will not
laugh me out of my opinion. M dearest Lizzy, do
but consider in what a disgracefu light it places Mr
Darcy, to be treating his father‘s favourite in such
a manner,— one, whom his father had promised to
provide for. It is impossible. No man of common
humanity, no man who had any value for his character,
could be capable 'of it. Can his most intimate friends
be so excessively deceived in him l—oh ! no.”

"I can much more easily believe Mr Bingley's
being imposed on, than that Mr Wickham should
invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
night; names, facts, everything mentioned without
ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr Darcy contradict
it. Besides, there was truth in his looks."

88 mm: mm PREJUDICIL

“ It in difﬁcult indeed—it is distressing. One doe
not kInow what to think."

“ rdon; one known exactl what to
thinan your P“ 7

But Jane could think with certainty on only one
point—that Mr Bingley, if he bad ken irnpooed on,
would have much to suﬁ‘er when the aﬂair became
public.

The two young ladies were Iummoned from the
thrubbery, where this convemtion passed, by the
arrival of some of the very persons of whom they had
been speaking: Mr Bingley and hit listen urne to
give their penoual invitation for the long-ex
hall at Netherlield, which was ﬁxed for the fol owing
Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their
dear friend again,—called it an age since they had met,
and repeatedly asked what she lnnl been doing with
herself since their separation. To the rest of the
family they paid little attention; avoiding Mn Bennet
as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
and nothing at all to the others. They were soon
gone again, rising from their seats with an activity
which took their brother by aurprize, and hurrying of
at if eager to escape from Mrs Bennet’s civilitiea.

The prospect of the Netherﬁeld ball was extremely
agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs Bennet
chose to consider it as given in compliment to her
eldest daughter, and was particular] flattered by
receiving the invitation from Mr Byingley himself,
instead of a ceremoninur card. Jane pictured to her-
Ielf a happy evening in the society of her two friends,
and the attentions of their brother; and Elizabeth
thou ht with pleasure of dancing a great deal with
Mr ickham, and of seeing a conﬁrmation of every-
thing in Mr Darcy’s look and behaviour. The happi-
neu anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended lean

mo: All) REIVDlCF. 89

on any event, or any particular penm, for though
they each, like Eliuheth, meant to dance half the
eveningvvith MrWickharn,hevaabynoroanlthe
onlypartnerwho could uﬁiymmandahallwagat
anyrate,aboll. Andeven Marycoulda-ureher
the lad no diinclination for it.

“ hileIcanhaveniyrnamingvtorn ,”nid
the “it in enough—I think it in no aacr'i cc to
occasionally in evenin engagements. ' ha:
claimon nrall;andgl profeasrnyuelfoneo thou:
who condder interval: of recreation and amth an
dainble for everybody.”

Elizabeth’s spirit: were no high on the occaa'on,
that thmgh she did not often vpak unneceuarily to
Mr Collins, the could not help asking him whether he
intended to accept Mr Bingley’l invitation, and if he
did, whether he would think it proper to join in the
evening’- arnu-ernent; and the was rather turpriud to
ﬁnd that be entertained no scnrple whatever on that
had, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either
from the Archbiuhop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh,
by venturing to dance.

“I am by no means of opinion, I assure you," aid
he “that a hall of this kind, given by a young man of
character, to respectable people, can have any evil
tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
m‘yeelf, that I ahall hope to be honoured with the hand:
0 all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and
I take thin opportunity of soliciting yourn, Miu Eliza-
beth, for the two lint dancer ially,—a preference
which I trust my cousin Jane mnribute to the right
came, and not to any disrespect for her.”

Eliubeth felt hernell' complete] taken in. She had
fully proposed being engaged by illr Wickham for thee
very dances; and to have Mr Collins insteadl-her
liveline- had been never worse timed. There wu no

I. G

9° prune AND newbies.

help for it, however. Mr Wickham’: and
her own was per force delayed a little longer, and Mr
Callinl’lp acceptedwithngoodagnceu
she codd. he wan not the beﬂer pleased with his .
gallantry from the idea it tugng of uometbing more.
It now ﬁrst melt her, that IL: was Ielected from
among her ﬁlters as worthy of being the mime: of
Huncford Panonage, and of mining to form a quad-
rille table at Racing, in the absence of more eligible
visitors. The idm soon, reached to conviction, as the
observed his incmaing civilin'es toward herself, and
heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit
and vivacity ; and though more astonished than gratiﬁed
herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long
before her mother gave her to understand that the pro-
bability of their marriage was exceedingly agreeable to
her. Elizabeth, however, did not chuse to take the
hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr Collim might never
make the offer, and, till he did, it was useless to quarrel
about him.

If there had not been a Netherﬁeld ball to prepare
for and talk of, the younger Mils Bennets would have
been in a pitiable state at this time, for from the day of
the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a
succession of rain as prevented their walking to Mery-
wn once. No aunt, no oﬂicars, no new: could be
sought after—the very shoe-roses for Netherlield were
got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some
trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended
the improvement of her acquaintance with Mr Wick-
ham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could
have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 9!

Chant" $17313.

ILL Eliubeth entered the drawing-room at
Netherﬁeld, and looked in vain for Mr Wick-
ham among the cluster of red coats there

assembled, a doubt of his being resent had never
occurred to her. The certainty a meeting him had
not been checked b any of those recollections that
might not unreasona ly have alarmed her. She had
dressed with more than usual care, and repared in the
highest s irits for the conquest of allP that remained
unsubd of his hart, trusting that it was not more
than might be won in the course of the evening. But
in an inmnt arose the dreadful suspicion of his being
urposely omitted for Mr Darcys pleasure in the
gingleys’ invitation to the officers; and though this
was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence
was pronounced by his’ friend Mr Denny, to whom
Lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that Wick-
ham had been obliged to go to town on business the
day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a
signiﬁcant smile,

“I do not imagine his business would have called
him away 'ust now, if he had not wished to avoid a
certain gen eman here."

This part of his intelligence, though unheard by
Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and as it assured her
that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham’s
absence than if her ﬁrst surmise had been just, every
feeling of displeasure against the former was so
sh ned by immediate disappointment, that she could
ha y reply with tolerable civility to the polite in-
quiries which be directly afterwards approached to
make. Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy,
was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against

91 PRIDE AND PRIIU'DICI’.

any sort of oonvenation with him, and turned away
with a degree of ill-humour which she could not
wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr Bingley,
whose blind partiality provoked her.

But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and
though every prospect of her own was demyed for the
evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and
having told all her grief: to Charlotte Lucas, whom
shehad notseen foraweek,ahe warsoonshletomake
a voluntary transition to the oddities of her main, and
to point him out to her particular notice. The two
lint dances, however, brought a return of diam; they
were dances of mortiﬁcation. Mr Collins, awkward
and solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often
moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all
the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for
a couple of dance: can give. The moment of her
release from him was ecstary.

She danced next with an officer, and had the refresh-
ment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that hewaa
universally liked. When those dances were over, she
returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation
with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by
Mr Darcy, who took her so much by surprize in his
application for her hand, that, without knowing what
she did, she accepted him. He walked away again
immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want
of presence of mind ; Charlotte tried to console her.

“ I dare say you will ﬁnd him very agreeable.”

“ Heaven forbid !—Tbu! would be the greatest mie-
fortune of all l—To ﬁnd a man agreeable whom one is
determined to hatel—Do not wish me such an evil.”

When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy
approached to claim her hand, Charlotte could not help
cautioning her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and
allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear un-

PRIDE AND PREJDDICI‘. 93

pleasant in the eyes of a man of ten times his conse-
quence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place
in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived
in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr Darcy, and
reading in her neighbours’ looks, their equal amazement
in beholding it. They stood for some time without
speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their
silence was to last through the two dances, and at ﬁrst
was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that
it would he the greater punishment to her partner to
oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on
the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After
a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second
time with—“ It is your turn to say something now, Mr
Darcy. I talked about the dance, and Jan ought to
make some kind of remark on the size of the room, or
the number of couples.”

He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished
him to say should be said.

" Very well. That reply will do for the present.
Perhaps by and by I may observe that private balls are
much pleasanter than public ones. But now we may
be silent.”

“ Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing 9”

“ Sometimes. One must ak a little, you know.
It would look odd to be entire y silent for half an hour
together; and yet for the advantage of June, conversa-
tion ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible.” '

“ Are you consulting your own feelings in the
present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying
mine 2 ”

“ Both,” replied Elizabeth, archly; “ for I have
always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds.
We are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, un-
willing to speak, unless we expect to say something that

94 PRIDE AND PREjublCE.

will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.”

“ This it no very striking resemblance of your own
character, I am sure,” said he. “ How near it may be
to print, I cannot. pretend to say. I'm think it a faithful
portrait undoubtedly.”

“ I must not decide on my own performance.”

He made no answer, and they were again silent till
they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if
she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton?
She answered in the aﬁinnative; and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, “ When you met us there the
other day, we had just been forming a new acquaint-
ance.”

The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of
hauteur overspread his features, but he id not a word,
and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own
weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke,
and in a constrained manner said, “Mr Wickham is
blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his
mating friends—whether he may be‘ equally capable of
"Mining them, is less certain.”

“ He has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship,”
replied Elizabeth with em hasis, “ and in a manner .
which he is likely to suffer rom all his life.”

Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of
changing the subject. At that moment Sir William
Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through
the set to the other side of the room ; but on perceiving
Mr Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy
to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.

“I have been most highly gratiﬁed indeed, my dear
sir. Such very superior dancing is not often seen. It
is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow
me to say, however, that your fair partner does not dis-
grace yon, and that I must hope to have this pleasure

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 95

often repeated, I when a certain desirable event,
my dear Miss Eliza, (glancing at her sister and Bing-
ley,) shall take place. What congratulations will then
ﬂow inl I appeal to Mr Darcy:—but let me not
interrupt you, sin—You will not thank me for detaining
you from the bewitching convene of that young lady,
whose bright eyes are also upbraiding rue.”

The latter rt of this addreu was scarcely heard by
Darcy; but William’s allusion to his friend seemed
to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with
a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane,
who were dancing together. Recovering himself, how-
ever, shortly, he tumed to his partner, and said, “ Sir
William’s interruption has made me forget what we

. were talking of.”

“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir
William could not have interrupted any two people in
the room who had less to say for themselves. We
have tried two or three subjects already without
success, and what we are to talk of next I cannot
imagine.”

“ What think you of books 9 ” said he, smiling.

“Books—Oh! no. I am sum we never read the
same, or not with the same feelings.”

“ 1 am sorry you think so; but if that be the case,
there can at least be no want of subject. We may
compare_our different opinions.”

“No—I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my
head is always full of something else.”

“ The prmnl always occupies on in such scenes—
does it ?” said he, with a look of oubt.

“ Yes, always,” she replied, without knowing what
she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the
subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her sudden]
exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, ﬂ
Darcy, that you hardly ever forgave, that your resent-

96 mos AND PREJUDICL

ment once created was unappeauble. You are very
cautious, I suppose, as to in being treated.”

“I am," said he, with a ﬁrm voice.

“ And never allow yourself to be blinded by pre-
judice 9 ”

“ I hope not.”

“ It is m'cularly incumbent on those who never
change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly
at ﬁrst.”

" May I ask to what these questions tend ? ”

“ Merely to the illustration of your character," said
she, endeavouring to shake oﬁ‘ her gravity. “1 am
trying to make it out.”

“And what is your success?”

She shook her head, “I do not get on at all. I
hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me
exceedingly.”

“ I can raidin believe," answered he gravely, “ that

rts ma va read with respect to me; and I
laid wiz~zh,yMisliiI ﬁennei', that you were not to sketch
my character at the present moment, as there is reason
to fear that the performance would reﬂect no credit on
either.”

“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may
never have another opportunity.”

“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of
yours,” he coldly replied. She said no more, and they
went down the other dance and parted in silence; on
each side dissatisﬁed, though not to an equal degree, for
in Darcy’s breast there was a tolerable powerful feeling
towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and
directed all his anger against another.

They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley
came towards her, and with an expression of civil
disdain thus accosted her:—“ So, Miss Eliza, I hear
you are quite delighted with George Wickham! Your

PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE. 97

sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me
a thousand ucstions; and I ﬁnd that the young man
forgot to tell you, amon his other communications, that
he was the son of old ickham, the late Mr Darcy’s
steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend,
not to 've implicit conﬁdence to all his assertions; for
as to Nil" Darcy’s using him ill, it is perfectly false; for,
on the contrary, he has been always remarkably kind to
him, though George Wickham has treated Mr Darcy
in a most infamous manner. I do not know the par-
ticulars, but I know very well that Mr Darcy is not in
the least to blame, that he cannot hear to hear George
Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother
thought he could not well avoid including him in his
invitation to the olﬁcers, he was excessively glad to
ﬁnd that he had taken himself out of the way. His
coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing,
indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it.
I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your
favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his descent,
one could not ex I much better.”

“His guilt an his descent appear by your account
to be the same," said Elizabeth angrily; “for I have
heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being
the son of Mr Darcy’s steward, and of (but, I can
assure you, he informed me himself.”

“ I beg your pardon," replied Miss BingIey, turning
away with a sneer. “ Excuse my interference : it was
kindl meant.”

" nsolent girl ! ” said Elizabeth to herself. “ You
are much mistaken if you expect to inﬂuence me by
such a paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it but
your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr

arcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had
undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of
Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet

98 um: AND mimics.

complacency, a glow of Inch happy upm' :-
lulliciently marked how well the wan ntilﬁed with the
occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth inlan read
her ﬁelinga, and at that mt Iolicimde for Ick-
ham,retentmentaguin¢hiaenemiea,andeverydxing
else, gave way before the hope of Jane'l being in the
fairen way for happinen

“ I want to know,” said the, with a countenance no
le- ttniling than her lister’l, “what you have larnt
about Mr Wickharn. But perhapo you have been too
pleanntly engaged to think of any third person; in
which use you may be sure of my pardon.”

“No,” replied Jane, “I have not forgotten him;
but I have nothing aatial'actory to tell you. Mr Bing-
ley does not know the whole of his hiatory, and in
quite ignorant of the circumstances which have prin-
cipally offended Mr Darcy; but he will vouch for the
good conduct, the prohity, and honour of his friend,
and in perfectly convinced that Mr Wickham has
deserved much lea attention from Mr Darcy than he
has received; and I am sorry to say that by hil
account as well an hie Eater’s, Mr Wickham in by no
mm a respectable young man. I am afraid he ha.-
been very imprudent, and hail deserved to late Mr
Darcy’s regard.”

“Mr Binglcy does not know Mr Wickharn him-
self?"

“No; he never saw him till the other morning at
Meryton.”

“Thin account then is what he has received from
Mr Darcy. I am perfectly sntilﬁed. But what does
he say of the living?”

“He does not exactly recollect the circumstaneen,
though he haaheard them from Mr Darcy more than
once, but he believes that it was left to him
only."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 99

“ I have not a doubt of Mr Bingley’s sincerity,” laid
Elizabeth warmly: “ but you must excuse my not being
convinced by assurances only. Mr Bingley’s defence of
his friend was a very able one, I dare say; but since he
is unacquainted with several pans of the story, and has
learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture
uill to think of both gentlemen as I did before.”

She then changed the discourse to one more gnu'fy-
ing to each, and on which there could be no difference
of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the
happy, though modest hopes which Jane enmnained of
Bingley’s regard, and said all in her power to heighten
I'm-r conﬁdence in it. On their being joined by Mr
Binglcy himself, Elinbeth withdrew to Miss Lucas;
to whose inquiry after the pleannmess of her last partner
she had scarcely replied, before Mr Collins came up to
them, and told her with great exultation that he had just
been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.

“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular acci-
dent, that there is now in the room a near relation of
my patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman
himself mentioning to the young lady who does the
honours of this house the names of his cousin Miss de
Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How
wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would
have thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of
Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am
most. thankful that the discovery is made in time for
me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going
to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it
before. My total ignorance of the connection must
plead my apology.”

“ You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr
Darc ! ”

“ ndeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not
having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady

[00 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

Catherine’s It will be in my power to assure
him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se’n-
night. ’

Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a
scheme, assuring him that Mr Darcy would consider
his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent
freedom, lather than a compliment to his aunt; that it
was not in the least necessary there should be any notice
on either side; and that if it were, it must belong to
Mr Darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the
acquaintance. Mr Collins listened to her with the dc-
tcrmined air of following his own inclination, and, when
she ceased speaking, replied thus :—“ My dr Miss
Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of
your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope
of your undemtanding; but permit me to any, that there
must be a wide dilTerence between the established forms
of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate
the clergy ; for, give me leave to observe that I consider
the clerical ofﬁce as ual in point of dignity with the
highest rank in the kingdom—provided that a proper
humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained.
You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of
my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to
perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon
me for neglecting to proﬁt by your advice, which on
every other subject shall be my constant guide, though
in the case before us I consider myself more ﬁtted by
education and habitual study to decide on what is right
than a young lady like yourself.” And with a low bow
he left her to attack Mr Darcy, whose reception of his
advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment
at being so addressed was vc evident. Her cousin
prefacad his speech with a soemn bow: and though
she could not hr a word of it, she felt as if heating
it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words

PRIDE AND HENDICP. 101

“apology,” “Hun-ford,” and “Lady Catherine de
Bourgh.” It vexed her to see him expose himself to
such a man. Mr Darcy was eyeing him with unre-
strained wonder, and when at last Mr Collins allowed
him time to speak, replied with an air of distant civility.
Mr Collins, however, was not discouraged from speak-
ing again, and Mr Darcy’s contempt seemed abundantly
increasing with the length of his second speech, and at
the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and
moved another way. Mr Collins then returned to
Elizabeth.

“I have no reason, I assure u,” said he, “tube
dissatisﬁed with my reCeption. r Darcy seemed much
pleased with the attention. He answered me with the
utmost civility, and even paid me the com liment of
saying, that he was so well convinced of La y Cather—
ine’s discernment as to be certain she could never bestow
a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome
thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with
him.”

As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own
to pursue, she turned her attention almost cntirely on
her sister and Mr Binglcy; and the train of agreeable
reﬂections which her observations gave birth to, made
her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in
ides settled in that very house, in all the felicity which
a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt
capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even
to like Bingley’s two sisters. Her mother’s thoughts
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she deter-
mined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too
much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she
considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed
them within one of each other; and deeply was she
vexed to ﬁnd that her mother was talking to that one
person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing

lo: PRIDE AND PREMICL

clue but of her expectation that Jane would he noon
married to Mr Bingley.—It wa- an animating NH
and Mn Bennet neemed incapable of fati ue while
enumerating the advantage: of the match. in being
each a charming young man, and no rich, and living but
three miles from them, were the lint. points of calf-
gratulation; and then it was inch a comfort to think
how fond the two listen were of Jane, and to be certain
that they must deaire the connection at much a she
could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for
her younger daughters, aa Jane’s marrying no gmdy
must throw them in the way of other rich men; and
laady, it. was no pleasant at her time of life to be able to
consign her single daughters to the care of their sister,
that she might not be obliged to go into company more
than the liked. It wan neceuary to make this circum-
stance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it
is the etiquette; but no one wan less likely than Mr:
Bonnet to ﬁnd comfort in staying at home at any period
of her life. She concluded with many good wishes
that Lady Lucas might soon be equally fortunate,
though evidently and triumphantly believing there was
no chance of it.

In vain did Elizabeth endavour to check the rapidity
of her mother’ 3 words, or perruade her to describe her
felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpreea-
ihle vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it
was overheard by Mr Darcy, who sat opposite to them.
Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.

" What is Mr Darcy to me, pray, that I ohould be
afraid of him ? I am sure we owe him no such particular
civility as to be obliged to say nothing be may not like
to hear."

“ F or heaven’s sake, madam, speak Iowan—What
advantage can it be to you to offend Mr Darcy ?—
You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so
doing! ”

PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE. 103

Nothing that she could sa , however, had any inﬂu-
ence. Her mother would k of her views in the same
intelligible tone. Elizath blushed and blushed again
with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr Darcy, though every glance
convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was
not always looking at her mother, she was convinced
that his attention was invariably ﬁxed by her. The
expression of his face changed gradually from indignant
contem t to a composed and steady gravit .

At ength, however, Mrs Bennet had, no more to
say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at
the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of
sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and
chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not
long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper
was over, singing was talked of, and she had the morti-
ﬁcation of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, pre-
paring to oblige the com ny. By many signiﬁcant looks
and silent entreaties, di she endeavour to revent such
a proof of complaisance,——but in vain; would
not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting
was delightful to her, and she began her song. Eliza-
beth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensa-
tions, and she watched her progress through the several
stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded
at their close; for Ma , on receiving, amongst the
thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might
be revailed on to favour them again, after the pause of
half a minute began another. Mary’s powers were by
no mans fitted for such a di lay; her voice was weak,
and her manner aKected—Elizabeth was in agonies.
She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane
was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked
at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of deri-
sion at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, how-

xo4, mm: Arm newbies.

ever, impenetrably grave. She looked at her father to
entreat his interference, lest Mary should he sin 'ng all
night. He took the hint, and when Mary had niahed
her second song, said aloud, “That will do extremely
well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let
the other young ladies have time to exhibit.”

Mary, though pretending not to hm, was somewhat
disconcerted; and Elisabeth, lorry for her, and sorry
for her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety had done
no good. Others of the party were now applied to.

" If I,” said Mr Collins, “were so fortunate as to

' be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure,
in ohliging the company with an air; for I consider
music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly com-
patible with the profession of a clergyman.——I do not
mean, however, to assert that we can be justiﬁed in
devoting too much of our time to music, for then: are
certainly other things to be attended to. The rector of
a parish has much to do.—In the ﬁrst place, he must
make such an agreement for tythes as may be bmeﬁcial
to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must
write his own sermons; and the time that remains will
not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and
improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be ex—
cused from making as comfortable as possible. And I
do not think it of light importance that he should have
attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,
especiall towards those to whom he owes his prefer-
ment. l cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I ‘
think well of the man who should omit an occasion of

testif ing his respect toward: any bod connected with
the gluily." And with a bow to r Darcy, he can-
eluded his speech, which had been ken so loud as to
be heard by half the room. -— any stared—man

smiled 5 but no one looked more amused than r

Bonnet himself, while his wife seriously commended Mr

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 105

Collins for having s roltcn so sensibly, and observed in a
half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkably
clever, good kind of young man.

To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made
an agreement to expose themselves as much as they
Could during the evening, it would have been impos-
sible for them to play their parts with more sBirit or
liner success; and happy did she think it for ingley
and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped
his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be
much distressed by the folly which he must have wit-
nessed. That his two sisters and Mr Darcy, however,
should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her rela-
tions, was bad enough, and she could not determine
whether the silent contempt of the gentlemen, or the
insolent miles of the ladies, were more intolerable.

The rest of the evening brought her little amusement.
She was teased by Mr Collins, who continued most
percheringly by her side, and though he could not
prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of
her power to dance with others. In vain did she
entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offer
to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He
assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indif-
ferent to it; that his chief object was by delicate atten-
tions to recommend himself to her, and that he should
therefore make a point of remaining close to her the
whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a
pioject. She owed her greatest relief to her friend

iss Lucas, who often ’oined them, and good-
naturedly engaged Mr éollins’s conversation to
herself.

She was at least free from the offence of Mr Darcy’s
further notice; though often standing within a very
short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came
near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable

l. K

:06 run: arm PREJUDICL

cmmqueneeofherallnionstoMrWickham,and
rejoiad in it.

The Longhonm party'erethe lam of allthecorn-
panytodepart.and,bylmamvreoan Bennet,
hadtonitfordteircaniageaqmnrr ofanhourafur
evaybodydaewngongvlhich gavethemtime to see
how heartily they were wished awayh vomeof the
family. Mrs Hum and her ﬁner name yopened their
mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evi-
dently impatient to have the house to themselves. They
repulsed eve attempt of Mr: Bennet at conversion,
and by so domg thmw a languor over the whole party,
which was very little relieved by the long he: of
Mr Collins, who was complimenting Mr Bmgley and
his sister: on the elegance of their entenainment, and
the hospitality and politen which had marked their
behaviour to their guests. Darcy aid nothing at all.
Mr Bonnet, in equal Iilcncc, was enjoying the scene.
Mr llinglcy and June were standing together, a little
detached from the rest, and talked only to each other.
Elizabeth prmerved as nady a dlence as either Mn
Hum or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much
fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation
of “ Lord, how tired I am ! " accompanied by a violent

wn.

When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs Bennet
was most preingly civil in her hope of seeing the
whole family soon at Longbourn, and addressed henelf
particularly to Mr Bingley, to assure him how happy
he would make them by eating a family dinner with
them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal
invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he
readin engaged for taking the earliest op rtunity of
waiting on her, after his return from Lon on, whither
he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.

Mrs Bennet was perfectly satisﬁed, and quilted the

 

PRIDE AND PREJU‘DICE. 107

house under the delightful Frmsion that, allowing for
the necessary preparations 0 settlements, new carriages,
and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her
daughter settled at Netherlield in the course of three or
four months. of having another daughter married to
Mr Collins, she thought with e ual certainty, and with
considerable, though not ual pleasure. Elizabeth
was the least dear to her of her children ; and though
the man and the match were quite good enough for hr,
the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr Bingley and
Netherlield.

tbasm ﬁji.

HE next day opened a new scene at Longbonm..

Mr Collins made his declaration in form.

Having resolved to do it without loss of time,
as his leave of absence extended only to the following
Saturday, and having no feelings of dilhdence to make
it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set
about it in a very orderly manner, with all the obser-
vanccs, which lie supposed a regular pan of the
business. On ﬁnding Mrs Bennet, Elizabeth, and
one of the younger girls to ether, soon after breakfast1
he addressed the mother in these words: “May I
ho , madam, for your interest with your fair daughter
Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour of a Frivate
audience with her in the course of this morning? ’

Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush

of surprize, Mrs Benuet instantly answered, " Oh dear!
—Yes—certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very
happy—I am sure she can have no objection. Come,
Kitty, I want you upstairs.” And, gathering her
work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth
called out,

108 PRIDE AND PREIUDIC‘

“ Dear ma'am, do not go. I beg you will not go.
Mr Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to
y to me that anybody need not hear. I am going
away myself."

“ No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will lay
where you are." And upon Elizabeth’s teeming really,
with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she
added, “ Lizzy, I imirt upon your staying and hearing
Mr Collins."

Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction—and
a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that
it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly
as possible, she sat down again, and tried to conceal, by
inCesmnt employment, the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Mrs Bennet and Kitty
walked oil, and as soon as they were gone Mr Collins
began.

“ Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your
modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather
adds to your other perfections. You would have been
less amiable in my eyes had there not been this little
unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have

our respected mother’s permission for this address.
{’ou can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse,
however your natural delicacy may lead you to dis-
semble; my attentions have been too marked to be
mistaken. Almost as soon as I entered the house, I
singled you out as the companion of my future life.
But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state
my reasons for marrying—and, moreover, for coming
into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife,
as I certainly did." _

The idea of Mr Collins, with all his solemn com-

sure, being run away with by his feelings, made

lizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I09

short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him
farther, and he continued :—

“ My reasons for marrying are, ﬁrst, that I think it
a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances
(like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his
parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add very
greatly to my happiness; and thirdly—which perhaps I
ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular
advice and recommendation of the very noble lady
whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice
has she condescended to give me her opinion gunasked
too I) on this subject; and it was but the very aturday
night before I left Hunsford—between our pools at
Eadrille, while Mrs Jenkinson was arranging Miss de

urgh’s footstool, that she said, ‘Mr Collins, you
must marry. A clergyman like you must marry.—
Chuse properly, chuse a gentlewoman for my sake;
and for your man, let her be an active, useful sort of
person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
income go a good way. This is my advice. Find
such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to
Hunsford, and I will visit hcr.’ Allow mc, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon
the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine dc Bourgh
as among the least of the advantages in my power to
offer. You will ﬁnd her manners beyond anything I
can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must
be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the
silence and respect which her rank will inevitably
excite. Thus much for my general intention in favour
of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
were directed to Longboum instead of my own neigh-
bourhood, where I assure you there are many amiable
young women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, to
Inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I

"0 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

could not myself without resolving to chuse s
wife from among his daughters, that the lo. to than
might be as little as possible, when the melancholy
event ukes place—which, however, as I have alrudy
said,rnaynotbe for several earl. Thishasbeenmy
motive, my fair cousin, and ﬂatter myself it will not
link me in your esteem. And now nothing remains
for me but to assure you in the most animated language
of the violence of my aﬁecn'on. To fortune I am
perfectly indifferent, and shall make on demand of that
nature on your father, since I am well aware that it
could not be complied with; and that one thounnd
pounds in the 4 per centL, which will not be your: till
after your mother's decease, is all that you may ever
he entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be
uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no
ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we
are marri ”

It was absolutely necessa to intermpt him now.

“ You are too hasty, sir, ' she cried. “ You forget
thatI have made no answer. Let me do it without
further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the com-
pliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the
honour of your proposals, but it is impouihle for me
to do otherwise than decline them.”

“I am not now to learn," replied Mr Collins, with
a formal wave of the hand, “ that it is usual with young
ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they
secretly mean to accept, when he ﬁrst a plies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refu is repeated a
second or even a third time. I am therefore by no
mm: discouraged by what you have just said, and shall
hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”

“ Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “ your hope
is rather an extraordinary one after my declaration. I
do assure you that I am not one of those young ladies

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I”

(if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as
to risk their halipiness on the chance of being asked a
second time. am perfectly serious in my refusal.
You could not make "I: happy, and I am convinced that
I am the last woman in the world who would make J0"
so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know
me, I am rounded she would ﬁnd me in every respect
ill qualiﬁ for the situau'on."

“ Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think"
so,” said Mr Collins very gravely—“ but I cannot
imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of
you. And you may be cenain that when I have the
honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the highest
terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable
qualiﬁcations.”

“ Indeed, Mr Collins, all praise of me will be un-
necessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself,
and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I
wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing
your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being
otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have
satisﬁed the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my
family, and ma take possession of Longboum estate
whenever it fahs, without any self-reproach. This
matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.’ ’
And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted
the room, had not Mr Collins thus addressed her:

“ When I do myself the honour of speaking to you
next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more
favourable answer than you have now given me; though
I am Far from accusing you of cmelty at present,
because I know it to be the established custom of your
sex to reject a man on the ﬁrst application, and perhaps
you have even now id as much to encourage my suit
as would be consistent with the tme delicacy of the
female character.”

I I 2 Pl“)! All'D "IJUDlCIL

“Rally, Mr Colitis,” cried Elinhah with some
mumpuukmuoeedingly. vahatI
havehithumnidanappeartoyoointhefmmof
cocouragauent, I know not how to expre- my reﬁ-al
in mch a way as my convince you of in being one."

“Youmgivemelave to ﬂannmynlﬁmydar
commtywrrtﬁmlofmyaddnuaaremerely
wordaofcoune. Myraaunaforhelievingitale
~hridy thm:—It does not appear to me tlnt my hand
is unworthy your acceptance, or that the eﬂahliahmcnt
I can offer would be any other than highly desirable.
My situation in life, my connection: with the family of
De Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, an:
circumstancct highly in my favour; and you should
take it into further consideration, that in of your
manifold attractions, it is by no means certain that
another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
Your portion is unha pily no anall, that it will in all
likelihood undo the of your lovelineal and amiable
qualiﬁcations. Al I must therefore conclude that you
are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall chuse
to attribute it to your with of incmling my love by
suspmne, according to the usual practice of elegant
females."

“I do assure you, air, that I have no pnunaiom
whatever to that kind of elegance which consist! in
tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid
the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in
your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely im-
possible. My feeling: in every respect forbid it. Can
I speak plainer.’ Do not consider me now an an
elegant female, intending to plague you, but as a rational
creature, speaking the truth ﬁ'om her heart."

“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with
an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am perwaded

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I I3

that when sanctioned by the express authority of both
yzur excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
in acceptable.”

0 such perseverance in wilful self-deception Eliza-
beth would make no reply, and immediately and in
silence withdrew; drterlnim'd, that if he persimnl in
considering her repeated refusals as ﬂattering encourage-
ment, to apply to her father, whose negative might be
uttered in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose
behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the aﬂ'ecta-
tion and coquetry of an elegant female.

than”: ﬁt

R COLLINS was not left long to the silent
contemplation of his successful love; for Mrs
Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule

to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw
Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her
towards the staircase, than she entered the breakfast-
room, and congratulated both him and herself in warm
terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection.
Mr Collins received and returned these felicitations
with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the
particulars of their interview, with the result of which
he trusted he had every reason to be satisﬁed, since the
refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would
naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine
delicacy of her character.

This information, however, startled Mrs Bennet ;—
she would have been glad to be equally satisﬁed that
her daughter had meant to encourage him b protesting
against his proposals, but she dared not be ieve it, and
could not help saying so.

X [4 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ But, depend upon it, Mr Collins," the added,
“that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak
to her about it myself directly. She is a very head-
strong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest;
but I will male her know it."

“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried
Mr Collins; "but if she is really headstrong and
foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be
a very desimble wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for ha pineas in the marriage state. If
therefore the actuale persists in rejecting my suit,
perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting
me, because if liable to such defects of temper, the
could not contribute much to my felicity."

“Sir, you quite misunder me,” aid Mrs
Bennet, alarmed. “ Lizzy is only headstrong in mch
matters as these. In everything else she is as good-
natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr
Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her,
I am sure."

She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying
instantly to her husband, called out as she entered the
library, “0h! Mr Bennet, you are wanted imme-
diately; we are all in an u roar. You must come
and make Lizzy marry Mr ollins, for she vows she
will not have him, and if you do not make haste he
will change his mind and nor have bar.”

Mr Bonnet raised his eyes from his book as she entered,
and ﬁxed them on her Face with a calm unconoem
which was not in the least altered by her communication.

“I have not the pleasure of understanding on,”
said he. when she had ﬁnished her speech. “ 0 what
me you tallkin f"

“Of Mr ollins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares the
will not have Mr Collins. and Mr Collins begins to say
till“ he will not have Lizzy."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [15

“And what am I to do on the occasion ?—It seems
an ho less business.”

“ peak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that
you insist upon her marrying him."

“ Let her be called down. She shall hear my
opinion.”

Mrs Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was
summoned to the librar .

“ Come here, child,’ cried her father as she appeared.
“I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I
understand that Mr Collins has made you an offer
of marriage. Is it true?” Elizabeth replied that it
was. “ Very well—and this offer of marriage you
have refused . ”

“ I have, sir."

“Very well. We now come to the point. Your
mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs
Bennet P "

" Yes, or I will never see her again.”

“ An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth.
From this day you must be a stranger to one of your
parents. Your mother will never see you again if you
do nut marry Mr Collins, and I will never see you again
if you (10."

Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of
such a beginning; but Mrs Bonnet, who had persuaded
herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished,
was excessively disappointed.

“ What do you mean, Mr Bennet, by talking in this
way? You promised me to inn}! upon her marrying
him."

“ My dear,” replied her husband, “ I have two
small favours to request. First, that you will allow me
the free use of my understanding on the present occa-
siou; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to
have the library to myself as soon as may be."

“6 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in
her husband, did Mrs Bennct give up the point. She
talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and
threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure
Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mild-
ne, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes
with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety,
replied to her attacks. Though her manner varied.
however, her determination never did.

Mr Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on
what had passed. He thought too well of himself to
comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse
him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no
other way. His regard for her was quite imaginary;
and the possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach
prevented his feeling any regret.

While the family were in this conﬂwion, Charlotte
Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met
in the vestibule b Lydia, who, ﬂying to her, cried in a
half whisper, "Iyam glad you are come, for there is
such fun here !-——What do you think has happened this
morning P—Mr Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and
she will not have him.”

Charlotte had hardly time to answer, before they
were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the me news;
and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room,
where Mrs “mm-t was alone, than she likewise hean
on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compas-
sion, and entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to
comply with the wishes of all her family. “ Pray do,
my dear Miss Lucas," she added in a melancholy tone,
“ for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me,
I am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves."

Charlotte’s reply was spared by the entrance of Jane
and Elizabeth.

“Aye, there she comes,” continued Mrs Bennet,

PRIDE AND PREJU‘DICE. I 1']

“ looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more
for us than if we were at York, provided she can have
her own way.—But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy—if
you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer
of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at
all—and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain
you when your father is dead.—I shall not be able to
keep you—and so I warn you.—I have done with you
from this very day.—I told you in the library, you
know, that I should never speak to you again, and you
will ﬁnd me as good as my word. I have no pleasure
in talking to undutiful clrildreII.—Not that I have much
pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who
sull‘er as I do from nervous complaints can have no great
inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer!
—But it is always so. Those who do not complain
are never pitied.’

Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion,
sensible that any attempt to reason with or soothe her
would only increase the irritation. She talked on,
therefore, without interruption from any of them, till
they were joined by Mr Collins, who entered with an
air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom,
she said to the girls, “Now,I do insist u n it, that
you, all of you hold your tongues, and let r Collins
and me have a little conversation together.”

Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and
Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined
to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained ﬁrst is
the civility of Mr Collins, whose inquiries after heme f
and all her family were very minute, and then by a
little curiosity, satisﬁed herself with walking to the
window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful
voice Mrs Bonnet thus began the projected conversation:
——“0hl Mr Collins! ”

" My dear madam,” replied he, “ let us be for ever

"8 mu; m mm“).

Iilentonthispoint. Farheit fmmme,” hepreaeutly
continued,inavoice llntmarkcdhild' ,“tn
resent the behaviour of your daughter. ' ' to
ineviubleevillil thedutyofuaall; the
ofayouogmanvho has has: no fonunanen I have
been inurlypreferment; and I tmntI
Pediapnotthelestmﬁnmfeelingadodxofmy
poitive happiness had my fair ooan honoured me with
her hand; fothaveoftenohmneddnatresigmdonil
never-operfectuwhen the bledng denied begins to
lose somewhat of in: value in our urination. You will
not, 1 ho , consider me an showing any no
your ' y, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my
pretensions to your daughter’l favour, without Inving
Paid yourfo and Mr Bennet the complimeutof request-
lng you to interpooe your authority in my behalf. My
conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted
my distninion from your daughter's lipl instead of your
own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly
meant well through the whole alfair. My ha
been to secure an amiable companion for myuelf, with
due consideration for the advantage of all your family,
and if my manner has been at all reprehenlible, I here
beg leave to apologize.”

Chant" ﬁﬁl

HE discussion of Mr Collina'l offer was now
nearly at an end, and Elinheth had only to
suffer from the uncomfortable feelings neoco-

rarily attending it, and occasionally from some peeviah
allusion of her mother. A: for the gentleman himaelf,
Li: feelings were chieﬂy expreued, not by embarras-
ment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 119

stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely
ever spoke to her, and the assiduous attentions which he
had been so sensible of himself were transferred for the
rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listen-
ing to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
especially to her friend.

The marrow reduced no abatement of Mrs Bennet’s
ill humour or ii health. Mr Collins was also in the
same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that
his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always
to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he still
meant to stay.

After breakfast, the girls walked to Merywn to in-
quire if Mr Wickham were returned, and to lament
over his absence from the Netherﬁeld ball. He joined
them on their entering the town, and attended them to
their aunt’s, where his regret and vexation, and the con-
cern of everybody, was well talked oven—To Elizabeth,
however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity
of his absence bad been self-imposed.

"I found," said he, " as the time drew near that I
had better not meet Mr Darcy ;-tlint to be in the
same room, the same party with him for so many hours
together, might be more than I could bear, and that
scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.”

She highly approved his forbearance, and they had
leisure for a full discussion of it1 and for all the com-
mendation which they civilly bestowed on each other,
as Wickham and another ofﬁcer walked back with
them to Longboum, and during the walk he particu-
larly attended to her. His accompanying them was a
double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered
to herself, and it was most acceptable as an occasion of
introducing him to her father and mother.

Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to

HO PRIDE AND PREJUDICL

Mi- Bennet; it came from Netherﬁeld, and was
opened immediately. The envelope contained a sheet
0 elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with
a lady’s fair, ﬂowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her
sister’s countenance change as she read it1 and saw her
dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane
recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away,
tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general
conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the
subject which drew of? her attention even from
Wicltham; and no sooner had he and his companion
taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to
follow her upstairs. When they had gained their own
room, Jane, taking out her letter, said, “ This is from
Caroline Binglcy; what it contains has surprized me a
good deal. The whole party have left Netherlield by
this time, and are on their way to town—and without
any intention of coming back again. You shall hear
what she says."

She then read the ﬁrst sentence aloud, which com-
prised the information of their having just resolved to
follow their brother to town directly, and of their
meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where
Mr Hurst had a house. The next was in these
words: “I do not pretend to regret anything I shall
leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest
friend; but we will hope, at some future pen'od, to
enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we
have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain
of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved
correspondence. I depend on you for that." To
these high-ﬂown ex ressions Elizabeth listened with
all the insensibility othistmst; and though the sudden-
ness of their removal surprized her, she saw nothing in
it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherﬁeld would prevent Mr Bingley’s

PRIDE AN D PREJUDICE. I 2 I

being there; and as to the loss of their societ , she was
persuaded that Jane must soon cease to regardV it, in the
enjoyment of his.

“ It is unluck ,” mid she, after a short pause, “ that
on should not be able to see your friends before they
cave the country. But may we not hope that the

'od of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
orward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that

the delightful intercourse you have known as friends
will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters?
Mr Bingley will not be detained in London by them.”
“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will
return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to
nu:—
y “ ‘ When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined
that the business which took him to London might be
concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain
it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that
when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to
leave it again, we have determined on following him
thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant
hourn in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaint-
ance are already there for the winter; I wish I could
hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of
making one in the crowd—but of that I despair. I
dncerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may
abound in the gaieties which that season generally
brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to
prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we
shall (1 rive you.’ ”

“ It rs evident by this,” added Jane, “ that he comes

back no more this winter.”

“It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not

mean he should.”

“ Why will you think so? It must be his own

doing. He is his own master. But you do not know

I 2 2 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

M. I will read you the passage which particularly
hum me. I will have no reserves from you.

“‘Mr Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to
confess the tmth, we are scarcely less eager to meet her
again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her
equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and
the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is
heightened into something still more interesting, from
the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our
sister. I do not know whether I ever before men-
tioned to you my feelings on this subject; but [will
not leave the country without conﬁding them, and I
tmst you will not esteem them unreasonable. M
brother admires her greatly already; he will have fre-
quent opportunity now of seeing her on the most
intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection
as much as his own; and a sister’s inrtiality is not
misleading me, I think, when I call1 Charles most
capable of engaging any woman’s heart. With all
these circumstances to favour an attachment, and
nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane,
in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the
happiness of so many 3 ’

“ What think on of (Li: sentence, my dear Lizzy ?"
said Jane as she Knishcd it. “ Is it not clear enough ?
Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither ex-
pects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is per-
fectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; .and that
if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she
means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can
there be any other opinion on the subject ? ”

"‘Yes, there can; for mine is totally different.—
Will you hear it 3 "

“ Most willingly."

“ You shall have it in a few words. Miss Binglcy
sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants him

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 123

to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in
the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade
you that he does not care about you.”

Jane shook her head.

“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me.—No one
who has ever seen you together can doubt his affection.
Miss Bingley,I am sure, cannot. She is not such a
simpletnn. Could she have seen half as much love in
Mr Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her
wedding clothes. But the case is this :—We are not
rich enough or grand enough for them; and she is the
more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from
the notion that when there has been an: intermarriage, she
may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which
there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it
would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the
way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously
imagine that because Miss Bingley tells you her brother

early admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree
fern sensible of your merit than when he took leave of
you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to per-
suade him that, instead of being in love with you, he is
very much in love with her friend.”

“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,” replied
Jane, “ your representation of all this might make me

uite easy. But I know the foundation is unjust.
aroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving any one;
and all that I can hope in this case is that she is
deceived herself.” '

“ That is right—You could not have started a more
happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine.
Belleve her to be deceived, by all means. You have
now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”

“ But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even sup-
posing the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and
friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere 2 ”

H4 PRIDE AND PRENDICE.

“ You must decide for yourself,” said Eliubeth;
“and if, upon mature deliberation, you ﬁnd that the
misery of disobliging his two sisters is more than
equivalent to the happiness‘of being his wife, I advise
you by all means to refuse him."

“ How can you talk so ? " said Jane, faintly smiling.
“You must know that though I should be exceedingly
grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate."

“I did not think you would: and that being the
case, I cannot consider your situation with much
compassion.”

“ But if he returns no more this winter, my choice
will never be required. A thousand things may arise
in six months! ”

The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated
with the utmost contempt It appeared to her merely the
suggestion of Caroline’s interested wishes, and she could
not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however
openly, or artfully spoken, could inﬂuence a young man
so totally independent of every one.

She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible
what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure
of seeing its happy effect. Jane’s temper was not
desponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though
the diﬂldence of affection sometimes overcame the hope,
that Bingley would return to Netherlield and answer
every wish of her heart.

They agreed that Mrs Bennet should only hear of
the departure of the family, without being alarmed on
the score of the gentleman’s conduct; but even this
partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the
ladies should happen to go away just as they were all
getting so intimate together. After lamenting it, how-
ever, at some length, she had the consolation of thinking
that Mr Bingley would be soon down again and soon

PRIDE AND PREJUDXCE. 125

dining at Longboum, and the conclusion of all was the
comfortable declarau'on, that though he had beenjnvited
only to a family dinner, she would take care to have
two full courses.

chaste: £51]-

HE Bennets were engaged to dine with the
Lucases, and again during the chief of the day
was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr

Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her.
“ It keeps him in good humour,” said she, “ and I am
more obliged to you than I can express.” Charlotte
assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
that it amply repaid her for the little sacriﬁce of her
time. This was very amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness
extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of ;
—its object was nothing else than to secure her from
any return of Mr Collins’s addresses, by engaging them
towards herself. Such was Miss Lucas’s scheme; and
appearances were so favourable, that when they parted
at night, she would have felt almost sure of success if
he hail not been to leave I'lertfurrlslrire so very soon.
But here she did injustice to the ﬁre and independence
of his character, for it led him to escape out of Long-
houm House the next morning with admirable slyness,
and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw himself at her feet.
He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins, from
a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not
fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to
haw the attempt known till its success could be known
likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with
reason, for Charlotte had been tolerath encouragin , he
was comparatively diflident since the adventure of ed-
uesday. His reception, however, was of the most ﬂat-

"a um: um Puma.

teﬁogkind. m-Lumpauivulhimﬁoman nppu’
windowuhewalked tmnn‘l: the horne,and
mouttomeethimaocidemllyinthelane. Bulinle
ludnhedaredtohopethatmmuchbveandeloquenoe
awaited her there.

Ina-diortatimeasMrCollins'slongqieechel
would allow,everything unsettled hemmthemto
thentisfactiooof both; aodutheyenteredthe house
heeame‘lycntratedhertoname the daythatwas to
make him the happiest of men; and though arch a
solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt
no inclination to triﬂe with his happines. The
with whichhewas favoured bynature must guard his
ooumhip from any charm that could make a woman
wish for its continuance ; and Miss Luca, who accepted
him loler from the pure and dia'nterested desire of an
amblirhnwnt, cured not how soon that emblislrmt
were gained. ‘-

Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied
to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most
joyful alacrity. Mr Collins’s resent circumstances
made it a most eligible match or their daughter, to
whom they could give little fortune; and his pmspecu
of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas
began directly to calculate. with more interest than the
matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
Mr Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it
as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr Collins should
be in possession of the Longboum estate, it would he
highly expedient that both he and his wife should make
their appearance at St James’s. The whole famil , in
short, were re erly overjoyed on the occasion. 1The
younger gir s armed hopes of turning and a year or
two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and
the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Char-
lotte’s dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was toler-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 12']

ably composed. She had gained her point, and had
time to consider of it. Her reﬂections were in general
satisfactory. Mr Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible
nor agreeable; his society was irksorne, and his attach-
ment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be
her husband. Without thinking highly either of men
or of matrimony, marriage had always been her object;
it was the only honourable provision lbr well-educated
young women of small fortune. and however uncertain\
of giving happiness, must be their pleasath preservatiVE)
from want. This reservative she had now obtained;
and at the age 0 twenty-seven, without having ever
been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it. The
least agreeable circumstance in the business was the
surprize it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose
friendslip she valued beyond that of any other person.
Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame
her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken,
her feeings must be hurt by such a disapproban'on. She
resolved to give her the information herself, and there-
fore charged Mr Collins, when he returned to Long-
bourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed
before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of
course very dutifull given, but it could not be kept
without difficulty; or the curiosity excited by his long
absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his
return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was
longing to publish his prosperous love.

As he was to begin ‘his journey too early on the
momw to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-
takirg was rformed when the ladies moved for the
nigh; and rs Bennet, with great politeness and cor-
diality, said how happy they should be to see him at
Longboum again, whenever his other engagements might
allow him to visit them.

128 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“M dear madam,” he replied, “this invitation is
parti arly gratifying, because it is what I have been
hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I
shall avail myself of it as soon at possible.”

Th were all astonished; and Mr Bennet, who
could y no means wish for so speedy a return,
immediately said—

“ But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's dis-
approbatiou here, my good sir? You had better
neglect your relations than run the risk of oﬂ'ending
your patroness.”

“ My dear sir,” replied Mr Collins, “I am particu-
larly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you
may depend upon my not taking no material a step
without her ladyship’s concurrence.”

“You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk
anything rather than her displeasure; and if you ﬁnd it
likely to be misml by your coming to us again, which I
should think exceedineg probable, stay quietly a: home,
and be satisﬁed that we shall take no offence.”

“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly
excited by such affectionate attention; and depend
upon it, you will speedin receive from me a letter of
thanks for this, as for every other mark of your regard
during my stay in Hertfordshine. As for my fair
cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to
render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of
wishing them health and happiness, not exceptirg my
cousin Elilabeth.”

With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all
of them equally surprized to ﬁnd that he mediated a
quick return. Mrs Bennet wished to understand by it
that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her
younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on
to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than
any of the others; there was a solidity in his reﬂections

PRIDE AND PREJUDICP. 129

which often struck her, and though by no means so
clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read
and improve himself by such an example as hers, he
might become a very agreeable companion. But on
the following morning, every hope of this kind was done
awa . Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in
a pnvate conference with Elizabeth related the event of
the day before.

The possibility of Mr Collins's fancying himself in
love with her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth
within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could
encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as
she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment
was con uently so great as to overcome at ﬁrst the
bounds of ecorum, and she could not help crying out—

" Engaged to Mr Collins! my dear Charlotte,—
im ible! ”

he steady countenance which Miss Lucas had
commanded in telling her story, gave way to a momen-
tary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach;
though, 'as it was no more than she expected, she soon
regained hcr composure, and calmly replied—

“ery should you be sulplisul, my dear l‘ilizai—
Do you think it incredible that Mr Collins should be
able to procure any woman’s good opinion, because he
was not so happy as to succeed with you P ”

But Elizabeth had now rccollected herself, and
making a strong effort for it, was able to assure her
with tolerable ﬁrmness that the prospect of their rela-
tionship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished
her all imaginable happiness.

“ I see what you are feeling,” replied Charlotte,—
“ you must be surprized, very much surprized—so lately
as Mr Collins was wishing to marry you. But when
you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will
be satisﬁed with what I have done. I am not romantic,

13° PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

you know; I never was. I ask only a comfortable
home; and considering Mr Collins’s character, con-
nections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people
can boast on entering the marriage state."

Elizabeth quietly answered “Undoubtedly;”—and
after an awkward use, they returned to the rest of the
family. Charlotte ’d not stay much longer, and Elizabeth
was then left to reﬂect on what she had heard. It was
a long time before she became at all reconciled to the
idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr
Collins's making two offers of marriage within three days
was nothin in comparison of his being now accepted.
She had aivays felt that Charlone’s opinion of matri-
mony was not exactly like her own, but she could not
have su d it possible that, when called into action,
she wo d have sacriﬁced every better feeling to worldly
advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr Collins, was a
most humiliating fpicture !—And to the pang of a friend
disgracing hersel and sunk in her esteem, was added
the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that
friend to be tolerany happy in the lot she had chosen.

chants! till}.

LIZABETH was sitting with her mother and
sisters, reﬂecting on what she had heard, and
doubting whether she was authorised to mention

it. when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by
his daughter to announce her engagement to the family.
With many compliments to them, and much self-gratu-
lation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter—to an audience not
merely wondering, but incredulous; for Mrs Bennet,
with more perseverance than politeness, protested he

PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE. 131

must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded
and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed—

“ Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such
a story .’ Do not you know that Mr Collins wants to
many Liuy P ”

Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier
could have borne without anger such treatment; but Sir
William’s good breedio carried him through it all;
and though he begged eave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their imper-
tinence with the most forbearing courtesy.

Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him
from I0 unplmnt a situation, now put herself forward
to conﬁrm his account, by mentioning her rior know-
ledge of it from Charlene herself; and en eavoured to
put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William,
in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by making
a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be
expected from the match, the excellent character of Mr
Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from
London.

Mrs Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to
say a great deal while Sir William remained; but no
sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid
vent. In the ﬁrst place, she persisted in disbelieving the
whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that
Mr Collins had been taken in ; thirdly, she trusted that
they would never be happy to ether; and fourthly, that
the match might be broken oﬁi Two inferences, how-
ever, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and
the other that she herself had been barbaroust used b
them all : and on these two oints she principally dwe t
during the rest of the da . glothing could console and
nothing appease her. or did that day wear out her

[32 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

resentment. A week elapsed before she could see
Elizabeth without scolding her, a month away
before she could speak to Sir William or ady Lucas
without being rude, and many months were gone before
she could at all forgive their daughter.

Mr Bennet’s emotions were much more tranquil on
the occasion, and such as he did experience he ro-
nounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratlﬁed
him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom
he had been used to think tolerany sensible, was as
foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!

Jane confessed herself a little surprized at the match;
but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest
desire for their happiness; nor could Elizabeth nuade
her to consider it as improbable. Kitt an Lydia
were far from envying Miss Lucas. for 1' Collins was
only a clergyman ; and it inﬂected them in no other way
than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.

Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on
being able to retort on Mrs Bennet the comfort of
having a daughter well married; and the called at
Longboum rather oftener than usual to say how happy
she was, though Mrs Bennet’s sour looks and ill-natured
remarks might have been enough to drive happineu
away.

Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a re-
straint which ke t them mutually silent on the sub'ect;
and Elizabeth elt persuaded that no real conli encc
could ever subsist between them again. Her disappoint-
ment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to
her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure
her opinion could never be shaken, and for whose hap-
piness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had
now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his
return.

Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. r 33

and was counting the days till she might reasonably
hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks
from Mr Collins arrived on Tuesda , addressed to their
father, and written with all the soemnity of gratitude
which a twelvemonth's abode in the family might have
prompted. After discharging his conscience on that
head, he proceeds to inform them, with many rapturous
ex ressions, of his ha piness in havin obtained the
a ection of their amia le neighbour, iss Lucas, and
then explained that it was merel with the view of en-
joying her society that he had en so ready to close
with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longboum,
whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fort-
night; for ady Catherine, he added, so heartily
approved his marriage, that she wished it to take place
as soon as possible, which he tnrstcd would be an un-
answerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name
an early day for making him the happiest of men.

Mr Collins’s return into Hertfordshire was no longer
a matter of pleasure to Mrs Bennet. On the contrary,
she was as much disposed to complain of it as her hus-
band—It was very strange that he should come to
Longboum instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very
inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome.—She hated
having visitors in the house while her health was so
indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most dis-
agreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs Ben-
net, and they gave way only to the greater distress of
Mr Bingley's continued absence.

Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on
this subject. Day after day assed away without bring-
ing any other tidings of him than the report which
shortly revailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
Nethe eld the whole winter; a report which highly
incensed Mrs Bennet, and which she never failed to
contradict as a most scandalous falsehood.

‘3‘ PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

Even Elizabeth began in fear—not that Bingley VIII
indifferent—but that hie liner: would be nrcceuful in
keeping him away. Unwilling an the was to admit an
idea In deatnrctive of Jane’e happinea. and no dilhon-
ounble to the ability of her lover, she could not
vent in frequently recurring. The united effort: 0 his
two unfeeling liners and of hi: overpowering friend,
mined by the attractiom of Miss Darcy and the
amusement: of London, might be too much, she feared,
for the urength of his attachment.

Al for Jane, ber anxiety under thin was, of
course, more painﬁrl than Elimbeth’u: Kt whatever
the felt Ihe was desirous of concealing, and hetwem
henelf and Elinbeth, therefore, the lubject wan never
alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her
mother, an hour reldom passed in which she did not
urlk of Binglcy, express her impatience {or hit animal,
or even require Jane to confess that if he did not come
back, the abould think herself very ill need. It needed
all Jane’n neady mildneu to hear these attach with
tolerable tranquillity.

Mr Collins retumod most punctually on the Monday
fortnight. but his reception at Longboum war not quite
to gmcioua as it had been on his ﬁrst introduction. He
was too happy, however, to need much attention 5 and,
luckily for the others, the business of love-making re-
lieved them from a great deal of his company. The
chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge,
and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
to make an apology for his absence before the family
went to bed.

Mrs Bennet wan really in a most pitiahle mate. The
very mention of anything concerning the match threw
her into an agony of ill-humour. and wherever Ibe
went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of
Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her succcaor in

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I 35

that house, she regarded her with jealous sbhorrence.
Whenever Charlene came to see them, she concluded
her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr Collins, was
convinced that they were talking of the Longhoum
estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters
out of the house, as soon as Mr Bonnet were dead.
She complained bitterly of all this to her husband.

“ Indeed, Mr Beunet,” said she, “ it is very hard to
think that Charlotte Lucas should ever be mistress of
this house, that I should be forced to make way for bar,
and live to see her take my place in it! ”

“ My dear, do not give way to such loomy
thoughts. Let us hope for better things. int us
ﬂaner ourselves that I may be the survivor.”

This was not very consoling to Mrs Bennet, and,
therefore, instead of making any answer, she went on as
before.

“ I cannot hear to think that they should have all
this estate. If it was not for the entail, I should not
mind it."

“ What should not you mind ?"

“ I should not mind anything at all."

“ Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a
state of such insensibility."

“I never can be thankful, Mr Bennet, for anything
about the email. How any one could have the con-
science to entail away an estate from one’s own
daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of
Mr Collins too!—Why should be have it more than
anybody else?”

“I leave it to yourself to determine,” said Mr
Beunet.

[36 PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE.

than“: $1117.

188 BINGLEY’S letter arrived, and put an
end to doubt. The ve ﬁrst sentence con-
veyed the assurance of their being all settled in

London for the winter, and concluded with her brother’s
regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his
friends in Hertfordshire before he left the country.

Hope was over, entirely over; and when June could
attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except
the professed affection of the writer, that could give
her any comfort. Miss Darcy’s praise occupied the
chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on,
and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing inti-
macy, and ventured to predict the accom lishment of
the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter.
She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother‘s
being an inmate of Mr Darcy’s house, and mentioned
with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to
new furniture.

Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated
the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her
heart was divided between concern for her sister, and
resentment against all others. To Caroline’s assertion
of her brother’s being partial to Miss Darcy she id no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she dilubted
no more than she had ever done; and much as she had
always been disposed to like him, she could not think
without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easi-
ness of temper, that want of pro r resolution, .which
now made him the slave of his esigning friends, and
led him to sacriﬁce his own happiness to the caprice of
their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however.
been the only sacriﬁce, he might have been allowed
to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best;

PRIDE AND PREJUDlCE. 137

but her deter‘s was involved in it, as' she thought he
must be sensible himself. It ms 3 subject, in short,
on which reﬂection would be long indulged, and must
be unavailing. She could think of nothing else; and
yet whether Bingley’s regard had really died away, or
were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether
he had been aware of Jane’s attachment, or whether it
had escaped his observation; whatever were the case,
though her opinion of him must be materially affected
by the difference, her sister’s situation remained the
same, her peace equally wounded.

A day or two passed before Jane had courage to
ﬁle of her feelings to Elizabeth : but at last, on Mrs

net's leaving them together, after a longer irritation
than usual about Netherﬁeld and its master, she could
not help saying,

“ O that my dear mother had more command over
herself I she can have no idea of the pain she gives me
by her continual reﬂections on him. But I will not
rcpine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and
we shall all be as we Were before.”

Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous
solicitudc, but mid nothing.

“ You doubt me,” cried Jane, slightly colouring;
“indeed you have no reason. He may live in my
memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance,
but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,
and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I
have not tba! pain. A little time therefore—I shall
certainly try to get the better.”

With a stronger voice she soon added, “I have this
comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an
error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm
to no one but myself."

“ y dear Jane! ” exclaimed Elizabeth, “ you are
too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedneus are

I. K

l 38 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

really angelic; I do not know what to say man. I
feel as if I had never done you justice, or lo you as
you deserve."

Min Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary
merit, and threw back the praise on her sister's warm
sﬂection.

“Nay,” said Elizabeth, " this is not fair. Tau wish
to think all the world re ctable, and are hurt if I
speak ill of anybody. I on y want to think you perfect,
and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of
my running into any excess, of my encroaching on

our privilege of universal good-will. You need not.

here are few ople whom I really love, and still
fewer of whom think well. The more I see of the
world, the more am I dissatisﬁed with it; and every
day conﬁrms my belief of the inconsistency of all
human characters, and of the little dependence that
can be placed on the appearance of either merit or
sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I
will not mention; the other is Charlotte's marriage.
It is unaccountable! in every view it is unaccount-
able ! "

“ My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings
as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not
make allowance enough for difference of situation and
temper. Consider Mr Collins’s respectability, and
Charlotte's prudent, steady, character. Remember
that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune,
it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe,
for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like
regard and esteem for our cousin.’

“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost any-
thing, but no one else could be beneﬁted by such a
belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte
had any regard for him, I should only think worse
of her understanding than I now do of her heart. My

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 139

clear Jane, Mr Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-
minded, silly man ; you know he is, as well as I do :
and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who
marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking.
You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas.
You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change
the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour
to rsuade ourself or me, that selﬁshness is prudence,
n insensihi ity of danger security for happiness.”

“I must think our language too strong in speaking
of both,” replied ane; “ and I hope you will be con-
vinced of it, by seeing them happy together. But
enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
mentioned two instances. I cannot misunderstand you,
but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinlb
ing tbal perm to blame, and saying your opinion of
him is sunk. We must not be so ready to Fancy
ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect
a lively young man to be always so guarded and cir-
cumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity
that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means
more than it does.” -

“ And men take care that they should."

“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justiﬁed;
but I have no idea of there being so much design in the
world as some persons imagine."

“ I am far from attributing any part of Mr Bingley’s
conduct to design,” mid Elizabeth ; " but without
scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy,
there may be error, and there maybe misery. Thought-
lessness, want of attention to other people’s feelings, and
want of resolution, will do the business.”

“And do you impute it to either of those ? ”

“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease
you by saying what I think of persons you esteem.
Stop me whilst you can."

I40 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“YIpu persist, then, in oran his sisters inﬂuence
him i

“ Yes, in conjunction with his friend."

“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to
inﬂuence him? They can only with his happiness;
andifheisattaehedtorne,nootherwoman can
secure it.”

“ Your ﬁrst position is false. They may wish many
things besides his happiness; they may with his increase
of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to
marry a girl who has all the importance of money,
reat connections and pride."

“ Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to chuse Miss
Darcy,” replied Jane; “but this ma be from better
ﬁelings than you are supposing. hey have known
her much longer than they have known me; no wonder
if they love her better. But, whatever may be their
own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have
opposed their brother’s. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something
very objectionable? If they believed him attached to
me, they would not try to part us; if he were so,
they could not succeed. By supposing such an slice-
tion, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong,
and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the
idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken—
nr, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison
of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his
sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light
in which it may be understood."

Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from
this time Mr Bingley’s name was scarcely ever men-
tioned between them.

Mrs Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at
his returning no more, and though a day seldom
in which Elizabeth did not account for it cearly,

PRIDE AND renounce. 141

there seemed little chance of her ever considering it
with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to
convince her of what she did not believe herself, that
his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of
a common and transient liking, which ceased when
he saw her no more; but though the probability of
the statement was admitted at the time, she had the
same story to repeat every day. Mrs Bennet’l best
comfort was that Mr Bingley must be down again
in the summer.

Mr Bennet treated the matter differently. “So,
Lizzy,” said he one day, “your sister is crossed in
love, I ﬁnd. I congratulate her. Next to being
married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little new
and then. It is something to think of, and gives her
a sort of distinction among her com nions. When is
your turn to come? You will hardlay bear to be long
outdone by Jane. Now is our time. Here are
oﬂicers enough at Meryton to thsappoint all the young
ladies in the country. Let Wickham be your man.
He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”

“ Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would
satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane’s good
fortune."

“True,” said Mr Bennet, “ but it is a comfort to
think that whatever of that kind may hefal you, you
have an affectionate mother who will always make the
most of it."

Mr Wickham’s society was of material service in
di lling the gloom which the late perverse occun'ences

thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They
saw him often, and to his other recommendations was
now added that of general unreserve. The whole of
what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr
Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was
now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and

I42 PRIDE AND PRIJUDICI'.

everybody was used to think how much they had
always disliked r Darcy before they had known any-
thin of the matter.

' Bonnet was the only cruture who could suppose
there might. be any extenuating circumstances in the
case, unknown to the society of Hertfondshire ; her
mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances.
and urged the possibility of rnmakes—but by everybody
else Mr Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.

chm" ﬁﬁ‘H.

FTER a week I: in professions of love and
schemes of felicrty, Mr Collins was called from
his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday.

The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on
his side, by preparations for the reception of his bride ;
as he had reason to hope, that shortly after his next
retum into Hertfordshire, the day wou d be ﬁxed that
was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave
of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as
before; wished his fair cousins health and happiness
again, and promised their father another letter of
thanks.

On the following Monday, Mrs Bennet had the
pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who
came as usual to spend the Christmas at Longboum.
Mr Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
superior to his sister, as Well by nature as education. The
Netherﬁeld ladies would have had difﬁculty in believing
that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his
own warehouses, could have been so well-bred and
agreeable. Mrs Gardiner, who was several years
younger than Mrs Bennct and Mrs Phillips, was an

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 143

amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite
with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest
and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular
regard. They had frequently been staying With her in
town.

The ﬁrst part of Mrs Gardiner' s business on her
arrival was to distribute her presents and describe the
newest fashions. When this was done she had a less
active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs
Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to
tomplain of. They had all been very ill-used since she
hat saw her sister. Two of her girls had been on the
point of maniage, and after all there was nothing
:n It.

“I do not blame Jane,” the continued, “ for Jane
would have got Mr Bingley if she could. But Liuy!
oh, sister! it is very hard to think that she might have
been Mr Collins’s wife by this time, had it not been for
her own perverseness. He made her an offerin this very
room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is,
that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I
have, and that Longboum estate is just as much entailed
as ever. The Lucnees are very artful people indeed,
sister. The are all for what they can get. I am
sony to say It of them, but so it is. It makes me very
nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own
family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before an body else. However, your coming just at
this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad
to hear what you tell us, of long sleeves."

Mrs Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had
been given before, in the course of Jane and Elizabeth’s
correspondence with her, made her sister a slight
answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
conversation.

When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke

I“ PRIDE AND PREIUDICE.

more on the subject. “ It seems likely to have been a
desirable match for Jane,” said she. “ I am sorry it
went off. But these things ha so often! A oung
man, such as you describe Mr ingley, so easily all! in
love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and when
accident separates them, so easily forget! her, that these
sort of inconstancies are very frequent.”

“ An excellent consolation in its way," mid Eliza-
beth, “ but it will not do for or. We do not sulfer by
accident. It does not often happen that the interferenc:
of friends will persuade a young man of independenl
fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was
violently in love with only a few days before.”

“But that expression of ‘violently in love' is so
hackneyed, so doubtful, so indeﬁnite, that it gives me
very little idea. It is as often applied to feelings which
arise from an half-hour’s acquaintance, as to a real,
strong attachment. Pray, lrow via/en! war Mr Bingley's
love?"

“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was
growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly
engrossed by her. Every time they metI it was more
decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended
two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance;
and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an
answer. Could there be ﬁner symptoms? Is not
general incivility the very essence of love ? "

“ Oh, yes l—-of that kind of love which I suppose
him to have felt. Poor Jane! I am sorry for her,
because, with her disposition, she may not get over
it immediately. It had better have happened to Jim,
Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it
sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed on
to go back with us? Change of scene might be of
service—4nd perhaps a little relief from home may he
as useful as anything."

PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE. I45

Eliubeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal,
and felt persuaded of her sister's ready acquiescence.

“ I hope," added Mr- Gardiner, " that no considera-
tion with regard to this young man will inﬂuence her.
We live in so different a rt of town, all our con-
nections are so different, and:a as you well know, we 0
out so little, that it is ve improbable that they shou d
meet at all, unless he real y comes to see her.”

“ And [but is quite im 'ble ; for he is now in the
custody of his friend, an Mr Darcy would no more
suﬁ‘er him to call on Jane in such a of London!
My dear aunt, how could fyou think 0 it? Mr Darcy
may perhaps have beard 0 such a place as Gracechurch
Street, but he would hardly think a month's ablution
enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once
to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr Bingley never
stirs without him."

“ So much the better. I hope th will not meet at
all. But does not Jane correspon with his sister?
Sb: will not be able to help calling.” .

“ She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”

But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth
aﬁ'ected to place this int, as well as the still more
interesting one of Binglty’s being withheld from seeing
Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced
her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought
it probable, that his affection might be reanimated, and
the inﬂuence of his friends successfully combated by the
more natural influence of Jane's attractions.

Miss Bennet accepted her aunt’s invitation with
pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her
thoughts at the same time, than as she hoped by Caro-
linc’s not living in the same house with her brother, she
might occasionally spend a morning with her, without
any danger of seeing him.

r46 PRIDE AND mmmcrt.

_ The Gardiner: ﬂayed a week at Longboum; and
what with the Phillipset, the Lucases, and the ofﬁcers,
there was not a da without its engagement. Mrs
Bennet .had so care lly provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit
down to a family dinner. When the engagement was
for home, some of the oﬂicen always made part of it
—of which oﬂicers Mr Wiekham was sure to be one;
and on these occasions, Mn Gardiner, rendered sus-
picious by Elizabeth’s warm commendation of him,
narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,
from what she saw, to be ve serioully In love, their
preference of each other was p ain enough to make her
a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth
on the subject before she left Hertfordshire, and re-
present to her the imprudence of encouraging such an
attachment.

To Mrs Gardiner, Wickham had one means of
affording pleasure, unconnected with his geneml powers.
About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage,
she had spent a considerable time in that very part of
Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, there-
fore, many acquaintance in common ; and though Wick-
ham had been little there since the death of Darcy’s
father, ﬁve years before, it was yet in his power to give
her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she
had been in the way of procuring.

Mrs Gardiner hrrd seen Pemberley, and known the
late Mr Darcy by character rfectly well. Here con-
sequently was an inexhaustib e subject of discourse. In
comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute
description which Wickham could give, and in bestow-
ing her tribute of praise on the character of its late pos-
sessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being
made acquainted with the present Mr Dare ’3 tmtment
of him, she tried to remember something 0 that gentle-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.‘ :47

man’s reputed disposition when quite a lad which might
agree with it, and was conﬁdent at last that she recol-
lected having heard Mr F itzwilliam Darcy formerly
spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.

chum #17].

RS GARDINER’S caution to Elizabeth was
punctually and kindly given on the ﬁrst favour-
able opportunity of speaking to her alone; nfter

honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went
on :—

“ You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love
merel because you are warned against it; and, there-
fore, I am not afraid of speaking o mnly. Seriously, I
would have you be on your guar Do not involve
yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection
which the want of fortune would make so very im-
prudent. Ihave nothing to say a ainst bim .- he is a
most interesting young man; and i he had the fortune
he ought to have, I should think on could not do
better. But as it is, you must not et your fancy run
away with you. You have sense, and we all expect
you to use it. Your father would depend on Jnur
resolution and good conduct, I am sure. You must not
disap )oint your father.”

“ y dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.”

“ Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious like-
wise.”

“ Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I
will take care of myself, and of Mr Wickham too. He
shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it.”

“ Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”

“I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I

I48 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

am not in love with Mr Wicltlnm ; no, I cettainly am
not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agree-
able man I ever saw—and if he becomes really attached
to me—I believe it will be better that he should not.
I see the imprudence of iL—Oh! (bat abominable Mr
Darcy! —My fadier'l opinion of me does me the
greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it.
My father, however, is panial to Mr Wickham. In
short, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the
means of making any of you unha py; but since we see
every day that where there is a ection, young people
are seldom withheld by immediate want 0 fortune from
entering into engagements with each other, how can I
promise to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creatures
if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it
would be wisdom to resist? All that I can i
you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I wil not be
in a hurry lo believe myself his ﬁrst object. When I
am in com ny with him, I will not be wishing. In
short, I wil do my best."

“ Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage hi:
coming home so very often. At least, you should not
remind your mother of inviting him.”

“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth with a
conscious smile: “very tnie, it will be wise in me to
refrain from tbal. But do not imagine that he is always
here so often. It is on your account that he has been
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother’ s
ideas as to the necessit of constant company for her
friends. But really, an upon my honour, I will try to
do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you
are satisﬁed.”

Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth
having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they
parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on
such a point, without being resented.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 149

Mr Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it
had been uitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he
took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no
great inconvenience to Mrs Benneo His marriage wal
now fast approaching, and she was at length so far
resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to
say, in an ill-natured tone, that she “ subbed they might
be hvapp ." Thursday was to be the wedding ay, and .
on ednesday Miss [Lucas] paid her farewell visit;
and when she rose to take leave, Eliubeth, ashamed of
her mother‘s ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and
sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the
room. As they went down stairs together, Charlotte
said—

“I shall depend on hearing from you very often,
Elia."

“ T541! you certainly shall.”

“And I have another favour to ask. Will you
come and see me P ”

“We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.”

“ I am not likely to leave Kent for some time.
Promise me, therefore, to come to Hunsford.”

Eliubeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little
pleasure in the visit.

" My father and Maria are to come to me in March,”
added Charlotte, “ and I hope you will consent to be
of the party. Indeed, Eliu, you will be as welcome
to me as either of them.”

The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom
set off for Kent from the church door, and everybody
had as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual.
Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their cor-
respondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever
been; that it should be equally unreserved was im -
sible. Eliubeth could never address her without m-
ing that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and

[5° PRIDE AND "ENDICI.

though determined not no Jackal a a
itwaforlhenkeof'hathad hand-aha llnnwhn
was. Charhue'l Emlaxenwete reodmdvihagood
dnlofqgerneu;l.helecouldnmhrnhecuriuitylo
kmwhwhwwﬂqakofhambmhowh
would like Lady Cadmingand how Wine'ould
dare pronounce henelf to be; than the letter-
were read. Elinhezh felt that C expend her-
eelfoneverypointencdyadle might luve faueen.
Shewmte cheerfully, natured unmnded with mmﬁxn,
and Emilia-ml nothing which the could not The
horn-e, fumimre, neighbourhood, and roads, were all In
her Ian; and Lady Catherine's behaviour wa mod
friendly and ohliging. It was Mr Collinl’l picture of
Huntfonl and Roéngl rationally aoﬁcmd; and Eliza-
beth perceived that she must wait for her own vii:
there, to know the rust.

Janehadalmdywrincnafcwlincem her titer to
announce their nfe arrival in London; andwhenlhe
wrote again,Eliuher.h hopedilwouldbeinherpower
to my numbing of the Bingleys.

Herimparienoe for thilaecond letterwuuwtll
rewardednimpan'mce generally is Jane had been a
week in town without either seeing or baring from
Caroline. She accounled for it, however, by imposing
that her last letter to her frimd from Longhourn Ind
by name accident been lost.

“My aunt," she continued, “in going to-morrow
inwrhatpanoftherown,aud I shall take Lhe oppor-
(unity of alling in Grosveuor Street.”

Shewmeagﬁnwhendmviﬁtquandnhe
hadeeen Min Bingley. “Ididuonhink Carolinein
qiriu," were her words, “but the was very glad to lee
me, and reprmched me for giving her no notice of my
coming to London. I was right, therefore; my last
letterhadnevarreachcdher. I inquiredaﬁertheit

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [5|

brother, of course. He was well, but so much en-
gaged with Mr Darcy that they scarcely ever saw
him. I found that Miss Dare was expected to dinner.
I wish I could see her. y visit was not long, as
Caroline and Mrs Hurst were going out. I dare say
I shall soon see them here.”

Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It con- '
vinced her that accident only could discover to Mr
Bingley her sister’s being in town.

Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of
him. She endeavoan to persuade herself that she did
not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss
Bingley’s inattention. After waiting at home every
morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a
fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear ; but
the shortness of her sta , and yet more, the alteration
of her manner, would al ow Jane to deceive herself no
longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion
to her sister will prove what she felt.

“ My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of
triumphing in her better judgment, at m expense, when
I confess myself to have been entime eceived in Miss
Bingley’s regard for me. But, my dear sister, though
the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate
if I still assert. that, considering what her behaviour
was, my conﬁdence was as natural as your suspicion.
I do not at all com rehend her reason for wishing to be
intimate with me; ut if the same circumstances were
to ha pen again, I am sure I should be deceived again.
Caro me did not return my visit till yesterday; and not
a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime.
When she did come, it was very evident that she had
no pleasure in it ; she made a slight, formal apology,
for not calling before, said not a word of wishing to
see me again, and was in every'respecl so altered a

152 PRIDE AND PREIUDICI‘.

aaturqtbatwbeusbewentawawauperfecd
resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I
pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very
wrong in tingling me out as she did; I can safely say
that every advance to intima began on her side. But
I pity her, because the mun eel thatthehas beat acting
wrong, and because I am very sure that anxi for her
brother is the cause of it. I need not ex ain m -
self farther; and though we know this anxrety to
guite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account
or her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he
is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may feel on his
behalf in natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder,
however, at her having any such fears now, because, if
he had at all cared about me, we must have met long,
long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am
certain, from something she said herself; and yet it
should seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted
to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss
Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were not afraid
of judging harshly,I should be almost tempted to say
that there il a strong appearance of duplicity in all this.
But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,
and think only of what will make me happy—your
affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle
and aunt. Let me hear from you very soon. Miss
Bingley said something of his never returning to Nether-
ﬁeld again, of giving up the house, but not with any
certainty. We had better not mention it. I am ex-
treme] glad that you have such pleasant accounts from
our fnends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with
Sir William and Maria. I am sure you will be very
comfortable them—Yours, 8w.”

This letter gave Elizabeth some pain ; but her spirits
returned as she considered that Jane would no longer be

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 153

duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the
brother was now absolutely over. She would not even
wish for any renewal of his attentions. His character
sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for
him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she
seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr Darcy’s
sister, as by Wickham’s account, she would make him
abundantly regret what he had thrown away.

Mrs Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of
her promise concerning that gentleman, and required
information ; and Elilabeth had such to send as might
rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself.
His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were
over, he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth
was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it
and write of it without material pain. Her heart had
been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisﬁed
with believing that :5: would have been his only choice,
had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of
ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of
the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in
this case than in Charlotte's, did not quan'el with him
for his wish of independence. Nothing, on the con-
trary, could be more natural ; and while able to suppose
that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she
was read to allow it a wise and desirable measure for
both, and, could very sincerely wish him happ .

All this was acknowledged to Mrs Gardyiner; and
after relating the circumstances, she thus went on:—
“ I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never
been much in love; for had I really experienced that
pure and elevating passion,I should at present detest
his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But
my feelings are not only cordial towards bin: ,- they
are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot ﬁnd
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least un-

l. L

154 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

willing to think her a very good tort of girl. There
can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been
effectual; and though I should certainly be a more
interesting object to all my acquaintance were I dis~
tractedly in love with him, I cannot say that I regret
my compamtive insigniﬁcance. Importance may some-
times be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia take
his defection much more to heart than I do. Theyare
young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to
the mortifying convictiOn that handsome young men
must have something to live on as well as the plain.”

GIMP"! $51733.

ITH no greater events than these in the Long-
bourn family, and otherwise diversiﬁed by little
beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty

and sometimes cold, did January and Febniary pass away.
March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had
not at ﬁrst thought very seriously of going thither; but
Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan,
and she gradually learned to consider it herself with
greater pleasure as well as grearcr certainty. Absence
had increased her desire of seeing Charlotte again, and
weakened her disgust of Mr Collins. There was novelty
in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a
little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The
journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and,
in short. as the time drew near, she would have been
very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went
on smoothly, and was ﬁnally settled according to
Charlotte’s ﬁrst sketch. She was to accompany Sir
William and his second daughter. The improvement
of spending a night in London was added in time, and
the plan became perfect as plan could be.

PRIDE AND PREJUDlCE l

The only pain was in leaving her father, who would
certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the int,
so little liked her going, that he told her to write to
him, and almost romised to answer her letter.

The farewell ween herself and Mr Wickham was
perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present

ursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had

n the lim to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the ﬁrst to be admired; and
in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every
enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in
Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion
of her—their opinion of everybody—would alwa
coincide, there was a solicitudc, an interest which she felt
must ever attach her to him vn'th a most sincere regard;
and she parted from him convinced that, whether
married or single, he must always be her model of the
amiable and pleasing.

Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a
kind to make her think him less agreeable. Sir William
Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humouer girl,
but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that
could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about
as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth
loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William’s too
long. He could tell her nothing new of the wonders
of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities
were worn out, like his information.

It was a journey of only twent -four miles, and they
began it so early as to be in émcechurch Street by
noon. As they drove to Mr Gardiner’s door, Jane
was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival ;
when they entered the passage she was there to welcome
them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was
pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. 0n the
stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eager-
ness for their cousin’s appearance would not allow them

r56 nun: AND PREJUDICE.

to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as
they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented
their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The
day passed most pleasantly away ; the morning in hustle
and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.

Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their
ﬁrst subject was her sister; and she was more grieved
than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiriel,
that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits,
there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable,
however, to hope that they would not continue long.
Mrs Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss
Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated
conversations occurring at different times between Jane
and herself, which proved that the former had, from
her heart, given up the acquaintance.

Mrs Gardiner then mllicd her niece on Wickham’s
deoertion, and compilimented her on hearing it so well.

“But1 my dear lizaheth," the added, “ what sort
of girl is Miss King? I should be sorry to think our
friend mercenary.”

“ Pray, my dear aunt, what is the diiference in matri-
monial aﬂhirs, between the mercenary and the prudent
motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin ?
Last Christmas you wme afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is
trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you
want to ﬁnd out that he is mercenary.”

“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss
King is, I shall know what to think."

“ She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I
know no harm of her.”

“ But he paid her not the smallest attention till her
grandfather‘s death made her mistress of this fortune.”

“No—why should he? If it were not allowable
for him to gain my affections because I had no money,

paws AND PREJUDICE. :57

what occasion could there be for making love to a girl
whom he did not care about, and who was equally poor?”

“ But there scents indelicacy in directing his atten-
tion towards her so soon after this event."

“ A man in distressed circumstances has not time for
all those elegant decorums which other peo le ma
observe. If .rbe does not object to it, why shoul «we ? ’

“Her not objecting does not justify Lint. It only
shows her being deﬁcient in something herself—sense
or feeling.”

“Well,” cried Elizabeth, “ have it as on choose.
He shall be mercenary, and .rb: shall be foo ish.”

“ No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should
be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who
has lived so long in Derbyshire.”

“Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of
young men who live in Derbyshirc; and their intimate
friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better.
I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going
Ito-marrow where I shall ﬁnd a man who has not one
agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to
recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth
knowing, after all.”

“ Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of
disappointment.”

Before they were separated by the conclusion of the
play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation
to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure
which they proposed taking in the summer.

“We have not quite determined how far it shall
carry us," said Mrs Gardiner, “but, perhaps, to the
Lakes.”

No scheme could have been more agreeable to Eliza-
beth. and her acceptance of the invitation was most
ready and grateful. “M dear, dear aunt,” she rup-
turously cried, “.what de ightl what felicit ! You
give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to ' ppoint-

158 PRIDE AND PREJUDICB.

ment and spleen. What are men to rocks and moon-
tains? Oh! what hours of trans rt we shall spendl
And when we do return, it I not be like other
travellers, without bein able to give one accurate idea
of anything. We can"; know where we have gone—
we MW recollect what we have seen. Lakes, moun-
tains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any
particular scene, will we begin quarrelling about its
relative situation. Let our rst effusions be less in-
supponable than those of the generality of travellers.”

Cbsnttr ﬁi‘HJ‘J].

VERY object in the next day’s journey was new
and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits
were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen

her sister looking so well as to banish all {ear for her
health, and the rospect of her northern tour was a
constant source of? delight.

When they left the high road for the lane to Huns-
foul, eVery eye was in search of the Parsonage, and
eve turning expected to bring it in view. The paling
of osings Park was their boundary on one side.
Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had
heard of its inhabitants.

At length the Parsonage was discernible. The
garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it,
the green pales, and the laurel hedge, everything de-
clared they were arriving. Mr Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the
small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the
house amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party.
In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing

PRIDE AND PREJUDlCE. 159

at the sight of each other. Mrs Collins welcomed her
friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was
more and more satisﬁed with coming when she found
herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly
that her cousin’s manners were not altered by his mar-
riage; his formal civility was just what it had been, and
he detained her some minutes at the are to hear and
satisfy his inquiries after all her famﬁy. They were
then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as
soon as they were in the rlour he welcomed them a
second time, with ostentatmus formality, to his humble
abode, and punctually repeated all his wife’s ollers of
refreshment.

Eliubeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and
she could not help fancying that in displaying the good
proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he
addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to
make her feel what ﬁre had lost in refusing him. But
though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she
was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance,
and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she
could have so cheerful an air with such a connanion.
When Mr Collins said anything of which his wife
might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not
unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte.
Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in
general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting
ong enough to admire every article of fumiture in the
room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an
account of dieir ‘oumey, and of all that had happened
in London, Mr (lollins invited them to take a stroll in
the garden, which was large and well laid out, and to
the cultivation of which he attended himself. To
work in his arden was one of his most respectable
pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of

:60 mm: AND Pnajunice

countenance with which Charlotte talked of the halth-
fulness of the exercise, and owned the encouraged it
as much as pouible. Here, leading the way through
every walk and cross walk, and tcarcely allowing them
an interval to utter the pruitea he asked for, every view
we pointed out with a minuteneta which left beauty
entirely behind. He could number the ﬁeld‘ in every
direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the Vler which
his garden, or which the country or the kingdom could
boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of
Rosings, al‘l'ordcd by an opening in the tree: that
bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his
house. It was a handsome modern building, well
situated on rising ground.

From his garden, Mr Collins would have led them
round hll two meadows; but the ladies, not having
ahoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned
back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Char-
lotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely
well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of show-
ing it without her husband’s help. It was rather Irmll,
but well built and convenient; and everything wan ﬁtted
up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of
which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When
Mr Collins could be forgotten, there was really a great
air of comfort throughout, and by Charlotte’s evident
enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must he often
forgotten.

She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still
in the country. It was spoken of again while they
were at dinner, when Mr Collins joining in, obSel‘Ved—

“ Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of
seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing
Sunday at Church, and I need not say you will be
delighted with her. She is all afi‘ability and conde-

rams AND PRBJUDICE. :61

scension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured
with some portion of her notice when service is over.
I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will
include you and my sister Maria in every invitation
with which she honours us during your stay here.
Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We
dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never
allowed to walk home. Her ladyship’s carriage is
regularly ordered for us. I rbauld say, one of her
ladyship’s carriages, for she has several.”

“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible
woman indeed,” added Charlotte, “ and a most
attentive neighbour.”

“ Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say.
She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard
with too much deference.”

The evening was spent chieﬂy in talking over Hert-
fordshire news, and telling again what had been already
written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude
of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte’s
degree of contentment7 to understand her address in
guiding, and com sure in bearing with, her husband,
and to acknowle go that it was all done very well.
She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the
quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatioul
interruptions of Mr Collins, and the gaieties of their
intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon
settled it all.

About the ’middle of the next day, as she was in her
room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below
seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and,
after listening a moment, she heard somebody running
upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her.
She opened the door and met Maria in the landing
place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out—

“ Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come

I62 PRIDE AND PREJUDICL

into the dining-room, for there is such a night to be
Ieenl I will not tell you what it in. Make hate,
and come down this moment."

Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell
her nothing more, and down they ran into the dining-
room, which fronted the lane, in quett of this wonder!
it was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden

gate.

“And ll this all?” cried Elizabeth. “ 1 expected
at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here
it nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter! "

“ La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the
mistake, “it in not Lady Catherine. The old lady in
Mrs Jenkinson, who lives with them; the other it Miss
de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
mature. Who would have thought she could be so
thin and small ! "

“ She is abonrinnbly rude to keep Charlotte out of
doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in i"

“ 0h, Charlotte ys she hardly ever does. It is
the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in.”

“ I like her appearance," said Elizabeth, stnick with
other ideas. “ She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she
will do for him very well. She will make him a very
pro r wife."

r Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the
gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir William,
to Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the door-
way, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before
him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh
looked that way.

At length there was nothing more to be said; the
ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house.
Mr Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began
to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the
whole party was asked to dine at Rating: the next day.

nunc AND summon ' 163

wat" ﬁilﬁu

R COLLINS’S triumph, in consequence of
this invitation, was complete. The power of
displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his

wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility
towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had
wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should
be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady
Catherine’s condescendon, as he knew not how to
admire enough.

“ I confess,” said he, “that I should not have been
at all surprized by her ladyship’s asking us on Sunday to
drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather
expected, from m knowledge of her aEahility, that it
would happen. ut who could have foreseen such an
attention as this? Who could have imagined that we
should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation,
moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
after our arrival! ’

“ am the less su rived at what has happened,”
replied Sir William, “ rom that knowledge of what the
manners of the great really are, which my situation in
life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon."

Scarccly anything was talked of the whole day or
next morning but. their visit to Rosings. Mr Collins
was carefully instructin them in what they were to
expect, that the sight 0 such rooms, so many servants,
and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower
them.

When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he
said to Elisabeth—

“Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin,
about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from ne-

164 nun: um PREJUDICI.

quirin that elegance of dress in us which becomes
heme] and daughter. I would advise you merely to
put on whatever of your clothes is supenor to the in
—there is no occasion for anything more. Lady
Catherine will not think the wone of you for being
simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of
rank reserved.”
bile they were dressing, he came two or three
times to their different doom, to recommend their being
quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be
kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts
of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite fright-
ened Malia Lucaa, who had been little used to com-
ny, and she looked forward to her introduction at
clings with as much apprehension as her father had
done to his presentation at St James’s.

As the weather was line, they had a pleasant walk of
about half a mile across the park. Every park has it!
beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to
be pleased with, though she could not be in such mp-
tures as Mr Collins expected the scene to inspire, and
was but slightly aﬁ‘ected by his enumeration of the win-
dows in front of the house, and his relation of what
the glazing altogether had originally con Sir Lewis de
Bourgh.

When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria’s
alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir
William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth’s
courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of
Lady Catherine that lte her awful from any extra-
ordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere
statelineu of money and rank she thought she could
witness without trepidation.

From the entrance-hall, of which Mr Collins inted
out, with a rapturous air, the ﬁne proportion and ished
ornaments, they followed the servants through on ante-

mum AND pmumcs. :65

chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her
daughter, and Mrs Jenkinson were sitting. Her lady-
shi with great condescension, arose to receive them;
ndhas Mrs Collins had settled it with her husband that
the olﬁce of introduction should be hers, it was per-
formed in a proper manner, without any of those
apologies and thanks which he would have thought
necessary.

In spite of having been at St James’s Sir William
was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding
him, that he had but just courage enough to make a
very low bow, and take his sent without saying a word ;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses,
at on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to
look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene,
and could observe the three ladies before her com-
posedly.—Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman,
with strongly-marked features, which might once have
been handsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was
her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not ren-
dered formidable by silence ; but whatever she said was
spoken in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self-
importance, and brought Mr Wickham immediately to
Elizabeth’s mind; and from the observation of the day
altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly
what he had represented.

When, after examining the mother, in whose coun-
tenance and deportment she soon found some resem-
hlance of Mr Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
daughter, she could almost have ‘oined in Maria’s
astouishment at her being so thin an so small. There
was neither in ﬁgure nor face any likeness between the
ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her
features, though not plain, were insigniﬁcant; and she
spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs

:66 PRIDE AND PREJUDICL

Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing
remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper
direction before her eyes.

After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one
of the windows to admire the view, Mr Collins attend-
ing them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine
kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.

The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there
were all the servants and all the articles of plate which
Mr Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise
foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by
her lad ship’s desire, and looked as if he felt that life
could liirnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate,
and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was
commended, ﬁrst by him and then by Sir William, who
was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-
law laid, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady
Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed
gratiﬁed by their excassive admiration, and gave most
gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table
proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply
much convemtion. Elizabeth was ready to speak
whenever there was an opening, but she was seated
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh—the former of
whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and
the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time. Mrs
Jenkinson wal chieﬂy employed in watching how little
Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other
dish, and fearing she was indisposed. Maria thought
speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did
nothing but eat and admire.

When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there
was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk,
which she did without any intermission till coffee came

PRIDE AND PREJumca. 167

in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive
a manner, as proved that she was not used to have her
judgment contravened. She inquired into Charlotte’s
domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her
a great deal of advice as to the management of them
all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in
so small a family as hers, and instmcted her as to the
care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found
that nothing was beneath this great lady’s attention,
which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating
to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs
Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria
and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose
connections she knew the least, and who she observed
to Mrs Collins was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl.
She asked her, at diﬂerent times, how many sisters she
had, whether they were older or younger than herself,
whether any of them were likely to be married, whether
they were handsome, where they had been educated,
what carriage her father kept, and what had been her
mother’s maiden name P—Elizabeth felt all the imper-
tinence of her questions, but answered them very com-
pusedly.—Lady Catherine then ohserved,

“ Your father's estate is entailed on Mr Collins, I
think. For your sake,” turning to Charlotte, " I am
glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing
estates from the female line.-——It was not thought neces-
sary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh’s family. Do you play
and sing, Miss Bennet?” .

“ A little.”

“ Oh! then—some time or other we shall be happy
to hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, robably
superior to You shall try it some day. 0 your
sisters play and sing ? ”

“ One of them does."

“Why did not you all learn i—You ought all to

 

168 rams: AND "women.

have lumed. The Miss Webbs all play, and their
father has not so good an income as youm—Do you
draw?"

“ No, not at all."

“Wing none of you?"

“ Not one.”

“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no
opportunity. Your mother should have taken you to
town every spring for the beneﬁt of maners.”

“ My mother would have had no objection, but my
father hates London.”

“ Has your governess left you P ”

“We never had any overness.”

“No governess! [few was that possible? Five
daughters brought up at home without a governess! I
never heard of such a thing. Your mother must have
been quite a slave to your education.’ ’

Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured
her that had not been the case.

“Then, who taught you? who attended to you?
Without a governess, you must have been neglected.”

“ Compared with some families, I believe we were;
but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the
means. We were always encouraged to read, and had
all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose
to be idle, certainly might."

“ Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will
prevent, and if I had known your mother, I should
have advised her most strenuoust to engage one. I
always say that nothing is to be done in education
without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but
a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many
families I have been the means of supplying in that way.
I am always glad to get a young person well placed
out. Four nieces of Mrs Jenkinson are most delight-
fully situated through my means; and it was but the

rmon AND PREJUDICE. r 69

other day that I recommended another young person,
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the
family are quite delighted with her. Mn Collins, did
I tell you of Lad Metcalfe’s calling yesterday to thank
me? She ﬁnds his: Pope a treasure. ' Lady Cathe-
rine,’ said she, ‘you have given me a treasure.’ Are
any of your younger listen out, Miss Bennet?”

“ Yea, ma’am, all.”

“ All l—What, all ﬁve out at once? Very odd !—
And you onl the second—The younger ones out
before the el er are marriedl—Your younger sisters
must be very young?"

“Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps rbe is
full young to be much in company. But really, ma’am,
I think it would he very hard upon younger sisters,
that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means
or inclination to marry early. The last-ham has as
good a right to the pleasures of youth as the ﬁrst. And
to be kept back on nub a motive! I think it would
not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or
delicacy of mind.’

“Upon my word,” said her ladyship, “ you give

ur opinion very decidedly for so young a person.

ray, what is your age? ”

“With three younger sisters grown up,” replied
Elizabeth, smiling, “your ladyship can hardly expect
me to own it."

Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not re-
ceiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself
to be the ﬁrst creature who had ever dared to triﬂe
with so much digniﬁed impeninence.

“You cannot be more than twenty, I am Iure,-—-—
therefore you need not conceal your age.’ ’

“ I am not one-and-twemy."

When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was

I. M

"V
170 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

over, the card-tables were laced. Lady Catherine,
Sir William. and Mr and rs Collins sat down to
quadrille; and as Min de Bourgh chose to play at
cauino, the two girls had the honour of assisting Mn
Jenkinaon to make up her party. Their table was
superlativer stupid. Scarcer a syllable was uttered
that did not relate to the game, except when Mn
Jenkinson expressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh’s
being too hot or too cold, or having too much or too
little light. A great deal more aged at the other
table. Lady Catherine was genera y speaking—stating
the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anec-
dote of herself. Mr Collins was employed in agreeing
to everything her lad ship said, thanking her for every
ﬁsh he won, and apol’ogising if he thought he won too
many. Sir William did not y much. He was
storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.

When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played
as long as the chose, the tables were broken up, the
can-iage was 0 ered to Mrs Collins, gratefully accepted,
and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the ﬁre to hear Lady Catherine determine what
weather they were to have on the marrow. From
these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of
the coach ; and with many speeches of thankfnlness on
Mr Collins’s side, and as many bows on Sir William’s,
they departed. As soon as they had driven from the
door, Elinbeth was called on by her cousin to give her
opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for
Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it
really was. But her commendation, though costing her
some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr Collins, and
he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship’s praise
into his own hands.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I7!

Ch‘i’ttf iﬁﬁt

IR WILLIAM stayed onlya week at Hunlford,
but his visit was long enough to convince him of
his daughter‘s being most comfonably settled,

and of her possessing such a husband and such a neigh-
bour u were not often met with. While Sir William
was with them, Mr Collins devoted his morning to
driving him out in his gig, and showing him the
country; but when he went away, the whole family re-
turned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was
thankful to ﬁnd that that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between
hmkfast and dinner was now passed by him either at
work in the garden, or in reading and writing, and look-
ing out of window in his own book-room, which fronted
the road. The room in which the ladies at was back-
wards. Eliubeth at ﬁrst had rather wondeled that
Charlene should not prefer the dining-parlour for com-
men use; it was a better sized room, and had a
pleasantcr aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had
an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr Collins
would undoubtedly have been much less in his own
apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and she
gave Charlene credit for the arrangement.

From the drawing-room they could distinguish
nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr Collins
for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and
how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her
phaemn, which he never failed coming to inform than
of, though it happened almost every day. She not un-
frequendy stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few
minutes’ convemtion with Charlotte, but was scarcely
ever prevailed on to get out.

Very few days passed in which Mr Collins did not

l7! PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

walk to ROBngl, and not man in which his wife did not
thinlt it necellary to go likewrae; and till Elizabeth re-
collected that there might be other family livings to be
disposed of, she could not understand the sacriﬁce of so
many hours. Now and then they were honoured with
a call from her ladylhip, and nothing escaped her
observation that was Pang in the room during these
visits. She examined into their employments, looked at
their work, and advised them to do it differently;
found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or
detected the housemaid in negligence; and if the accepted
any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of
ﬁnding out that Mrs Collinr’r jointr of meat were too
large for her family.

Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady
was not in the commission of the peace for the county,
she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the
minutest concema of which were carried to her by Mr
Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were dis-

to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she
rallied forth into the village to settle their dilfereneee,
silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony
and plenty.

The entertainment of dining at Roeings was repeated
about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir
William, and there being only one card-table in the
evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the ﬁrst. Their other engagements were few, as the
style of living of the neighbourhood in general was
be ond the Collinsea’ reach. This, however, was no
evrl to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her
time comfortably enough; there were half-hours of
pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather
was so ﬁne for the time of ear that she had often great
enjoyment out of doors. I-l’er favourite walk, and where
she frequently wcnt while the others were calling on

nuns AND enzymes. :73

Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged
that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered
path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine’s
curiosity.

In this quiet way, the ﬁrst fortnight of her visit soon
passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week
pieceding it was to brin an addition to the family at

odngs, which in so I a circle must be important.
Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr
Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks,
and though there were not many of her acquaintance
whom the did not prefer, his coming would furnish one
comparatively new to look at in their Rosingl parties,
and she might be amused in seeing how he less Miss
Bingley’s designs on him were, by his hehavronr to his
cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady
Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admira-
tion, and seemed almost an ry to ﬁnd that he had already
been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.

His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for
Mr Collins was walking the whole morning within View
of the lodges opening into Hnnsford Lane, in order to
have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his
bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home
with the great inmlligence. On the following morning
he hastened to Rosings to ay his respects. There
were two nephews of Lady (gatherine to re uire them,
for Mr Darcy had brought with him a Co‘lonel Fitz-
william, the younger son of his uncle Lord ——, and,
to the great snrprize of all the party, when Mr Collins
returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte
had seen them from her husband’s room, crossing the
road, and immediately running into the other, told the
girls what an honour they might expect, adding—

r74 PRIDE AND PREJUDICB.

“ I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility.
Mr IParey would never have come so soon to wait upon
me.

Eliubeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to
the compliment, before their approach was announced
by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentle-
men entered the room. Colonel Fitlwilliam, who led
the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in non
and address most truly the gentleman. Mr Barcy
looked as he had been used to look in Hertford-
shire—paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to
Mrs Collinl, and whatever might be his feelings towards
her friend, met her with every appearance of composure.
Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him, without saying a
word.

Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly
with the readiness and ease of a well—bred man, and talked
ve pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed
a Is’iighv. observation on the honse and garden to Mrs
Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as
to enquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family.
She answered him in the usual way, and, after a moment’s

use, added—

“ My eldest sister has been in town these three months.
Have you never happened to see her there 2 ”

She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but
she wished to see whether he would betray any con-
sciousness of what had passed between the Bin leys
and Jane, and she thought he looked a little can sed
n he answered that he had never been so fortunate as
to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no
farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 175

that" Sﬁﬁl

OLONEL FITZWILLIAM’S manners were
very much admired at the Parsonage, and the
ladies all felt that he must add considerably to

the pleasure of their engagements at Rosings. It was
some days, however, before the received an invitation
thither—for while there were Visitors in the ouse, they
could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen’s arrival, that they
were honoured by such an attention, and then they were
merely asked on leaving church to come there In the
evening. For the last week they had seen very little of
either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitz-
william had called at the Parsonage more than once
during the time, but Mr Darcy they had only seen at
church.

The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper
hour they ’oined the party in Lady Catherine’s drawing-
room. er ladyship received them civilly, but it was
plain that their company was by no means so acceptable
as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in
fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them,
especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person
in the room.

Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them ;
an thing was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and
Mis Collins’s pretty friend had moreover caught his
fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travel-
ling and staying at home, of new books and music, that
Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that
room before; and they conversed with so much spirit
and ﬂow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine
herself, as well as of Mr Darcy. Hi: eyes had been

..

r76 nuns sun PREJUDICE.

soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of
curiosity; and that her ladylhip, after a while, shared
the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did
not scrup e to call out—

“Whatil that you are so ' g, Fiuwilliam? What
is it you are talking of ? hat are you telling Miss
Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”

“ We are speaking of music, nudam,” said he, when
no longer able to avoid a reply.

“ of music ! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all
subjects my delight. I must have my share in the con-
versation if lyou are speaking of music. There are few
people in ngland, I suppose, who have more true
enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natunl
taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great
proﬁcient. And so would Anne, if her health had
allowed her to ap ly. I am conﬁdent that she would
have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get
on, Darcy ? "

Mr Darcy spoke with alfectionate praise of his sister's
proﬁciency.

“ I am very glad to hear such a good account of
her," said Lady Catherine; “and pmy tell her from
me, that she cannot expect to excel if she does not
practise a great deal.”

“I assure you, madam,” he replied, " that she does
not need such advice. She practises very constantly."

“ So much the better. It cannot be done too much;
and when I next write to her, I shall charge her not
to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies
that no excellence in music is to beat: mred without
constant practice. I have told Miss net several
times, that she will never play really well unless she
practises more; and though Mrs Collins has no instru-
ment, she is very Welcome, as I have often told her, to
come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte

mum In

Emu-l'sl—. ﬁdbiﬁg‘s
q,Fbt,i&F:J*h-.'
wmqﬂldahki-dd'ﬁﬁkl-
brad—k-“
“*umwrﬁﬂ
Bibi—'dnhba;dh
nhﬁuﬁyhbh Babes-31H
uh. ugmuhhdbﬂa“
hﬂsﬁthk¢t;ih
huﬂauyi-h,d-"Iiﬁi-i
“mtg-ma“-
.bcI—ldaf‘ ivd'hE’FQI-x}
m Mm'hbuhd
ahhmmuﬂbbiﬂ-ﬂ
ﬁddl—
‘Yu—uﬁhnlrlhqﬁyu—‘g
iltﬂmuh-E BulII-nh-h—l
H y. ‘1 b h u Id. Th: ‘3 :
Iii..- il‘ - It: at! ‘- it: I k
Waite-aim “ya-gt.-

pun-ydfoﬂ'viﬂnn—cdcgnsdaeﬁ. hilt:
Mrqu,'-.i mint-uh
dn’ukmvaydhimgeiW

178 ane um Pumice.

and, give me leave to my, very impolin'c too—for it is
provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come
out as will shock your relations to hear.’ '

“ I am not afraid of you," said he, smilingly.

“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him
of,” cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. “I should like to
know how he behaves among strangers.”

“ You shall hear then—but prepare yourself for
something very dreadful. The ﬁrst time of my ever
seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a
bull—and at this hall, what do you think he did? He
danced only four dances! I am sorry to pain you—
but so it was. He danced only four dances, though
gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain know-
ledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in
want of a partner. Mr Darcy, you cannot deny the
fact.”

“ I had not at that time the honour of knowing any
lady in the assembly beyond my own party.”

“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a
hall-room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliarn, what do I play
next? My ﬁngers wait your orders."

“ Perhaps," said Darcy, “I should have judged
better, had I sought an introduction; but I am ill
qualiﬁed to recommend myself to strangers.’ ’

“ Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this 2 ” said
Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. “Shall
we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who
has lived in the world, is ill qualiﬁed to recommend
himself to strangers? "

“I can answer your question,” laid Fitzwilliam,
“without a plying to him. It is because he will not
give himsel the trouble."

“ I certainly have not {the talent which some people

as," said Darcy, “ of conversing easily with those
ﬁve never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of

hunclunldndrﬁrnudkcf I:
inhlﬁmhﬁwqﬁgmsﬂ.
again: Edy—I'm"

ofbu;‘ﬁ:bvlubofikhvhtb
«Wigwam-ham Hy,
ukiﬁhwhuﬁnxﬂdyonlyh,hl
ink-Blank.

Mug" 'ihhnym-

180 min: AND rnemnrcs.

the forbarance of civility, and,“ the request of the
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her lldyship’s
carriage was ready to take them all home.

Chum! ﬂﬂﬂaj.

LIZABETH was sittin by herself the next
morning, and writing to sue, while Mrs Collins
and Maria were gone on business into the village,

when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain
signal of a visitor. As she had heard no Carriage, Ilse
thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under
that apprehension was putting away her half-ﬁnished
letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,
when the door opened, and, to her very great sur-
prize, Mr Darcy, and Mr Darcy only, entered the
room.

He seemed astonished too on ﬁnding her alone, and
apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he
had understood all the ladies to be within.

They then sat down, and when her inquiries after
Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into
total silence. It was absolutely necemry, therefore, to
think of something, and in this emergence recollecting
«:52»: she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and
feeling curious to know what he would my on the
subject of their hast departure, she observed—

“ How ver sud enly you all quitted Netherﬁeld last
November, r Darcy! It must have been a most
agreeable surprize to Mr Bingley to see you all after him
so soon ; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were wel|,I hoye, when
you left London ?”

“ Perfectly so, I thank you.”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [8!

She found that she was to receive no other answer,
and, after a short pause, added—

“I think I have understood that Mr Bingley has not
much idea of ever returning to Netherﬁeld again i ”

“I have never heard him say so; but it is probable
that he may spend very little of his time there in future.
He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when
friends and engagements are continually increasing.”

“ If he means to be but little at Nether-ﬁeld, it would
be better for the neighbourth that he should give up
the place entirely, for then we mi ht ‘bly get a
settled family there. But, perhaps, r Bingl did not
take the house so much for the convenience of e neigh-
bourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to
keep or quit it on the same principle.”

“I should not be surpnzed,’ said Darcy, “if he
were to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase
offers.”

Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talk—
ing longer of his friend; and, having nothing elsew
say, was now determined to leave the trouble of ﬁnding
a subject to him.

He took the hint, and soon began with, " Thil
seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I
believe, did a great deal to it when Mr Collins first came
to Hunsford."

“I believe she did—and I am sure she could not
have bestowad her kindness on a more grateful object.”

“ Mr Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of
a wife.”

“Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his
having met with one of the very few sensible women
who would have accepted him, or have made him ha y
if they had. My friend has an excellent understnn ing
—though I am not certain that I consider her marrying
Mr Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems

182 PRIDE AND PREJUDICR.

perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light it is
certainly a very good match for her.

“It must he very agreeable to her to be settled
within so easy a distance of her own family and
friends.”

“ An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly ﬁfty
miles.”

“ And what is ﬁfty miles of good road? Little more
than half a day's journey. Yes, I call it a very easy
distance.”

“ I should never have considered the distance as one
of the advanlqgu of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “ I
should never haw said Mrs Collins was settled near her
family.”

“ It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertford-
shire. Anything beyond the very neighbourhood of
Longhoum, I suppose, would appear far.”

As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Eliza-
beth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her
to be drinking of Jane and Netherﬁeld, and she blushed
as she answered—-

“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be
settled too near her family. The far and the near must
be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances.
Where there is fortune to make the expenses of travel-
ling unimportant, distancc becomes no evil. But that
is not the case berg. Mr and Mrs Collins have a com-
fortable income, but not such a one as will allow of
frequent journeys—and I am rsuaded my friend would
not call herself nmr her fami y under less than lmlf the
present distance.”

Mr Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and
said, “Tau cannot have a right to such very strong
local attachment. Tau cannot lave been always at
Longboum.”

Elizabeth looked surprized. The gentleman experi-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 183

enced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair,
took a new aper from the table, and, glancing over it,
said, in a co der voice—

“ Are you leased with Kent? ”

A short diagogue on the subject of the county ensued,
on either side calm and concise—and soon put an end
to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just re-
turned from their walk. The viz-id!!! surprized them.
Mr Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned
his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few
minutes longer without saying much to anybody, went
awa .

"yWhat can be the meaning of this P ” said Charlotte,
as soon as he was gone. “ My dear Eliza, he must be
in love with you, or he would never have called on us
in this familiar way.”

But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not
seem very likely, even to Charlotte’s wishes, to be the
case; and after various conjectures, they could at last
only suppose his visit to proceed from the difﬁculty of
ﬁnding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All ﬁeld sports were over.
Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a
billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot be always within
doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived
in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this rind
of walking thither almost every day. They cal ed at
various times of the morning, sometimes separately, some-
times together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliarn
came because he had pleasure in their socict , a per-
suasion which of course recommended him still, more;
and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of
her, of her former favourite George Wickham; and

r 84 name AND PREJU‘DICE.

though, in comparing them, she saw there was less
captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam’l manners,
she believed he might have the belt informed mind.

But why Mr Darcy ame I0 often to the Parsonage,
it was more difﬁcult to understand. It could not be for
society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together
without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice—a
sacriﬁce to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He
seldom appeared really animated. Mrs Collins knew
not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam’s ocu-
tionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was
generally differentI which her own knowledge of him
could not have told her ; and as the would have liked
to believe this change the effect of love, and the object
of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to
work to ﬁnd it out. She watched him whenever they
were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford;
but without much success. He certainly looked at her
friend a great deal, but the expreon of that look was
dirputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she
often doubted whether there were much admiration in
it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of
mind.

She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the
possibility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth
always laughed at the idea; and Mrs Collins did not
think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
raising expectations which might only end in disappoint-
ment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt,
that all her friend’s dislike would vanish, if she could
supra: him to be in her power.

n her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes
Ianned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was
beyond comparison the pleasantelt man; he certainly
admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible;

prune AND PREJUDICL r85

but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr Darcy had
considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin
could have none at all.

Chum: ﬁﬁﬁlll

ORE than once did Elisabeth, in her ramble
within the rk, unexpectedly meet Mr Darcy.
She felt a? the perverseneu of the mischance
that should bring him where no one else was brought,
and, to revent in ever happening again, took care to
inform him at ﬁrst that it was a favourile haunt of hers.
How it could occur a second time, therefore, was very
odd! Yet it did, and even the third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntIr penance, for on these
occasions it was not merely a ew formal inquiries and
an awkward pause and then away, but he actually
thought it necessary to tum buck and walk with her.
He never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the
trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck
her in the course of their third rencontre that he was
asking some odd unconnected questions—about her plea-
sure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks,
and her opinion of Mr and Mrs Collins's happiness;
and that in speaking of Rosings and her not perfectly
understanding the house, he seemed to expect that when-
ever she came into Kent again she would be staying 15m
:00. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have
Colonel Fitzwilliamhl in his thoughts? She supposed,
if he meant anything, he must mean an allusion to what
might arise in that carter. It distressed her a little,
and she was quite I to ﬁnd herself at the gate in the
poles opposite the garsonage. _
She was engaged one day as she walked in reperusing

r. N

:86 Plum arm newbies.

Jane’s last letter, and dwelling on some passage which

raved that Jane had not written in spirits, when,
Instead of being again surprized by Mr Darcy, she uw
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting
her. Putting away the letter immediawa and forcing
a smile, she said-—

“I did not know before that you ever walked this
way.”

“I have been making the tour of the park,” he
replied, “as I generally do every year, and intend to
close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going
much farther! "

“ No, I should have turned in a moment."

And accordingly she did turn, and they walked
towards the Parsonage together.

“Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday ?” said she.

“Yes—if Darcy does not put it off again. But I
am at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he
pleases.” -

“And if not able to please himself in the arrange-
ment, he has at least great pleasure in the power of
choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to
enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr
Darcy.”

" He likes to have his own way very well,” replied
Colonel Fitzwilliarn. “ But so we all do. It is only
that he has better means of having it than many others,
because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured
to self-denial and dependence.”

“In my inion, the younger son of an earl can
know very li e of either. Now, seriously, what have
you ever known of selﬁdenial and dependence? When
have you been prevented by want of money from going
wherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a
fancy for .’ "

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I 87

"These are home uestions—and perha Icannot
say that l have experienced many hardships of that
nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suﬂ'er
from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry
where they like.”

“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I
think they very often do."

“ Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and
there are not many in my rank of life who can afford
to marry without some attention to money.”

“ Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “ meant for me i " and
she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself, said
in a lively tone, “And pray, what is the usual price of
an ear“ younger son 9 Unless the elder brother is very
sickly, I suppose you would not ask above ﬁfty thousand
pounds.”

He answered her in the same style, and the subject
dropped: To interrupt a silence which might make
him fanc her affected with what had passed, she soon
afterward; said—

“ I imagine your cousin brought you down with him
chieﬂy for the sake of having somebody at his disposal.
I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting con-
venience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as
well for the present, and, as she is under his sole care,
he may do what he likes with her."

“ No,” said Colonel F itzwilliam, “ that is an advan-
tage which he must divide with me. I am joined with
him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy."

“ Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians
do you make? Does your charge give you much
trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes a
little diﬂicult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy
spirit, she may like to have her own way."

As she spoke she observed him looking at her ear-
nestly; and the manner in which he immediame asked

188 PRIDE AND summer.

her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them
any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or
other pretty near the truth. She directly replied—

“ on need not be frightened. I never heard any
harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the
most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very
great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance,
Mrs Hunt and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard
you ﬂy that you know them.”

“ I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant
gentlemanlike man—he is a great friend of Darcy’s.”

“Oh! es," said Elizabeth drily—“ Mr Darcy is
uncommon y kind to Mr Bingley, and takes a prodigious
deal of care of him."

“Care of him l—Yes, I really believe Darcy don
take care of him in those points where he most wants
are. From something that he told me in our journey
hither,I have reason to think Bingley very much in-
debted to him. But I ought to beg his pardbn, for I
have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person
meant. It was all conjecture.”

“ What is it you mean?”

“ It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could
not wish to be generally known, because if it were to
get round to the lady’s family, it would be an unpleasant
thing?”

“ u may depend upon my not mentioning it.”

“And remember that I have not much reason for
mpposing it to be Bingley. What he told me was
merely this: that he congratulated himself on having
lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or
any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be
Bingley from believing him the kind of young man
so get Into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them
to have been together the whole of last summer.”

Prune AND PREJUDICE. x89

“ Did Mr Darcy give you his reasons for this inter-
ference ? ”

“ I understood that there were some very strong objec-
tions against the lady."

“ And what am did he use to separate them 2 "

“He did not talk to me of his own arts," said Fitz-
williasn, smiling. “ He only told me what I have now
told u.”

E iubeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart
swelling with indignation. After watching her a little,
F itzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtﬁsl.

I‘I am thinking of what you have been telling me,"
aid she. “Your cousin’s conduct does not suit my
feelings. Why was he to be the judge 2 "

“ You are rather disposed to call his interference
ollicions ? ”

“I do not sec what right Mr Darcy had to decide
on the propriety of his friend’s inclination, or why, upon
his own judgment alone, he was to determine and direct
in what manner that friend was to be happy. But,"
she continued, recollecting herself, “ as we know none
of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is
not to be supposed that there was much affection in the
case.”

“ That is not an unnatural surmise,” said Fitzwilliam,
“but it is lessening the honour of my cousin’s triumph
ve sadly.”

q‘his was spoken jesu'ngly; but it appeared to her so
just a picture of Mr Darcy, that she would not tnrst
herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing
the conversation, talked on indilferent matters till they
reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own
room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think
without interruption of all that she had heard. It was
not to be supposed that any other people could be
meant than those with whom she was connected.

I90 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

There could not exist in the world two men over
whom Mr Darcy could have such boundless inﬂuence.
That he had been concerned in the measures taken to
separate Mr Bingley and Jane she had never doubted;
but the had always attributed to Miss Bingley the
principal design and ammgement of them. If hil own
unity, however, did not mislead him, be was the cause,
hil pride and capricc were the cause, of all that Jane
had mill-red, and still continued to suffer. He had
mined for a while every hope of happiness for the most
nﬂ'ectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one
could any how lasting an evil he might have inﬂicted.

“There were some very strong objections against the
lady,” were Colonel Fitzwilliam’s words; and these
lrong objections probably were, her having one uncle
who was a country attorney, and another who was in
buan in London.

“ To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be
no possibility of objection; all loveliness and goodness
n she is! her understanding excellent, her mind im-
proved, and her manners captivating. Neither could
anything he urged against my father, who, though with
some pcculian'ties, has abilities which Mr Darcy him-
self need not disdain, and respccuibility which he will
pmbably never reach." When she thought of her
mother, indeed, her conﬁdence gave way a little; but
.he would not allow that any objections Ilaere had
mterial weight with Mr Darcy, whose pride, she was
convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the
Vlnt of importance in his friend’s connections, than
from their want of sense; and she was quite decided
It hm, that he had been partly governed by this worst
Itind of iride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr
Bi Iey or his sister.

' he agitation and tears which the subject occasioned,
nought on a headache; and it grew so much worse

fun-nu. AID sun-s. run-Inns. Inn-win...

This preservation photocopy was made
at Bookiab. Inc. in compliance with copyright law.
The paper meets the requirements of ANSI/N150
23948-1992 (Permanence of Paper)

Austin 1995

7/

3 2044 024 598 11

 

M'MHWMU‘L
‘VE RI 3

 

 

 

 

 

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

JAN E AUSTEN’S NOVELS

EDITED BY

REGINALD BRIMLEY JOHNSON

IN TEN VOLUMES

VOL. IV.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

VOL. II.

 

 

 

 

 

MM

1%¢%Mauézoféu‘én4

 

I8H7HJ‘7 (17}

 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

LADY Cumulus IRATE" . . . Franlixpim
Mn. DAICY’S LET-rm . . . . no: :1

Mom HUMILIATIONS . . . . ,, 88

    
  
  

 

 

 
    
   

    

 

      

I

 

 

 

 

 

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.
—~———.

churn" Sﬁﬁlv.

HEN they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intend-
ing to exasperate herself as much as possible
against Mr Darcy, chose for her em loyment

the examination of all the letters which Inc had
written to her sinCe her being in Kent. They con-
tained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of
ast occurrences, or any communication of present suffer-
mg. But in all, and in almost every line of each, there
was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to
characterize her style, and which, proceeding from the
serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly disposed
towards every one, had been scarcely ever clouded.
Eliubeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of
uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received
on the ﬁrst perusal. Mr Darcy’s shameful boast of what
misery he had been able to inﬂict gave her a keener
sense of her sister’s sufferings. It was some consola-
tion to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the
day after the next—and, a still greater, that in less than
a fortnight she should herself be with Jane again, and
enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by
all that affection could do.
She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent with-

6 mums AND PREJUDICE.

out remembering that his cousin was to go with him;
but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had
no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.

While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by
the sound of the door-bell, and her a irits were a little
ﬂuttered by the idea of its bein Co onel Fitzwilliam
himself, who had once before cal ed late in the evening,
and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirit: were
very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement,
she saw Mr .Darcy walk into the room. In a hurried
manner he immediately began an inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she
were better. She answered him with cold civility.
He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up,
walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprized, but
said not a word. After a silence of seven] minutes, he
came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus
began—

“In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My
feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to
tell on how ardently I admire and love you."

E’lizabeth’s astonishment was beyond expression. She
stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent. This he
considered sufﬁcient encouragement ; and the avowal of
all that he felt, and had long felt for her, immediately _
followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings
besides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not
more elo uent on the subject of tenderness than of
pride. is sense of her inferiority—of its being a
degradation—of the family obstacles which judgment
had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with
a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he
was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
suit.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 7

In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not
be insensible to the compliment of such a man’s affec-
tion, and though her intentions did not vary for an
instant, she was at ﬁrst sorry for the pain he was to
receive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent
language, she lost all com ssion in anger. She tried,
however, to compose horse f to answer him with patience,
when he should have done. He concluded with re-

resenting to her the strength of that attachment which,
In spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to
conquer; and with expressing his ho that it would
now be rewarded by her acceptance 0 his hand. As
he said this, she could easil see that he had no doubt
of a favourable answer. e Jpn}: of a prehension and
anxiety, but his countenance expresses real security.
Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and,
when he ceased, the colour rose into her cheeks, and
she said—

“ In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established
mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments
avowed, however unequally they ma be returned. It
is natural that obligation should be t, and if I could
feel gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot
—I have never desired your good opinion, and you
have cenainly benowed it most unwillingly. I am
sorry to have occasioned pain to any one. It has been
most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be
of short duration. The feelings which, ou tell me,
have long prevented the acknowledgment ofyyour regard,
can have little diﬂiculty in overcoming rt after this
ex lanation."

r Darcy, who was leaning against the mantel-piece
with his eyes ﬁxed on her face, seemed to catch her
words with no less resentment than surprize. His com-
plexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
his mind was visible in every feature. He was stnrg-

8 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

gling for the appearance of composure, and would not
0 n his lips till he believed himself to have attained it.
'Ivlie pause was to Elizabeth's feelings dreadful. At
length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said—

“And this is all the reply which I am to have the
honour of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be in-
formed why, with so little endeavour at civility. I am
thus rejected 9 But it is of small importance.”

“ I might as well inquire," replied she, “ why with
so evident a design of offending and insulting me, you
chose to tell me that you liked me against your will,
against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I was un-
civil? But I have other provocations. You know I
have. Had not my own feelings decided against you
——had they been indiﬂ‘erent, or had they even been
favourable, do you think that any consideration would
tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of
ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
beloved sister 3 "

As she pronounced these words, Mr Darcy changed
colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened
without attempting to interrupt her while she continued—

“I have every reason in the world to think ill of
you. No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenemus
part you acted rim-2. You dare not, you cannot deny
that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other—of exposing one to
the censure of the world for caprice and instability, the
other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving
them both in misery of the acutest kind.”

She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that
he was listening with an air which proved him wholly
unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked
at her with a smile of affected incredulity.

“ Can you deny that you have done it? ” she repeated.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 9

With assumed tranquillity he then replied, “ I him
no wish of denying that I did everything in m power
to separate my friend from our sister, or that rejoice
in my success. Towards I have been kinder than
towards myself."

Eliubeth disdained the appearance of noticing this
civil reﬂection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was
it likely to conciliate her.

“ But it is not merely this affair,” she continued,
“ on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had
taken place my 0 'nion of you was decided. Your
character was unfo ded in the recital which I received
many months ago from Mr Wickham. On this subject,
what can you have to say? In what imaginary act
of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under
what misrepresentation can you here impose upon
others ? ”

“You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s
concerns,” said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with
a heiallrtened colour.

“ ho that knows what his misfortunes have been,
can help feeling an interest in him ?"

“His misfortunes! " repeated Darcy contemptuously:
“ yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.”

“ And of your inﬂiction,” cried Eliubeth with
energy. “ You hm reduced him to his present state
of poverty—comparative poverty. You have withheld
the advantages which you must know to have been
designed for him. You have deprived the best years of
his life of that independence which was no less his due
than his desert. You have done all this! and yet you
can treat the mention of his misfortunes with contempt
and ridicule.”

“ And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with uick
steps across the room, “ is your opinion of me! his
is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you

IO PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,” added
he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her,
“these offences might have been overlooked, had not
your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
temples that had long prevented my forming any serious
design. These bitter accusations might .have been
suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my
struggles, and ﬂattered you into the belief of my being
impelled by un ualiﬁed, unalloyed inclination; by
reason, by reﬂection, by everything. But disguise of
every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of
the feelings I related. The were natural and just.
Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of
your connections ?—to congratulate myself on the hope
of relations, whose condition in life is so decidedly
beneath my own?"

Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every
moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with
com ure when she said— '

“ on are mistaken, Mr Darcy, if you suppose that
the mode of your declaration affected me in any other
way, than as it spared me the concern which I might
have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more
gentlemanlike manner. ’

She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and
she continued— '

“ You could not have made me the olfer of your
hand in any possible way that would have tempted me
to scc tit.”

Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked
at her vdth an expression of mingled incredulity and
mortiﬁcation. She went on—

“ From the very beginning—from the ﬁrst moment,
I may almost say—of my acquaintance with you, your
manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. ll

arrogance, your conceit, and your selﬁsh disdain of the
feelings of others, were such as to form that ground-
work of disa robation on which succeeding events
have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not
known you a month before I felt that you were the last
man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to
m .’I

“ on have laid quite enough, madam. I rfectly
comprehend your feelings, and have now 0 y to be
ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for
having taken up so much of your time, and accept my
best wishes for your health and ha piness.”

And with these words he has ' y left the room, and
Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front
door and quit the house.

The tumult of her mind was now painfully great.
She knew not how to support herself, and from actual
weakness sat down and cried for half-an-hour. Her
astonishment, as she reﬂected on what had passed, was
increased by every review of it. That she should
receive an oﬂ'er of man-iage from Mr Darcy! that he
should have been in love with her for so man months!
—so much in love as to wish to marry her In spite of
all the objections which had made him prevent his
friend’s marrying her sister, and which must appear at
least with e ual force in his own case—was almost
incrediblel—rt was gratif ing to have inspired uncon-
sciously so strong an a ecnon. But his pride, his
abominable pride—his shameless avowal of what he had
done with respect to Jane—his unpardonable assurance
in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and
the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr
Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not
attem ted to deny, soon overcame the ity which the
consi elation of his attachment had or a moment
excited. She continued in very agitating reﬂections

12 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

till the sound of Lady Catherine’s carriage made her
feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s
observation, and hurried her away to her room.

chant" gem}.

LIZABETH awoke the next morning to the
same thoughts and meditations which had at
length closed her eyes. She could not yet

recover from the surpn'ze of what had happened; it
was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally
indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after
breakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She
was )roceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the
recollection of Mr Darcy's sometimes coming there
stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she
turned up the lane, which led her farther from the
turnpike-road. The park paling was still the boundary
on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into
the ground.

After walking two or three times along that part of
the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasanmess of the
morning, to stop at the gates and look into the rk.
The ﬁve weeks which she had now passed in ent
had made a great difference in the country, and every
day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She
was on the point of continuing her walk, when she
caught a glim se of a gentleman within the sort of
grave which ged the park; he was moving that way;
and, fearful of its being Mr Darcy, she was directly
retreating. But the person who advanced was now
near enough to see her, and stepping forward with
ugemeu, pronounced her name. She had turned
away i but on hearing herself called. though in a voice

 

414W
ﬂap-'4-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 13

which proved it to be Mr Darcy, she moved again
towards the ate. He had by that time reached it
also, and, hol ing out a letter, which she instinctively
took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have
been walking in the grove some time in the hope of
meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading
that letter?” And then, with a slight bow, turned
again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.

With no expectation of pleasure, but with the
strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and,
to her still-increasing wonder, perceived an envelo
containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite
through, in a very close hand. The envelope itself was
likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she
then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight
o’clock In the morning, and was as follows :—

“ Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter,
by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of
those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were
last night so disgusting to you. [write without any
intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwel-
ling on wishes which, for the harness of both, cannot
be too soon forgotten: and the e on which the forma-
tion and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should
have been ared had not my character required it to be
written an read. You must, therefore, pardon the
[freedom] with which I demand your attention; your
feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I
demand it of your jusdce.

“ Two oﬂ‘ences'of a very different nature, and by no
means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my
charge. The ﬁrst-mentioned was, that, regardless of
the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr Bingley
from your sister,—and the other, that I had, in deﬁance
of various claims, in deﬁance of honour and humanity,

l4 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

ruined the immediate prosperi and blasted the ros-
pzcts of Mr Wickham.— iﬁilly and wanton y to

ve thrown off the companion of my youth, the
acknowledged favourite of my father, a oung man
who had scarcely any other dependence an on our
patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its
exertion, would be a depravity, to which the reparation
of two young persons, whose affection could be the
irowth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.

ut from the severity of that blame which was last
night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance,
I shall ho to be in future secured, when the following
account of,e my actions and their motives has been read.
If, in the explanaan of them, which is due to myself,
I am under the necessity of relating feelings which may
be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry.
The necessity must be obeyed, and further apology
would be absurd.

“I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw,
in common with others, that Bingley preferred your
elder sister to any other young woman in the country.
But it was not till the evening of the dance at Nether-
field that I had any ap rehension of his feeling a serious
attachment. I had 0 ten seen him in love before. At
that ball, while I had the honour of dancing with you,
I was ﬁrst made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas’s
accidental information, that Bingley’s attentions to your
sister had given rise to a general expectation of their
man-iage. He spoke of it as a certain event, of which
the time alone could be undecided. From that moment
I observed my friend’s behaviour'attentively; and I
could then perceive that his parﬁality for Miss Bonnet
was be and what I had ever witnessed in him. Your
sister also watched. Her look and manners were
open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any
symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained c0nvinccd

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 15

from the evening’s scnrtiny, that though she received
his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by
any participation 0 sentiment. If you have not been
minaken here, I must have been in an error. Your
superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter
probable—If it be so, if I have been misled by such
error to inﬂict pain on her, your resentment has not been
unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that the
serenity of your sister’s countenance and air was such as
might have giVEI'I the most acute observer a conviction
that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not
likely to be easil touched. That I was desirous of
believing her indifferent is certain—but I will venture
to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually
inﬂuenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her
to be indifferent because I wished it ;—I believed it on
impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason.
My objections to the marriage were not merely those
which I last night acknowledged to have required the
utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case;
the want of connection could not be so great an evil to
my friend as to me. But there were other causes of
repugnance;——causes which, though still existing, and
existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had
myself endeavoured to to et1 because they were not im-
mediately before me. hese causes must be stated,
though brieﬂy. The situation of our mother’s family,
though objectionable, was nothing In comparison of that
total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly
betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and
occasionally even by your father. Pardon me. It pains
me to offend you. But amidst your concern for the
defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at
this representation of them, let it give you consolation
to consider that, to have conducted yourselves so as to
avoid any share of the like censure, is praise no less

I6 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

generally bestowed on you and your eldest sister, than
it is honounble to the sense and disposition of both. I
will only say farther that from what passed that evening,
my opinion of all parties was conﬁrmed, and every in-
ducement heightened which could have led me before
to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most
unhappy connection. He left Netherﬁeld for London,
on the day following, as you, I am certain, remember,
with the design of soon returning. ‘

“ The part which I acted is now to be explained.
His sisters’ uneasiness had been equally excited with my
own; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered,
and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detach-
ing their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him
direct] in London. We accordingly went—and there
I readily engaged in the olﬁce of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described,
and enforced them earnestly. But1 however this re-
monstrance might have staggered or delayed his deter-
mination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have
prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the
assurance which I hesitated not in giving, of your sister’s
indifference. He had before believed her to return his
aﬂ‘ectiou with sincere, if not with equal regard. But
Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger de-
pendence on my judgment than on his own. To con-
vince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was
no very diﬂicult point. To persuade him against retum-
ing into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been
given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot
blame myself for having done thus much. There is
but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which
I do not reﬂect with satisfaction; it is, that I conde-
scendcd to adopt. the measures of art so far as to conceal
from him your sister's being in town. I knew it myself,
as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [7

even et ignorant of it That they might have met with-
out i l consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard
did not a pear to me enough extinguished for him to
see her wrthout some danger. Perhaps this concealment,
this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and
it was done for the best—On this subjectl have nothing
more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have
wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done';
and though the motives which governed me may to you
very naturally appear insufﬁcient, I have not yet learnt
to condemn them.

“ With respect to that other, more weighty accusa-
tion, of having injured Mr Wickham, I can only refute
it by laying before ou the whole of his connection
with my family. 0 what he has particularly accused
me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall
relate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted
veracit .

“ r Wickham is the son of a very respectable man,
who had for many years the management of all the
Pemberle estates, and whose good conduct in the dis-
charge ofy his trust naturally inclined my father to be of
service to him; and on George Wickham, who was his
godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed.
My father supported him at school, and afterwards at
Cambridge,—most imponant assistance, as his own
father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife,
would have been unable to give him a gentleman’s educa-
tion. My father was not only fond of this young man's
society, whose manners were always engaging; he had
also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church
would be his profession, intended to provide for him in
it. As for myself, it is many, many years since I ﬁrst
began to think of him in a very different manner. The
vicious propensities—the want of principle, which he
was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best

u. n

’1!

I 8 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

friend, could not escape the observation of a young man
of nearly the same age with himself, and who had oppor-
tunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr
Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you
pain—to what degree you on] can tell. But whatever
may be the seno'ments which r Wickham has created,
a suspicion of their nature shall not revent me from
unfolding his real character—it 2 ds even another
motive.

“ My excellent father died about ﬁve years ago ; and
his attachment to Mr Wickham was to the last so
steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it
to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner
that his profession might allow—and if he took orders,
desired that a valuable family living might be his as
soon as it became vacant. There was also a legac of
one thousand pounds. His own father did not ong
survive mine, and within half a year from these events
Mr Wickham wrote to inform me that, having ﬁnally
resolved against taking orders, he hoped I should not

. think it unreasonable for him to expect some more im-

mediate pecuniar advantage, in lieu of the mrferment,
by which he cou d not be beneﬁted. He had some in-
tention, he added, of stud ing the law, and I must be
aware that the interest a? one thousand pounds would
be a very insuﬁicient support therein. I rather wished,
than believed him to be sincere—but, at any rate, was
perfectly ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that
Mr Wickham ought not to he a clergyman; the busi-
ness was therefore soon settled—he resigned all claim
to assistance in the church, were it possible that he
could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted
in return three thousand pounds. All connection be-
tween us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of
him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in
town. In town I believe he chieﬂy lived, but his

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 19

studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now
free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and
dissipation. For about three years I heard little of
him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living
which had been designed for him, he applied to me
again by letter for the presentation. His Circumstances,
he assured me, and I had no diflicult in believing it,
were exceedineg bad. He had foun the law a most
un rolitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on
being ordained, if I would present him to the living in
guestion—of which he trusted there could be little

oubt, as he was well assured that I had no other per-
son to provide for, and I could not have forgotten my
revered father’s intentions. You will hardly blame me
for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting
every repetition of it. His resentment was in propor-
.tion to the distress of his circumstances—and he was
doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in
his reproaches to myself. After this “period every
appearance of acquaintance was droppe How he
lived I know not. But last summer he was again most
painfully obtnlded on my notice.

“I must now_ mention .1 circumstance which I would
wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than
the present should induce me to unfold to any human
being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of
your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years
my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's
nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself. About a
year ago, she was taken from school, and an establish-
ment formed for her in London; and last summer she
went with the lady who presided over it, no Ramsgate;
and thither also went Mr Wickham, undoubtedly by
design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaint-
ance between him and Mrs Younge, in whose character
we were most unhappin deceived; and by her con-

20 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

nivance and aid, he so far recommended himself to
Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a stron
impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she
was persuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent
to an elopement. She was then but ﬁfteen, which
must be her excuse; and after mating her impnidence,
I am happ to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to
herself. ijoined them unexpectedly a day or two be-
fore the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable
to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother
whom she almost looked u to as a father, acknow-
ledged the whole to me. @ou may imagine what I
felt and howI acted. Regard for my sister’s credit
and feelings prevented any public exposure; but I
wrote to Mr Wickham, who left the place immedi-
ately, and Mrs Young: was of course removed from
her charge. Mr Wiekham’s chief object was un-
questionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty
thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that
the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong
inducement. His revenge would have been complete
indeed.

“This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event
in which we have been concerned together; and if you
do not absolute] reject it as false, you will, I hope,
acquit me henceii’mh of cruelty towards Mr Wickham.
I know not in what manner, under what form of false-
hood he has imposed on you; but his success is not
perhaps to be wondered at, ignorant as you previously
were of everything concerning either. Detection could
not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in
your inclination.

“ You may possibly wonder why all this was not
told you last night; but I was not then master enough
of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed.
For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal

PRIDE AND PRBJUDICE. 2 l

more particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitz-
william, who, from our near relahonship and constant
intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my
father’s will, has been unavoidably ac uainted with
every particular of these transactions. I your abhor-
rence of ms should make my assertions valueless, you
cannot be revented by the same cause from conﬁding
in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of
consulting him, I shall endeavour to ﬁnd some oppor-
tunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course
of the morning. I will only add, God bless you.
“ F I‘I‘ZWILLIAM Dsecv."

tbspttr exams.

F Elisabeth, when Mr Darcy gave her the letter,
did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers,
she had formed no expectation at all of its contents.

But such as they were, it may be well supposed how
eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety
of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read
were scarcely to be deﬁned. With amazement did
she ﬁrst understand that he believed any apology to be
in his wer; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that
he co d have no explanation to give, which a just
sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
prejudice against everything he might say, she began his
account of what had happened at Netherlield. She
read with an agemess which hardly left her power of
comprehension; and from impatience of knowmg what
the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attend-
ing to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief
of her sister’s insensibilit she instantly resolved to be
false; and his account 0 the real, the worst objections

22 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of
doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what
he had done which satisﬁed her; his style was not
penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.

But when this subject was succeeded by his account
of Mr Wickham,—when she read with somewhat
clearer attention a relation of events which, if true,
must overthrow eve cherished opinion of his worth,
and which bore so a arming an afﬁnity to his own his‘
tory of himself,—her feelings were yet more acutely
painful and mom diﬂicult of deﬁnition. Astonishment,
apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She
wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming,
“ This must be false! This cannot be! This must
be the grossest falsehood ! "—and when she had gone
through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing any-
thing of the last page or two, put it hastily away, pro-
testing that she would not regard it, that she would
never look in it again.

In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that
could rest on nothing, she walked on ; but it would not
do; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again, and
collecting herself as well as she could, she again began
the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham,
and commanded herself so far as to examine the mean-
ing of eve sentence. The account of his connection
with the emberley family was exactly what he had
related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr Darcy,
though she had not before known its extent, agreed
equally well with his own words. So far each recital
confirmed the other; but when she came to the will,
the diiference was great. What Wickham had said of
the living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled
his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there
was gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for
a few moments, she ﬂattered herself that her wishes did

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 23

not err. But when she read and re-resd with the
closest attention, the particulars immediame following
of Wickham’s resigning all pretensions to the living, of
his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesimte. She
put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with
what she meant so be impartiality—deliberated on the
probability of each statement—but with little success.
On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read
on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair,
which she had believed it im ‘ble that any contrivance
could so represent as to render.I Mr Darcy s conduct in
it less than infamous, was capable of s turn which
must make him entirely blameless throughout the
whole.

The extravagance and general proﬂigacy which he
scrupled not to lay to Mr Wickham’s char , exceed-
ingly shocked her; the more so, as she co d bring no

roof of its injustice. She had never heard of him

fore his entrance into the —shire Militia, in which
he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who,
on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed
a slight acquaintance. of his fonner way of life nothing
had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told him-
self. As to his real character, had information been in
her power, she had never felt a wish of insiuiring. His
countenance, voice, and manner had estab ished him at
once in the possession of every virtue. She tried to
recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him
from the attacks of Mr Darcy ; or at least, by the pre-
dominance nf virtue, atone for those casual errors under
which she would endeavour to class what Mr Darcy
had described as the idleness and vice of many yeals
continuance. But no such recollection befriended her.
She could see him instantly before her, in every charm

24 PRIDE AND PREIUDICI.

ofairand address; but she could remember no more
substantial good than the general of the
nei hbourhood,and theregardwhioh hissocialporen

gainedhirninthemess. Aﬁerpansingonthis
point a considerable while, she once more continued to
read. ButI alas! the Rory which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcyﬁreoeived some oonﬁrnntion
from what had passed between Colonel F itzwilliam and
herself only the morning before; and at last the was
referred for the truth of every to Colonel
Fitzwilliam himself—from whom she had previousst
received the information of his nar concern in all his
cousin’s affairs, and whose character she had no reason
to uestion. At one time she had almost resolved on
aprilying to him, but the idea was checked by the
awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly
banished by the conviction that Mr Darcy would never
have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well
assured of his cousin's corroboration.

She perfectly remembered everything that had

in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their
ﬁrst evening at Mr Phillips's Many of his expreuions
were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck
with the impropriety of such communications to a
stranger, and wondered it had escaped her before. She
saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had
done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his
conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of hav-
ing no fear of seeing Mr Darcy—that Mr Darcy might
lave the country, but that be should stand his ground :
yet he had avoided the Netheiﬁeld ball the very next
week. She remembered also that, till the Netherﬁeld
family had quitted the cbnntry, he had told his story to
no one but herself; but that after their removal it had
been everywhere discussed; that he had then no re-
serves, no scruples in sinking Mr Darcy’s character,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 25

thou h he had assured her that respect for the father
woul‘il always prevent his exposing the son.

How differently did everything now a pear in which
he was concerned I His attentions to Miss King were
now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mer-
cenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no
longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to
grasp at anything. His behaviour to herself could now
have had no tolerable motive; he had either been
deceived with regard to her fonune,or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she
believed she had most incautiously shown. Every lin er-
ing struggle in his favour grew faster and fainter; an in
farther ‘ustiﬁcation of Mr Darcy, she could not but allow
that Mi Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long
ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud
and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in
the whole course of their acquaintance—an acquaintance
which had latterly brought them much together, and
given her a sort of intimacy with his wayso-seen any-
thing that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust—
anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits:
that among his own connections he was esteemed and
valued—that even Wickham had allowed him merit as
a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so
aﬂ'ectionatel of his sister as to prove him capable of
some amiabe feeling; that had his actions been what
Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from
the world; and that friendship between a person capable
of it, and such an amiable man as Mr Bingley, was
incomprehensible.

She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither
Darcy nor Wickltam could she think without feeling
that she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.

“ How despicany have I acted! " she cried; “I,

26 run: nu) newbie:

who have 'ded uylzlfon mydbeunw! I, who
haven] myselfonmyllilitieelvlmhaveoﬁen
diadained the gamut undouroflnyinernnd '
my vanity in unle- ot [Nannhle] diam. How
humiliating it this discovery! yet. how juu a humilia-
tionl Hadlheen inlomlcouldntxhavehoen
more wretchedlyhlind. Butnni ,nmbvghnbeen
Infoll.Pleatedwiththe demand

nde!bytheneglectoftheuha,ontheveryhegin-
ning of our acquaintance, I lure muted
and ignorance, and driven reason away. when either
were concerned. Till this moment I never knew
mylelfl"

From henelf to Jane—from June to Bingley, her
thought: were in a line which anon brought to hr le-
collection that Mr Darcy’s (but had
apEated very insulﬁcieut, and uh: lad it again. \Videly
dt tent was dieeﬂ'ectofaaeoondpennl. How
couldahe denythatcredit to his Minute in-
atance, which she had been to give in the odier.
He declared himself to have been totally uncuqicioulof
her sister's attachment; and she could not help remem-
bering what Charlotte’a opinion had always been.
Neither could Ihe deny the junice of hi- nf
Jane. She felt an: Jane's feelingx, though fervent,
were little displayed. and that there was a constant
complacency in her air and manner not often united
with great unaihility.

Whenahe came to thatpanofthe lemerin which
herfamilywetementionedinteﬁmofsuimﬁfying,
yetmerited mach,heraensenfel’nmevauevere.
The justice 0 the chargemuck he: too forciblyfor
denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly
alluded at having paid at the Netherlield hall, and aa
conﬁrming all his lint dinppmhation, could not have
madeasuungerimpredononhiamindthanonhem

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 27

The compliment to herself sud her sister was not
unfelt. It soothed, but it could not console her for the
contempt which had thus been self-attracted by the rest
of her famil 5 and as she considered that Jane’s dis-
ap 'ntment ad in fact been the work of her nearest
re ations, and reﬂected how materially the credit of
both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she
feltfdeprelsed beyond anything she had ever known

he ore .

[ Afterg wandering along the lane for two hours, giving
way to every varie of thought—re-ennsidering events,
determinin probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well
Is she eou d, to a change so sudden and so important,
fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her
at len th return home; and she entered the house with
the Wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolu-
tion of repressing such reﬂections as must make her
unﬁt for convemtion.

She was immediately told that the two gentlemen
from Rosings had each called during her absence ; Mr
Darcy, only for a few minutes to take leave,—but that
Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving
to walk after her till she could be found. Elizabeth
could but all” concern in missing him ; she really
rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an
object; she could think only of her letter.

Chm" #51713.

HE two gentlemen left Rosings the next mom-
ing, and Mr Collins having been in waiting
near the lodges, to make them his parting

obeisanee, was able to bring home the pleasing intelli-

28 PRIDE AND renames.

gence, of their appearing in very good health, and
in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings.
To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady Cathe-
rine and her daughter; and on his return brought back,
with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her
vary desirous of having them all to dine with her.

<lizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without re-
collecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this
time have been presented to her as her future niece;
nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyr
ship’s indignation would have been. “What would
she have said i—how would she have behaved?” were
questions with which she amused herself.

Their ﬁrst subject was the diminution of the Rosings
party. “I assure you, I feel it exceedingly," said
Lady Catherine; “I believe nobody feels the loss of
friends so much as I do. But I am particularly at-
tached to these young men, and know them to be so
much attached to mei—T hey were excessively sorry
to go! But so they always are. The dear colonel
rallied his spirits tolerany till just at last; but Darcy
seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last

ear. His attachment to Rosings certainly increases.”

Mr Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to
throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the
mother and daughter.

Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss
Bonnet seemed out of spirits, and immediately account-
ing for it herself, by supposing that she did not like to
go home again so soon, she added—

“ But if that is the case, you must write to your
mother to beg that you may stay a little longer. Mrs
Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure.”

“ I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 29

invitation," replied Elizabeth, “but it is not in my
power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday.”

“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only
six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I
told Mrs Collin. so before you came. There can he
no ocusion for your going so soon. Mrs Bennet could
certainly spare ou for another fortnight.”

“ But my Either cannot. He wrote last week to
hurry my return."

“ 0h ! your father of course may spare you, if your
mother can. Daughters are never of so much conse-
quence to a father. And if you will at: another
mull: complete, it will be in my power to take one of
you as far as London, for I am going there early in
June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to
the barouche-box, there will be very good room for
one of you—and indeed, if the weather should happen
to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as
you are neither of you large."

“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we
must abide by our original plan."

Lady Catherine seemed resigned. " Mrs Collins,
you must send a servant with them. You know I
always speak my mind, and I cannot hear the idea of
two oung women travelling post by themselves. It is
higth improper. You must contrive to send some-
body. I have the greatest dislike iu the world to that
sort of thing. Young women should always be pro-

rly guarded and attended, according to their situation
in life. When my niece Georgiana went to Rsmsgate
last summer, I made a point of her having two men-
servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr
Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have
appeared with propriety in a diKemnt manner. I am
excessively attentive to all those things. You must
send John with the young ladies, Mrs Collins. I am

30 PRIDE All) Wm

gladioeundm-eh-uini;irivodd
mﬂthmFohhpaI-e.”
‘ yuckiblndauuﬁr"
“OM—er Inch!
doesheQ—Imvuyghd Inna-dandy“
dint: of due thig‘ £2
hound-Oh! Bronlq,ofm—If Iain
myumauhendl. 'iIIIRIu-hdb.‘
Layaway.- myodu- ‘ Ind!!-
‘ Ihu'rjoumy,a-:lusdie nuanced:-
helclﬁmtionvu my,“ Edie!-
beliendtobMyforhu-3u.viahaliﬂ
occuyied. the might Inn {again 'IIIE in
Reﬂection mmhemudforanliulym;
tuitwlhngdxganuymhudt
Itlief;andnotadayvmtbywithoun
invhichdxemightindﬂgeinalhhcdﬁgmu’
woollccﬁms

am
MrDuty’skcu-hminaﬁirvay
inﬁrm Shcauﬁdemymce
her 'gumwdiiu'ﬁtuma‘
difuun. When she ml III: uer
addmdicwuuiﬂﬁnllofinﬁgmdou;hnv
mﬁdcmdho' unjlnlyslnhalmdmnniand
Whinhaanguwmndgaimhawdhmd
hildiuﬁoinmdﬁdingshmmtheobjzctdmm-
ion. is anachmcnl excimi grain-dc, his social
mm;budlemﬂdm Rhianna
ounldsheﬁramomthrmhu orfeelthc

é:
5

Ms

E 9..
ER:

in.
{H

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 3!

manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible
of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with June
in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their
mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of
improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and
completely under Lydia’s guidance, had been always
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and
careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They
were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an
ofﬁcer in Meryton, they would ﬂirt with him; and
while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they
would be going there for ever.

Anxiety on Jane’s behalf was another prevailing
concern, and Mr Darcy's explanation, by restoring
Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the
sense of what Jane had lost. His aﬂ'ection was proved
to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all
blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of
his conﬁdence in his friend. How grievous then was
the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for
ha piness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and
in ecorum of her own family!

When to these recollections was added the develop-
ment of Wickham’s character, it may be easily believed
that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed
before, were now so much affected as to make it almost
im ible for her to appear tolerath cheerful.

heir engagements at Rosings were as frequent
during the last week of her stay as they had been at
ﬁrst. The very last evening was spent there; and her
ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their joumey, gave them directions as to the best method
of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing
gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought her-

32 PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE.

self obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the
morning, and pack her trunk afresh.

When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great con-
descension, wished them a good journey, and invited
them to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss
de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to curtscy and hold
out her hand to both.

when": iﬁﬁﬁ‘lll

N Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr Collins
met for breakfast a few minutes before the
others appeared; and he took the opportunity

of paying the parting civilities which he deemed in-
dispensably necessary.

“I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said he, “whether
Mrs Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kind-
ness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will
not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it.
The favour of your company has been much felt, I
assure you. We know how little there is to tempt
any one to our humble abode. Our plain manner of
living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the
little we see of the world, must make Hunsford ex-
tremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope
you VII” believe us grateful for the condescension, and
that we have done everything in our power to prevent
your spending your time unpleasantly.”

Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances
of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great en-
joyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and
the kind attentions she had received, must make ber
feel the obliged. Mr Collins was gratiﬁed, and with a
more smiling solemnity replied—

rams sun PREJUDICE. 33

“ It. me the greatest pleasure to hear that you
have gassed your time not disagreeably. We have
certain y done our best; and most fortunately having it
in our power to introduce you to very superior society,
and, from our connection with Rosmgs, the f uent
means of varying the humble home scene, I thin we
may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot
have been entirely irksome. Our situation with regard
to Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extm-
ordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast.
You see on what a footing we are. You see how
continually we are engaged there. In truth I must
acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this
humble parsonage, I should not think any one abiding
in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of
our intimacy at Rosings.”

Words were insufﬁcient for the elevation of his
feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room,
while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and tmth in a
few short sentences.

“ You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of
us into I-Iertfordshire, my dear cousin. I ﬂatter myself
at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Cather-
ine’s great attentions to Mrs Collins you have been a
daily witness of; and altogether I tnist it does not
a ar that your friend has drawn an unfortunate

ut on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only
let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can
from my heart most cordiall wish you equal felicity
in marriage. My dear Chariotte and I have but one
mind and one wa of thinking. There is in everything
a most remarkabe resemblance of character and ideas
between us. We seem to have been designed for each
other.”

Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great hapgi-
ness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity

II. c

 

34 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

could add, that she ﬁrmly believed and rejoiced in his
domeutic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of
the lad from whom they sprung. Poor Charlene! it
Will me uneholy to leave her to such society! But she
had elroren it with her eyes open ; and though evidently
regretting that her viuitoru were to go, she did not seem
to mlt for companion. Her home and her housekeep-
ing, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent.
concernu, had not yet lost their charrm.

At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened
rm, the purcell pluced within, and it was pronounced to
be ready. After an affectionate parting between the
lrientls. Elizabeth was attended to the can-iage by Mr
(.‘nlliun, and in they walked down the garden, he was
emnmiuionin her with his best respects to all her
lirmily, not orgetting his thanks for the kindness he
haul received at Longbourn in the winter, and his com-
rlimeuu to Mr and MN Gardiner, though unknown.

lc then lurnded her in, Maria followed, and the door
was on the point of being closed, when he suddme
reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of
llosingu.

“ llut," he added, “ you will of course wish to have
your humble respects delivered to them, with your
grateful thanka for their kindness to you while you have
been here."

Elizabeth made no objection ; the door was then
allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off.

“ Good gracious! " cried Maria, after a few minutes’
Bilence, “it seems but a day or two since we ﬁrst
came l—and yet how many things have happened! ”

“ A great many indeed," said her companion with a
sigh. “We have dined nine times at Rosings, besidea
drilnking tea there twice! How much I shall have to
tel ! ”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 35

Elizabeth privately added, “ And how much I shall
have to conceall ”

Their, journey was performed without much conver-
sation, or any alarm; and within four hours of their
leaving Hunsford they reached Mr Gardiner's house,
where they were to remain a few days.

Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little oppor-
tunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engage-
ments which the kindness of her aunt had reserved
for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and
at Longboum there would be leisure enough for
observation.

It was not without an eﬁ'ort, mean while, that she
could wait even for Longbourn, before she told her
sister of Mr Darcy’s ropesals. To know that she
had the power of mveaiing what would so exceedingly
astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly
gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been
able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness
as nothing could have conquered but the state 0 inde-
cision in which she remained as to the extent of what
the would communicate; and her fear, if she once
entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating
something of Bingley which might only grieve her
sister further.

than" MW”?-

T vru the second week in May, in which the three
young ladies set out together from Gmcechurch
Street for the town of — , in Herti'urdshire;

and, as they drew near the appointed inn when: Mr
Bennet’s carriage was to meet them, they quickly r-
ceived, in token of the coachman’s punctuality, gth
Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs.

 

36 mm mm

hnurin then-E,
Wymrlvyed, m "Inns-u wry-‘2' .
wmdnngdie sentinel on guard.“ 4mg 3 nladnd
cm.

After welcomingthdrimdrynimqtmﬂyﬂ-

yedamblelaomﬁthehmldnmunhm

mllyaﬂ'mdyexdainﬁng,“hmﬂxisnim?k
nadiilmagneablempriu?”

“Andwemnmmywall,” added Lydia;
“buyoummlmduthequorwe havejnnqxsn
madnenhopomthexe." Mining” -
chaos—“lookhenJlnvelxmghtthhbmnn. l1
nuthinkitil vetypreny;bu1 I drought I might:
velllxnyitaanot. Inlnllpnllitmpieoesu-oonul
gabmandieeiflmmakeitupmyhma."

Alumna ingrained a: a: "51»an
wiihpetfect umonoem, “Oh! but the“: mmor
threemuchuglierinthelhopgandwhenlhavehwght
we ettier-coloumdadnmuimitwithﬁ'dyIthink
it wi be very tolerable. Beirlaﬂt will not much
ignifywhazonewandii-mmmer,aﬁenhe—uhixe
haveleﬁ Merymn, and they are going in a fonnighL”

“Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth. with the
graduatinfaction.

“They are going to be encam mt Brighton;
andldowwantpapamtakeusalthemfordiem-
mer! It would be such a delicious scheme, and I date
Any would hardly mauything at all. Manama would
like to go too of all Ihingll Only think what a
minerable nummer else we shall have ! ”

“ Yea," thought Elizabeth, “ [bat would be a delight-
ful Icheml: indeed, and completely do for up at once.
Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole campful of
ooldicn, to us, who have been oversct already by one

r regiment of militia, and the monthly balk of

erywn l "

 

rmnc AND PREJUDICE 37

“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia,
as they sat down at table. “ What do you think? It
is excellent news—capital news—and about a certain
person that we all like I "

Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the
waiter was told that he need not stay. Lydia laughed,
and said—

“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion.
You thought the waiter must not har, as if he cared!
I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am
going to say. But he is an ugly fellow ! I am glad he
is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well,
but now for my news; it is about dear Wickham; too
good for the waiter, is not it? There is no danger of
Wickham’s marrying Mary King. There ’s for you I
She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to
stay. Wickham is safe.”

“ And Mary King is safel ” added Elizabeth;
“ safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune.”

“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked
him.”

“ But I hope there is no strong attachment on either
side,” said Jane.

“ I am sure there is not on by}. I will answer for it,
he never cared three straws about her—who mold about
such a nasty little freckled thing .’ ”

Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incap-
able of such coarseness of :x ration herself, the coarse-
ness of the "minim! was ittle other than her own
breast had formerly harboured and fancied liberal !

As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the
carriage was ordered; and after some contrivance, the
whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and

arcela, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and
iydia’s yurchases, were seated in it.

“ How nicely we are crammed in,” cried Lydia.

38 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

“ I am gladl bought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun
of having another bandbox l Well, now let us be
quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the
way home. And in the ﬁrst place, let us hear what has
happened to you all since you went away. Have you
seen any pleasant men? Have you had any ﬂirting?
I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a
husband before you came back. Jane will be quite an old
maid soon, I declare. She is almost tlrree-and-twenty!
Lord, how ashamed I should be of not being married
before three-and-twentyl My aunt Philips wants you
so to get husbands, you can’t think. She says Lizzy
had better have taken Mr Collins; but I do not think
there would have been any fun in it. Lord! how I
should like to be married before any of youl and then
I would chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear
me ! we had such a good piece of fun the other day at
Colonel Forster’s. Kitty and me were to spend the
day there, and Mrs Forster promised to have a little
dance in the evening; (by the bye, Mrs Forster and
me are web friends!) and so she asked the two Har-
ringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was
forced to come by herself; and then, what do you
think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in
woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a lady,—only
think what fun ! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and
Mrs Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we
were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you can-
not imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and
Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men
came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord!
how I laughed! and so did Mrs Forster. I thought
I should have died. And Ilml made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the
matter."

With such kind of histories of their parties and good

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 39

jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty’s hints and additions,
endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to
Longboum. Elizabeth listened as little as she could,
but there was no escaping the frequent mention of
Wickham’s name.

Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs
Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty;
and more than once during dinner did Mr Bennet say
voluntarily to Elizabeth.—~

“I am glad you are come back, Lizzy.”

Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost
all the Lucasee came to meet Maria and hear the news;
and various were the subjects which occupied them :
Lady Lucas was in airing of Maria, across the table,
after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter ;
Mrs Bennet was doubly engaged1 on one hand collect-
ing an account of the present fashions from Jane, who
sat some way below her, and, on the other, retailing
them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a
voice rather louder than any other person’s, was enumer-
ating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody
who would hear her.

“ 0h ! Mary," said she, “ I wish you had gone with
us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty
and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended there was
nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the
way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to
the George, I do think we behaved very handsomel ,
for we treated the other three with the nicest co d
luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we
would have treated you too. And then when we came
away it was such fun! I thought we never should
have got into the coach. 1 was ready to die of laughter.
And then we were so merry all the way home! we
talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have
heard us ten miles off! "

40 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

To this Mary very graver replied, “Far be it from
me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They
would doubtless be congenial with the generality of
female minds. But I confess they would have no
charms for Ink—I should inﬁnitely prefer a book.”

But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She
seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute,
and never attended to Mary at all.

In the afternoon L dia was urgent with the rest of
the girls to walk to eryton, and see how everybody
went on ; but Elizabeth steadily op d the scheme.
It should not be said that the Miss ennets could not
be at home half a day before they were in unuit of the
ofﬁcers. There was another reason too or her oppo-
sition. She dreaded seeing Wickham again, and was
resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort
to [w of the regiment’s approaching removal was indeed
beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go—
snd once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more
to lague her on his account.

he had not been many hours at home before she
found that the Brighton scheme, of which Lydia had
given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent disp
cussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly
that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding ;
but his answers were at the same time so vague and equi-
vocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had
never yet despaired of succeeding at last.

chime: i311.

LIZABETH’S impatience to acquaint Jane with ,
what had happened could no longer be over-
come; and at length, resolving to suppress every

particular in which her sister was concerned, and pre-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 4 l

paring her to be surprised, she related to her the next
morning the chief of the scene between Mr Darcy and
herself.

Miss Bennet’s astonishment was soon lessened by the
stron sisterly partialin which made any admiration of
Eliza th appear perfectly natural; and all surprize was
shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr
Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner
so little suited to recommend them; but still more was
she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s refusal
must have given him.

" His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,” said
she, “and certainly ought not to have appeared; but
consider how much it must increase his disappointment! ”

“Indeed,” replied Elizabeth, “I am heartily sorry
for him; but he has other feelings, which will probably
soon drive awa his regard for me. You do not blame
me, however, liar refusing him ?”

“ Blame youl Oh, no.”

“ But you blame me for having spoken so warme of
Wickham ? ”

“ No—I do not know that you were wrong in saying
what you did.”

“ But you evil know it, when I have told you what
hapgsened the very next day."

he then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of
its contents as far as they concerned George Wickham.
What a stroke was this for poor Jane! who would
willingly have gone through the world without believing
that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of
mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor
was Darcy’s vindication, though grateful to her feelings,
capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most
earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error,
and seek to clear one without involving the other.

“ This will not do,” said Elizabeth; “ you never

42 mum; AND summon.

will be able to make both of them good for anything.
Take our choice, but you must be satisﬁed with only
one. here is but such s quantity of merit between
them ; 'ust enough to make one good sort ofman; and
of law it has been shifting about prett much. For my
pnrt, I am inclined to believe it all r Darcy's; but
you shall do as you chuse.”

It was some time, however, before a smile could be
exwrted from Jane.

“ I do not know when I have been more shocked,”
said she. “Wickham so very bad! It is almost past
belief. And poor Mr Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only
consider what he must have suffered. Such a dimp-
pointmentl and with the knowledge of your ill opinion
tool and having to relate such a thing of his sisterl It
is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it
'0."

“Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done
away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will
do him such ample justice, that I am growing every
moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your pro-
fusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him
much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather."

“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of
goodness in his countenance! such an openness and
gentleness in his manner! "

“There certainly was some great mismanagement in
the education of those two young men. One has got
all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of
it."

“I never thought Mr Darcy so deﬁcient in the
appearance of it as you used to do.”

“ And yet I meant to be uncommonly clever in
taking so decided a dislike to him, without any mason.
It is such a spur to one’s genius, such an opening for
wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be con-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 43

tinually abusive without saying‘ anything just; but one
cannot be always laughing at a man without now and
then stumbling on something witty.”

“Lizz , when you ﬁrst read that letter, I am sure
you coul not treat the matter as you do now.”

“ Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough.
I was very uncomfortable, I may say unhappy. And
with no one to speak to of what I felt, no Jane to
comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak
and vain and nonsensical as I knew I had! Oh! how
I wanted you l "

“How unfortunate that you should have used such
very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr
Darc , for now they do appear wholly undeserved.”

“ ertainly. But the misfortune of speaking with
bitterness is a most natural conse uence of the pre-
judices I had been encouraging. here is one point
on which I want your advice. I want to be told
whether I on ht, or ought not, to make our acouaint-
ance in genera understand Wickham’s character. ’

Miss Bonnet paused a little, and then replied, “ Surely
there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully.
What is your own opinion ? "

“That it ought not. to be attempted. Mr Darcy
has not authorized me to make his communication

ublic. 0n the contrary, every particular relative to
his sister was meant to be kept as much as poible to
myself ; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to
the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The
general rejudice against Mr Darcy is so violent, that
it. would, be the death of half the good people in
Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light.
I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon be gone;
and therefore it will not. signify to anybody here what
he really is. Some time hence it will be all found
out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not

44 same AND PREJUDICE.

knowing it before. At present I will say nothing
about it."

“You are quite right. To have his errors made
public might ruin him for ever. He is now, perhaps,
sorry for what he has done, and anxious to re-establnh
a character. We must not make him desperate.”

The tumult of Elizabeth’s miml was allaycd by this
conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets
which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was
certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she
might wish to talk again of either. But. there was
still something lurking behind, of which pnrdence
forbad the disclosure. She dared not relate the other
half of Mr Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister
how sincerely she had been valued by his friend.
Here was knowledge in which no one could partake;
and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect
understanding between the parties could justify her in
throwing oﬂ‘ this last encumbrance of m stery. “ And
then,” said she, “ if that very improbab e event should
ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what
Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner
himself. The liberty of communication cannot be
mine till it has lost all its value ! "

She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure
to observe the real state of her sister's spirits. Jane
was not happy. She still cherished a very tender
affection for Bingley. Having never even fancied
herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth
of ﬁrst attachment, and, from her age and disposition,
greater steadiness than ﬁrst attachments often boast;
and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and
prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense,
and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were
requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which
must have been injurious to her own health and their
tranquillity.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 45

“ Well, Lizzy,” said Mrs Bennet one day, “ what
is your opinion new of this sad business of Jane’s?
For my part, I am determined never to speak of it
again to anybody. I told my sister Philips so the
other day. But I cannot find out that Jane saw any-
thing of him in London. Well, he is a very undeserv-
ing young man—and I do not suppose there is the
least chance in the world of her ever getting him now.
There is no talk of his coming to Netherlield again in
the summer; and I have inquired of everybody, too,
who is likely to know.”

“I do not believe that he will ever live at Nether-
lield any more.”

“ Oh, well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants
him to come. Thou h I shall always say that he used
my daughter extremer ill; and if I was her, I would
not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is,I am
sure Jane will die of a broken heart; and then he will
be sorry for what he has done.”

But as Elisabeth could not receive comfort from any
such expectation, she made no answer.

“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon after-
wards, “and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do
they? Well, well, I only hope it will last And
what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp
as her mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing
extravagant in (Mr housekeeping, I dare say.”

“ No, nothing at all.”

"A great deal of good management, depend upon
it. Yes, yes. T will take care not to outrun their
income. The] wil never be distressed for money.
Well, much good may it do them! And so, I
suppose, they often talk of having Longboum when
your father is dead. They look upon it quite as their
own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”

46 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ It was a subject which they could not mention
before me.”

“No; it would have been strange if they had: but
I make no doubt they often talk of it between them-
selves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate that
is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I
should ‘be ashamed of having one that was only entailed
on me. '

cbspttr $13.

HE ﬁrst week of their return was seen one.
The second began. It was the last 0 the
regiment’s stay at Meryton, and all the young

ladies in the neighbourth were drooping apace. The
dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss
Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep,
and pursue the usual course of their employments.
Very frequently were they reproached for this in-
sensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery
was extreme, and who could not comprehend such
hard-heartedness in any of the family.

“Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What
are we to do?” would they often exclaim in the
bitterness of woe. “ How can you be smiling so,
Lizzy?”

Their aﬂ'ectlonate mother shared all their grief ; she
remembered what she had herself endured on a similar
occasion, ﬁve-and-twenty years ago.

“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days
together when Colonel Miller’s regiment went away.
I thought I should have broke my heart.”

“I am sure I shall break mint,“ said Lydia.

“ If one could but go to Brighton 1 " observed Mrs
Bennet. ,

mum AND PREJUDICE. 47

“ Oh, yes l—if one could but go to Brighton! But

pa is so disagreeable."

“A little sen-bathing would set me up for ever.”

" And m Aunt Phili s is sure it would do me a
great deal olygood.” add Kitty.

Such were the kind of lamentations resounding per-
petually through Longboum House. Elizabeth tried
to be diverted by them; but all sense of leasure was
lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of r Darcy’s
objections; and never had she before been so much
disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his
{diam th gl r Lydia’ sh n1

uteoomo srotwaso

cleared away; for she received any in'iietition from Mr!
Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to
accomyany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend
was a very young woman, and very lately married. A
resemblance in good humour and good spirits had re-
commended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their om months’ acquaintance they had been intimate
ma.

The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration
of Mrs Forster, the delight of Mrs Bennet, and the
mortiﬁcation of Kitty, are scarcel to be described.
Wholly inattentive to her sister’s eelings, Lydia ﬂew
about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for every
one’s congratulations, and laughing and talking with
more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty con-
tinued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as
unreasonable as her accent was peevish.

“ I cannot see why Mrs Forster should not ask was
well as Lydia,” said she, " though I am not her par-
ticular friend. I haVe just as much right to be asked as
she has, and more too, for I am two years older."

In vain did Elizabeth attempt to make her reason-
able, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth

48 mm myopic:

her-elﬁthilinviuﬁmmnﬁrﬁomexdﬁnginha
thenmefcelinglasinha- mhuandLydiythat I):
considered it II the dash warrant of I" ' ' of
common on: for the latter; and u and: a
nepmuumkehawueit know-hede on help
aecredyadvil'ngherfadiernot mlether go. Shere-
chmhimalltheimpvprieﬁaofLydia'lguual
viour, the little advantage the nouldderin ﬁumthe
fneudahipofnchawmnuMnFm,andIhe
probalilityofherheingyetmoreimprudmtwidiuuia
companion at Brighton, where the m l:
grater than at home. He heard her muddy, and
then said—

“Lydiawill neverbeearyu'll ahehacexpo-edher-
Ielfin tome public place or other,and we an never
expect her to do it with no little expeme or inconveni-
ence to her family as under the recent circumnanou.”

“ If you were aware,” aid Elizabeth, “ofthe very
great disadvantage to us all which mun arise from the
public notice of Lydia'c unguarded and imprudent
manner—nay, which has almdy arisen from it, I am
sure you would judge differently in the alﬁlir."

“ Already arisen ? " repated Mr Benoet. “ What,
has the frightened away some of your lovers? Poor
linle Lizzy I But do not be cast down. Such
squeamish youths as cannot hear to be connected with a
little abeurdit are not worth a regret. Come, let me
see the lint ofy itiful fellow: who have been ktpt aloof
by L ‘3’9 fol y.”

“ ndecd you are mistaken. I have no such in-
juries to resent. It is not of peculiar, but of general
evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance,
our rcrpccmbility in the world must be achcted by the
wild volatility, the auuruncc and disdain of all restraint
which mark Lydia’a character. Excuse me,—for I
mutt Ipeak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not

PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE- 49

take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present ursnits are not to be
the business of her life, she wil soon be be ond the
reach of amendment. Her character will be xed, and
she will, at sixteen, be the most determined ﬂirt that
ever made herself and her family ridiculous ;—a ﬂirt,
too, in the worst and meanest degree of ﬂirtation;
without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable
person ; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her
mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that
universal contempt which her rage for admiration will
excite. In this danger Kitty is also comprehended.
She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant,
idle, and absolutely nncontrouledl Oh! my dear
father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be
censured and despised wherever they are known, and
that their sisters will not he often involved in the
disgrace 2 ”

Mr Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the
sub‘eet, and aﬁectionately taking her hand, said in
rep y~

“ Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Where-
cver you and Jane are known you must be respected and
valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for
having a couple of——or I may say, three Very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbonm if
Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then.
Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out
of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be
an object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be
of less importance even as a common ﬂirt than she has
been here. The ofﬁcers will ﬁnd women better worth
their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insigniﬁcance. At any
rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without
authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life.”

I]. D

50 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content;
but her own opinion continued the same, and the left
him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature,
however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
She was conﬁdent of having performed her duty, and to
fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety,
was no part of her disposition.

Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of
her conference with her father, their indignation would
hardly have found expression in their united volubility.
In Lydis’s imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised
every possibility of canth happiness. She saw, with
the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-
place covered with officers. She saw herself the object
of attention to tens and to scores of them at present no-
known. She saw all the glories of the camp—its tents '
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded
with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet;
and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated
beneath a tent, tenderly ﬂirting with at least six ofﬁcers
at once.

Had she known that her sister sought to tear her
from such prospects and such realities as these, what
would have been her sensations ? They could have
been understood only by her mother, who might have
felt nearly the same. Lydia’s going to Brighton was
all that consoled her for her melancholy conviction of
her husband’s never intending to go there himself.

But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed ;
Ind their rapturcs continued, with little intermission, to
the very day of Lydia’s leaving home.

EIiL-Ibcth was now to see Mr Wickham for the last
time. Having been frequently in company with him since
her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations
of former partiality entirely so. She had even learnt
to detect, in the very gentleness which had ﬁrst delighted

PRIDE AND PREJ‘UDICE. 51

her, an aﬂ'ectation and a sameness to disgust and weary.
In his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had
a fresh source of displeasure, for the inclination he soon
testiﬁed of renewing those attentions which had marked
the early part of their on uaintance could onl serve,
after what had since pa , to rovoke her. he'lost
all concern for him in ﬁnding erself thus selected as
the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and
while she steadil repressed it, could not but feel the re-
proof' contained in his believing, that however long, and
or whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn,
her vanity would be gratiﬁed, and her preference secured
at any time by their renewal.

On the very last day of the regiment’s remaining at
Meryton, he dined, with others of the ofﬁcers, at
Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to
part from him in good humour, that on his makin
some inquiry as to the manner in which her time h
passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam’s
and Mr Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at
Rosings, and asked him if he was acquainted with the
fomer.

He looked surprized, di leased, alarmed; but with
a moment’s recollection and; returning smile, replied,
that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observ-
ing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her
how she had liked him. Her answer was war-ml in
his favour. With an air of indifference he soon ailer-
wards added—-

“ How long did you say that he was at Rosings ? ”

“ Nearly three weeks.”

“ And you saw him frcq’ucntly ? ”

“ Yes, almost every da . ’

" His manners are very different from his cousin’s."

“Yes, very different. But I think Mr Darcy im-
proves on acquaintance.”

52 mo: AND mm“

“Indeed!” aidehnviIhalnokvhichdid
not escape her. “And pray, my I ‘2"———-Bnt
checking him-elf, he Mina gayer tom,“hitin
addresthnheilnpmveo.’ Hashedtipodtondd
auﬂrtofcivilityto his ordinary‘yleE—forldarem
hope," he continued in a lover and menu'an tone,
“ that he is improved in elrntiala.”

“Oh, no! " said Elizabeth. “ In uenliah, I believe.
he ll very much what he ever wan."

While Ihe woke, Wickham looked a if learn:er
knowing whether to remove her words, or to
diunut their meaning. van a uomething in her
countenance which made him listen with an apprehen-
nive and anxiom attention, while the added—

“ When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I
did not mean that either hir mind or manner: were in a
mw of im mvemcnt, but that, from knowing him
better, hi5 disposition was better undemood.”

Wickham’a alarm now appeared in a heightened
complexion and,agitated look; for a few minute: he
wal Iilent, till, Ihaking of? his ernhanmnent, he turned
to her again, and aid in the gentlest of accente—

“You, who to well know my feelings toward. Mr
Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must
rejoice that he in wine enough to assume even the
a patron” of what is right. Hie pride, in that direc-
tion, may be of service, if not to himnelf, to many
others, for it must deter him from such foul miaconduct

‘ II I have mﬂ'ered by. I only fear that the non of
ctutioucneu to which you, I imagine, have been allud-
ing, il merely adopted on his visit: to his aunt, of whole
giood opinion and judgment he stands much in awe.

is fear of her has always operated, I know, when
they were together; and a good deal in to be imputed
to hi: with of fonr/arding the match with Mini de
Bough, which I am certain he he very much at heart."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 53

Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she
answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She
saw that he wanted to engage her an the old subject of
his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the ammr-
we, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but wr
further attempt to distinguish Eliubeth; and they
parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual
desire of never meeting again.

When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs
Forster to Merywn, from whence they were to let out
early the next morning. The ration between her
and her family was rather noisy‘mn pathetic. Kitty
was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep
from vexation and envy. Mrs Bennet was diffuse in
her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and
impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss
the o rtunity of enjoying herself as much as possible
—advrce which there was every reason to believe would
be attended to; and in the clamorous happiness of
Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle
adieu: of her sisters were uttered without being heard.

Gibson: i131-

AD Elizabeth’s opinion been all drawn from her
own family, she could not have formed a very
pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic

comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty,
and that appearance of good humour which youth and
beauty generally give, had married a woman whose
weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
their marriage put an end to all real aﬂ‘ection for her.
Respect, esteem, and conﬁdence had vanished for ever;

54 mm: AND PREJUDICI.

and all his views of domestic happine- were over-
thrown. lhlt Mr Bonnet was not of a rn
m'lt coniﬁirt for the diunppointment which his own
hnpi'mlence Innl brought on, in any of those pleasure:
whirh too often conmle the unfortunate for their folly
or their vice. He was fond of the country and of
hook” and from these tastes had an'sen his principal
rn'u‘ynu-ntl. 'l‘u hi0 wife he was very little otherwise
im ('Dllfll, than mt her ignorance and folly had contri-
buted to ill! nquIenIent. This is not the sort of happi-
m-n which u' man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; hut where other powers of entertainment are
wanting, the true philosopher will derive beneﬁt from
Inule all are given.

III .ubeth, however, had never been blind to the im-
nn uir-Iy of her father's behaviour as a husband. She
nui :Ilwnyl seen it with pain; but respecting his
uhilitiel, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
hrrtu-Il', the endeavoured to forget what she could not
uw-tlunlt, «ml to banish from her thoughts that continual
breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in
expanding hit will- to the contemﬁt of her own children,
was so hinhly reprehensible. ut she had never felt
no utmn ly III now the diuudvantages which must attend
the chililren of IO unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been
to fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged
u direction of talents; talents which, rightly used,
miuht at learnt have preservad the respectability of his
daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of
his wife.

When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham’a
departure, the found little other cause for satisfaction in
the loan of the regiment. Their parties abroad were
less varied than before, and at home she had a mother
Ind liner whose constant repinings at the dulnm of
everything around them threw a real gloom over their

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time

in her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
0 her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose
disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was
likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by a
situation of such double danger as a watering-place and
' a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
has been sometimes found before, that an event to
which she had looked forward with impatient desire
did not, in taking lace, bring all the satisfaction she
had promised hersef. It was consequently necessary
to name some other period for the commencement of
actual felicity—to have some other point on which her
wishes and hopes might be ﬁxed, and by again enjoying
the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her
tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest
thou hts; it was her best consolation for all the un-

ortable hours which the discontentedness of her
mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have
included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would
have been perfect.

f‘llut it is fortunate," thought she, “ that I have
something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement
complete, my disappointment would be certain. But
here, my carrying with me one ceaseless source of
regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope to
have all my expecmtions of pleasure realised. A
scheme of which every part promises delight can never
be successful; and general disappointment is only
warded off by the defence of some little peculiar
vexation.”

When Lydia went away, she promised to write very
often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but
her letters were always long expected, and always very
short. Those to her mother contained little else than

56 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

that the were just returned from the library, where
such an such ofﬁcers had attended them, and where
she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite
wild; that she had s new gown, or a new palatal,
which she would have described more fully, but was
obliged to leave of? in a violent hurry, as Mrs Forster
called her, and they were going to the amp; and
from her correspondence with her sister there was still
leu to be leamt—for her letters to Kitty, though rather
longer, were much too full of lines under the words to
be made public.

After the ﬁrst fortnight or three weelu of her
absence, henlth, good humour, and cheerfulneos began
to reappear at Longboum. Everything wore a happier

ct. The families who had been in town for the
winter came back again, and summer ﬁnery and summer
engagements arose. Mrs Bonnet was restored to her
usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June,
Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter
Meryton without tears; on event of such happy promise
as to make Elizabeth hope that by the following Christ-
mas she might be so tolerany reasonable as not to
mention an olﬁcer above once a day, unless, by some
cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Ofﬁce,
another regiment should be quartered in Meryton.

The time ﬁxed for the beginning of their northern
tour was now fast approaching, and a fortnight only was
wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs Gardiner,
which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed
its extent. Mr Gardiner would be prevented h busi-
ness from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and
must be in London again within a month ; and as that
left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so
much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the
leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged
to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 5 7

tour, and, according to the present plan, were to go no
farther northward than Derbyshire. In that coun
there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their
three weeks; and to Mrs Gardiner it had a peculiarly
strong attraction. The town where she had formerly
passed some ears of her life, and where they were now
to spend a ew da s, was probably as great an object
of her curiosity as l the celebrated beauties of Mmlock,
Chatsworth, Dovcdale, or the Peak.

Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set
her heart on seeing the Lakes, and still thought there
might have been time enough. But it was her business
to be satisﬁed—and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.‘

With the mention of Derbyshire there were many
ideas connected. It was im ssible for her to see the
word without thinking of emberley and its owner.
“ But surely," said she, “ I may enter his county with
impunity, and rub it of a few petriﬁed spars without his
perceiving me."

The period of expectation was now doubled. Four
weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt‘s
arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr and Mrs
Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear
at Longhoum. The children, two girls of six and
eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left
under the articular care of their cousin Jane, who was
the generar favourite, and whose steady sense and sweet-
ness of temper exactl adapted her for attending to them
in every way—teaching them, playing with them, and
loving them.

The Gardiners stayed only one ni ht at Longboum,
and set olf the next morning with E izabeth in pursuit
of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain
—that of suitableness as com anions ; a suitableness
which comprehended health an temper to bear incon-

58 PRIDE AND PRIJUDICE.

veniences—checrfulncss to enhance every plenum—and
affection and intelligence, which might su ly it among
themselves if there were disappointments a road.

It is not the object of this work to give a descri ion
of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable
through which their route thither lay; Oxford, len-
heim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Bimingham, &c., are
sufﬁciently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all
the present concern. To the little town of Lambton,
the scene of Mrs Gardiner’s former residence, and
where she had lately learned that some sequaintanoe
still remained. they bent their steps, after having seen
all the princhal wonders of the count ; and within
iivc mich of .ambton, Elizabeth found rom her aunt
that P-mbcrley was situated. It was not in their direct
road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talk-
ing over their route the evening before, Mrs Gardiner
expressed an inclination to see the place again. Mr
Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was
applied to for her approbation.

“ My love, should not you like to see a place of
which you have heard so much?” said her aunt; "a
place, too, with which so many of your acquaintance
are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there,
you know.”

Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no
business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a dis-
inclination for seeing it. She must own that she was
tired of great houses; after going over so many, she
reall had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.

lid." Gardiner abused her stupidity. “If it were
merely a ﬁne house richly furnished," said she, “I
should not care about it myself; but the grounds are
delightful. They have some of the ﬁnest woods in the
country."

Elizabeth said no more—but her mind could not

PRIDE AND PREJUDlCE. 59

acquiesce. The possibility of meen'ng Mr Darcy, while
viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be
dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and thought
it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to
run such a risk. But against this there were objections;
and she ﬁnally resolved that it could be the last resource,
if her private inquiries as to the absence of the fumin
were unfavourany answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the
chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very ﬁne
lace, what was the name of its proprietor, and, With no
ittle alarm, whether the family were down for the
summer. A most welcome negative followed the last
question—and her alarms being now removed, she was
at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the
house herself; and when the subject was revived the
next morning, and she was again applied to, could
readily answer, and with a pro er air of indifference,
that she had not really any disliEe to the schema—To
Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.

otbnmt £31,313.

LIZABETH, as they drove along, watched for
the ﬁrst appearance of Pemberley Woods with
some perturbation; and when at length they

turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high
ﬂutter.

The park was very large, and contained great variety
of ground. They entered it in one of its lowest points,
and drove for some time through a beautiful wood
stretching over a wide extent.

Eliubeth’s mind was too full for conversation, but
she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point

6o PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

of View. They gradually ascended for half-a-Inile,
and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was
instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the
opposite side of a valley, into which the road with
some abru tneu wound. It was a large, handeome
stone buil ing, standing well on rising ground, and
backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front,
a stream of some natural im rtance was swelled into
greater, but without any artiﬁcial appearance. Its banks
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth
was delighted. She had never seen a place for which
nature had done more, or where natural beauty had
been so little counteracted by an awkward taste. They
were all of them warm in their admiration; and at
that moment she felt that to be mistress of Pcmberley
mi ht be something!
hey descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and
drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer
aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting
its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chamber-
maid had been mistaken. 0n applying to see the
lace, they were admitted into the hall; and Eliza-
th, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
wonder at her being where she was.

The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly
woman, much less ﬁne, and more civil, than she had
any notion of ﬁnding her. They followed her into
the dining-parlour. It was a large, well-proportioned
room, handsomely ﬁtted up. Elizabeth, after slightly
surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
The hill, crowned with wood, from which they had
descended, receiving increased abruptness from the
distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of
the ground was good; and she looked on the whole
ecene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks, and

PRIDE AND PREJUDICI. 6!

the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,
with delight. As they pasted into other rooms these
objects were taking different positions; but from every
window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms
were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable
to the fortune of their proprietor; but Elizabeth saw,
with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy
nor uselesst line; with less of s lendour, and more
real elegance, than the fumiture of osinge.

“ And of thithe,” thought she, “ I might have
been mistressl ith these rooms I might now have
been familiarly acquainde Instead of viewing them
as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my
own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and
aunt—But no,"——recollecting herself,—“ that could
never be: my uncle and aunt would have been lost
to me; I should not have been allowed to invite
them.”

This was a lucky recollection—it ved her from
something like regret.

She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether
her master was really absent, but had not courage for
it. At length, however, the question was asked by
her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while
Mrs Reynolds replied that he was, adding, “But we
expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.”
How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey
had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!

Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She
approached and saw the likeness of Mr Wickham
suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the
mantel iece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she
liked it. The housekeeper came forward, and told
them it was the picture of a young gentleman, the son
of her late master s steward, who had been brought up
by him at his own expense. “ He is now gone into

62 same sun PREJUDICE.

the army," she added ; “but I am afraid he has turned
out very wild."

Mrs Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but
Elizabeth could not return it.

“And that,” said Mr: Reynolds, pointing to an-
other of the miniatures, “is my master—and very like
him. It was drawn at the same time as the other—
nbout eight years ago."

“ I have heard much of your master’s ﬁne person,”
said Mrs Gardiner, looking at the picture; " it is a
handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether
it is like or not.”

Mrs Reynold’s respect for Elizabeth seemed to
increase on this intimation of her knowing her master.

“ Does that oung lady know Mr Darcy .’ ”

Elizabeth co cured, and said—“ A little.”

“And do not you think him a very handsome
gentleman, nia'am ? '

“ Yes, very handsome.”

“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the
gallery upstairs you will see a ﬁner, larger picture of
him than this. This room was my late master’s
favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they
need to be then. He was very fond of them."

This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr Wickharn’s
being among them.

Mn Reynolds then directed their attention to one of
Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only eight yarn
old.

“ And ll Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother 9” H
laid Mr Gardiner. ' I

“ Oh! yes—the handsomest young lady that ever
was seen i and so accomplished !—She plays and sings
all day long. In the next room is a new instrument
just come down for her—a present from my master;
she comes here to-murrow with him."

mos AND summon. 63

Mr Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant,
encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and
remarks: Mrs Reynolds, either from pride and-attach-
ment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.

“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of
the year 9 "

“ Not so much as I could wish, sir ; but I dare say
he may spend half his time here; and Miss Darcy is
always down for the summer mont ” -

“Except.” thought Elizabeth, “when she goes to
Ramsgate.”

“ ’If your master would marry, you might see more of
him.

“Yes, sir; but I do not know when tlml will be.
I do not know who is good enough for him.”

Mr and Mrs Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not
help saying, “It is very much to his credit, I am sure,
that you should think so.”

“ I say no more than the truth, and what everybod
will say that knows him,” replied the other. Elizabeth
thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with
increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I
have never had .1 cross word from him in my life,
and I have known him ever since he was four years
old.”

This was praise, of all others most extraordinary,
most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-
tempered man had been her ﬁrmest opinion. Her
keenest attention was awakened ; she longed to hear
more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying—

“ There are very few ople of whom so much can
be said. You are lucky In having such a master.”

“ Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through
the world, I could not meet with a better. But I
have always observed, that they who are good-natured

Orv

64 nuns AND PREJUDICE.

when children, are good-natured when they grow up;
and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-
hearted boy in the world.”

Elizabeth almost stared at her. “ Can this be Mr
Dare 3" thought she.

“ is father was an excellent man,” said Mrs
Gardiner.

“Yes, ma’am, that he was indeed; and his son will
be just like him—just as affable to the poor.”

Eliubeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was im-
patient for more. Mrs Reynolds could interest her on
no other point. She related the subjects of the pictures,
the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the fumi-
ture, in vain. Mr Gardiner, highly amused by the
kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her
excessive commendation of her master, soon led again
to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits as they proceeded together up the great
staircase.

“ He is the best landlord, and the best master," id
the, “that ever lived; not like the wild young men
now-a-days, who think of nothing but themselves.
There is not one of his tenants or servants but what
will give him a good name. Some people call him
proud; but I am sure I never saw anything of it. To
my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away
like other young men."

“ In what an amiable light does this place him ?"
thou ht Elizabeth.

“ his line account of him,” whispered her aunt as
they walked, “ is not quite consistent with his behaviour
to our poor friend.”

“ Perhaps we might be deceived.”

“That is not very likely; our authority was too
good."

On reaching the spacious lobby above they were

PRIDE arm PREJUDICE. 65

shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately littcd up
with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments
below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to
the room when last at Pemberley.

“ He is certainl a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as
she walked towar s one of the windows.

Mrs Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy’s delight,
when she should enter the room. “ And this is always
the way with him,” she added. “ Whatever can give
his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment.
There is nothing he would not (in for her.”

The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal
bedrooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the
former were many good paintings; but Elizabeth knew
nothing of the art: and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some
drawings of Miss Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects
were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.

In the gallery there were many family portraits, but
they could have little to ﬁx the attention of a stranger.
Elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose
features would be known to her. At last it arrested
her—and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr
Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remem-
bered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her.
She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest
contemplan'on, and returned to it again before they
quitted the gallery. Mrs Reynolds informed them that
it had been taken in his father’s lifetime.

There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth’s
mind, a more gentle sention towards the original than
she had ever felt in the height of their acquaintance.
The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs Reynolds
was of no triﬂing nature. What praise is more valuable
than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a brother,

u. E

(:6 ram: AND PRIJUDICI.

A landlord, in neuter, the considered how my penile-
ltuppincu were in llll guardian-hipI—hov mud: of
plea-urt- or pain it wu in hit power to he‘owl—Inv
much of good or evil mutt he done by him! Every
inlru that had been brought forward by the home

VIM l'uvournble to llll ehnraeter, and an the mod

tlw eutivut on which he wan reprelented, and ﬁxed lie
rye- upnu hem-ll, the thought of hit regard with a
lll'l1lt‘l’ u-ntiment uf grntitude than it had ever rained
brim“ the remembered in warmth, and Iofrened it:
im no n‘irly of ex Il’L'IIlDII.

When nll of t it: house that was 0 n to general in-
qu-rliun hull been wen, they retumetl‘downmin, and,
taking lrnvv ul' the haunt-keeper, were cantigned over to
the Wuhan-r, who met them at the hall-door.

[\- thry wnlkt-il nerou the lawn towardl the river,
lull/Mirth turm-il hack to look again; her uncle and
um" Itoppnl ulm, um! while the former wan conjectur-
ln in In the dale ol' the building, the owner of it him-
uu‘l nmhlvnly «mm- lbrwuril from the road which led
Iwhiml ii to the Itnblct.

'I'lwy wm- within twenty yards of each other, and
m ulnupl wul llll nppenmnce tltnt it was impossible to
uvuitl hi: linhl. ' ‘ieir eyes instantly met, and the
eln-vlt- of melt were uveruprend with the deepest blush.
llt' nlmrlulvly «turn-ti, and for a moment seemed im-
nmvubh' limit lurprile; but shortly recovering himself,
tulvuuenl tnwmthl the party, and upoke to Elizabeth, if
not in term: (If Ixrri'cet composure, at least of perfect
uivility.

Hhe hud inntinctively turned away; but stopping on
llll approach, received hit compliments with an em-
lmmument immuible to be overcome. Had his ﬁm
auteur-nee, or Ill resemblance to the picture they had
jut been examining, been insufﬁcient to insure the other
two that they new law Mr Darcy, the gardener’t ex-

PRIDE AND snmumce. 67

pression of surprize, on beholding his master, must
immediately have told it. They stood a little aloof
while he was milking to their niece, who, astonished
and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face,
and knew not what answer she returned to his civil
inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alteration of
his manner since they last parted, every sentence that
he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every
idea of the impropriety of her being found there re-
curring to her mind, the few minutes in which they
continued together were some of the most uncomfort-
able of her life. Nor did he seem much more at ease:
when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedate-
ness; and he ated his inquin'es as to the time of
her having lefthngbourn, and of her stay in Derby-
shire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly
spoke the distraction of his thoughts.

At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after
standing a few moments without saying a word, he
suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.

The others then joined her, and expressed their
admiration of his ﬁgure; but Elizabeth heard not a
word, and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings,
followed them in silence. She was overpowered by
shame and vexation. Her coming there was the most
unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world!
How strange must it appear to him! In what a dis-
graceful light might it not strike so vain a man! It
might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in
his way againl oh! why did she come? or, why
did he thus come a day before he was expected?
Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should
have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for
it was plain that he was that moment arrived —that
moment alighted from his horse or his carriage. She
blushed again and again over the perverseness of the

63 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI’.

meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly altered,—
what could it mean? That he should even speak to
her was amazing l—but to speak with such civility, to
inquire after her famil 1 Never in her life had she
seen his manners so lit e digniﬁed, never had he spoken
with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.
What a contrast did it offer to his last address in
Rosings Park, when he ut his letter into her hand!
She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.

They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side
of the water, and every step was bringing forward a
noblcr fall of ground, or a liner reach of the woods to
which they were approaching; but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though
she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of
her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to
such objects as they minted out, she distinguished no
part of the scene. er thoughts were all ﬁxed on
that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might
be, where Mr Darcy then was. She longed to know
what at that moment was passing in his mind—in what
manner he thought of her, and whether, in deﬁance of
everything, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had
been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there
had been lbs! in his voice which was not like ease.
Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
seeing her she could not tell, but he certainly had not
seen her with composure.

At length, however, the remarks of her com nions
on her absence of mind roused her, and she elt the
necessity of appearing more like herself.

They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the
river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds;
whence, in spots where the opening of the trees gave
the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of

PRXDE AND PREJUDICE. 69

woods overspreading many, and occasional] part of the
stream. Mr Gardiner expressed a wish 0 going round
the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile, they wene told that it was ten
miles round. It settled the matter; and they ursued
the accustomed circuit; which brought then-a am,after
some time, in a descent among hanging w , to the
edge of the water, in one of its narrowest parts. They
crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the
general air of the scene; it was a t less adorned than
any they had yet visited; and t e valley, here con-
tracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood
which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore its
windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and
perceived their distance from the house, Mrs Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and
thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as
possible. Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit,
and they took their way towards the house on the
opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but
their progress was slow, for Mr Gardiner, though
seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of
ﬁshing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and
talking to the man about them, that he advanced but
little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they
were again surprized and Elizabeth’s asmnishmcnt was
quite equal to what it had been at ﬁrst, by the sight of
Mr Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance.
The walk being here less sheltered than on the other
side, allowed them to see him before they met. Eliza-
beth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for
an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to
speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them.
For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would pro-

7o PRIDE AND Pncjunrcr‘s‘.
bany strike into some other path. The idea lasted
while a turning in the walk concealed him from their
view; the turning past, he was immediath before
them. With a glance, she saw that he had 0st none
of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she ‘
began as they met to admire the beauty of the place;
but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,”
and “charming,” when some unlucky recollections
obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from
her might be mischievously construed. Her colour
changed, and she said no more.

Mrs Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on
her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the
honour of introducing him to her friends. This was a
stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;
and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now
seeking the acquaintance of some of those very ple
against whom his pride had revolted in his 0 er to
herself. “What will be his surprize,” thought she,
“ when he knows who they are? He takes them now
for people of fashion."

The introduction, however, was immediately made;
and as ,lre named their relationship to herself, she stole a
sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not
without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was
unprith by the connexion was evident; he sustained it,
however, with fortitude, and, so far from going away,
turned back with them, and entered into conversation
with Mr Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should
know she had some relations for whom there was no
need to blush. She listened most attentively to all that
passed between them, and gloried in every expression,
every sentenCe of her uncle, which marked his intelli-
gence, his taste, or his good manners.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 7!

The conversation soon turned upon ﬁshing ; and she
heard Mr Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility,
to ﬁsh there as often as he chose while he continued in
the neighbourhood, offering at the same time to supply
him with ﬁshing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs
Gardiner, who was walking arm-and-ann with Elizabeth,
gave her a look expressive of her wonder. Eliubeth
said nothing, but it gratiﬁed her exceedingly; the com-
pliment must be all for herself. Her astonishment.
however, was extreme, and continually was she repeat-
ing, “ Why is he so altered? From what can it pro-
ceed? It cannot be for rue—it cannot be liar my sake
that his manners are thus softened. My re roofs at
Hunsford could not work such a change as thrs. It is
impossible that he should still love me.’

After walking some time in this way, the two ladies
in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their
places, after descending to the brink of the river for the

etter inspection of some curious water-plant, there
chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Mrs
Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning,
found Elizabeth’s arm inadequate to her support, and
consequently preferred her husband’s. Mr Darcy took
her place by her niece, and they walked on together.
After a short silence, the lady ﬁrst spoke. She wished
him to know that she had been assured of his absence
before she came to the place, and accordingly began by
observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected—
“ for your housekeeper,” she added, “informed us that

on would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and
indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that ﬁns
were not immediately expected in the country.” c
acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business
with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a
few hours before the rest of the party with whom he

7’ PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

butl been travelling. “They will join me early to-
niurmw," he continual, “and among them are some
who will clninl an acquaintance with yum—Mr Bingley
and hill «ii-tern.”

lilizubeth Inlwered only b 1 ﬂight bow. Her
thou Ihtu were innuntly driven ck to the time when
Mr iinglt-y'l nnme had been last mentioned between
lbrln | mul. if Illt.‘ might judge from his complexion, bi:
mind wnu not very ditli-rently engaged.

“'l'hrrt- in nlnn one other Freon in the party,” he
enminuml nller a paure, “ who more nicularly wilhes
to be known to yam—“’ill you all ow me, or do I
nuk tun quehI to introduce my sister to your acquaint-
nm'e «luring your stay at Lambton?”

'l'lu- Iurpriw of such an application was great indeed;
iI wu- Inn “rent for her to know in what manner she
lll't'l'llt'tl In il. She inunedintely felt that whatever desire
Minn lhlrcy might have of being acquainted with her
Illllll be the work of her brother, and, without looking
further, it waul ultiulitctory; it was gntifying to know
that bit I'eleutment hml not nuule him think really ill of
her.

'l‘hey nuw wnlltetl on in uilencc, each of them deep in
thought. I'ilimheth was not comlbmible; that was
im'mnible; but I'll: was ﬂattered and pleased. Hill
with of inu'mlueing his sister to her was a compliment
of the higheut kiml. They soon outstripped the others,
and when they haul reached the carriage, Mr and Mrs
Gardiner were hulfu quarter of a mile behind.

He then naked her to walk into die house—but the
deelnred herqu not tired, and they stood together on
the lawn. At Iuch a time much might have been said,
and uiIeHCe was very awkward. She wanted to talk,
but there Ieemed an embargo on every subject. At last
ahe recolleeted that she had been travelling, and they
talked of Mutlock and Dovednle with great persever-

prune AND PREJUDICE. 73

ance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her
patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the
I’le-ﬁ-Iﬂ: was over. On Mr and Mn Gardiner’ s coming
up they were all pressed to go into the house and take
some refreshment; but this was declined, and they
ﬁtted on each side with the utmost politeness. Mr

arcy handed the ladies into the can-iage; and when
it drove of, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards
the house.

The observations of her uncle and aunt now began;
and each of them pronounced him to be inﬁnitely
superior to an thing they had expected. “ He is
perfectly well haved, polite, and unassuming,” said
her uncle.

“There is something a little stately in him, to be sure,”
replied her aunt; “but it is conﬁned to his air, and is
not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper,
that though some people may call him proud, I have
seen nothing of it.’

“I was never more surprized than by his behaviour
to us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive ;
and there was no necessity for such attention. His
acquaintance with Elizabeth was very triﬂing."

“To be sure, Lizzy," said her aunt, “he is not so
handsome as Wiekham; or, rather, he has not Wick-
ham’s countenance, for his features are perfectly good.
But how came you to tell me that he was so dis-
agreeable ? "

Eliubeth excused herself as well as she could: said
that she had liked him better when they met in Kent
than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant
as this morning.

“ But rha he may be a little whimsical in his
civilities,’ replied her uncle. “Your great men often
are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word
about ﬁshing, as he might change his mind another day,
and warn me oﬂ" his grounds."

74 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Elizabeth felt that they had entime mistaken his
character, but said nothing.

“ From what we have seen of him," continued Mn
Gardiner, “I really should not have thought that he
could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody on he
has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured
look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing
about his mouth when he speaks And there is some-
thing of dégnity in his countenance, that would not give
one an on :Ivourable idea of his heart. But, to be cure,
the good lady who showed us the house did give him a
most ﬂaming character! I could hardly help laughing
aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose,
and Ilml in the eye ofa servant compl‘chends every virtue."

Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something
in vindication of his behaviour to Wickham; and there-
fore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner
as she could, that by what she had heard from his rela-
tions in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction; and that his character was by no means
so faulty, nor Wickham's so amiable, as they had been
considered in Hertfordshire. In conﬁrmation of this,
she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transac-
tions in which they had been connected, without actually
naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might
be relied on.

Mrs Gardiner was surprized and concerned; but as
they were now approaching the scene of her former
pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollec-
tion ; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to
her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to
think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by
the moming’s walk, they had no sooner dined than she
set 05 again in quest of her former ac uaintance, and
the evening was spent in (he satisfactions 0 an intercourse
renewed after many years’ discontinuance.

same AND PREJUDlCE. 75

The occurrences of the day were too full of interest
to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new
friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think
with wonder, of Mr Darcy’s civility, and, above all, of
his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.

Chapter £1217.

LIZABETH had settled it that Mr Darcy could
bring his sister to visit her the very day after her
reaching Pemberley; and was consequently re-

solved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of
that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on
the very morning after their own arrival at Lambton,
these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were re-
turned ro the inn to dress themselves for dining with the
same family, when the sound of a carria e drew them to a
window, and they saw a gentleman an lady in s curricle
driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing
the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small
degree of surprize to her relations by ac uainting them
with the honour which she expected. er uncle and
aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of
her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance
itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding
day, opened to them a new idea on the business.
Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt
that there was no other way of accounting for such
attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a par<
tiality for their niece. While these newly-born notions
were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Eliza-
beth’s feelings was every moment increasing. She was
quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst

76 mmnm

damiMﬁebathpﬁyd
thrill-haw hut-1 :- .ni‘nh ﬁat;
dmhmﬁnaﬂah

gnczfnLShewas landmdnnhu’lrdﬂ;
Mdmemmandgmdhmrhhuﬁmand

done away; but had the still felt any, it could hardly
have Inod in ground against the umﬂ'ccttd cordiality

PRIDE AND PREJUDICF. 7 7

with which he expressed himself on seeing her again.
He inquired in a friendly, though general way, after
her famil , and looked and spoke with the same good-
humou ease that he had ever done.

To Mr and Mrs Gardiner he was scarcely a less
interesting personage than to herself. They had long
wished to see him. The whole party before them, -
indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions
which had just arisen of Mr Darcy and their niece
directed their observation towards each with In eamest
though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the ful conviction that one of them
at least knew what it was to love. of the lady's
sensations they remained a little in doubt ; but that the
gentleman was overﬂowing with admiration was evident
enough.

Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She
wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors ;
she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself
agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for
those to whom she endeavoured to giVe pleasure were
prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was rdy,
Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined, to be
pleased.

In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally ﬂew to her
sister; and oh! how ardently did she long to know -
whether any of his were directed in a like manner.
Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself
with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was
trying to trace a resemblance. But, though this
might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to
his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up
as a rival to Jane. No look appeared on either side
that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred be—

78 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE

tween them that could justify the hopes of his sister.
On this point she was soon satisﬁed ; and two or three
little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in
her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of
Jane not untinctured hy tenderness, and a wish of
saying more that might lead to the mention of her,
had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment
when the others were talking together, and in a tone
which had something of real regret, that it “was a
very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing
her;” and, before she could reply, he added, “ It is
above eight months. We have not met since the 26th
of November, when we were all dancing together at
Netherlield."

Elizabeth was pleased to ﬁnd his memory so exact;
and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when un-
attended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters
were at Longbourn. There was not much in the
question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was
a look and a manner which gave them meaning.

It was not often that she could turn her eyes on
Mr Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catch a
glimpse, she saw an expression of general complaisance,
and in all that he said she heard an accent so far
removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as
convinced her that the improvement of manners which
she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary its
existenCe might prove, had at least outlived one day.
When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and
courting the good opinion of people with whom any
intercourse a few months ago would have been a
disgrace—when she saw him thus civil, not only to
herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly
diuiuincd, and mcollected 'their last lively scene in
Hunsford Parsonage,—the difference, the change was
so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 79

could hardly restrain her astonishment from being
visible. Never, even in the company of his dear
friends at Netherﬁeld, or his digniﬁed relations at
Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so
free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as
now, when no importance could result from the success
of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of
those to whom his attentions were addressed would
draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both
of Netherﬁeld and Rosings.

Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour;
and when they arose to depart, Mr Darcy called on
his sister to jam him in expressing their wish of seeing
Mr and Mrs Gardiner, and Miss Bonnet, to dinner at
Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy,
though with a diflidence which marked her little in
the habit of giving invitations readily obeyed. Mrs
Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how
she, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed
as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her
head. Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance

ke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dis-
like of the roposal, and seeing in her husband, who
was fond o society, a perfect willingness to accept
it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the
day after the next was ﬁxed on.

Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of
seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say
to her, and many inquiries to make after all their
Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all this
into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was
pleased; and on this account, as well as some others,
found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of
considering the last half-hour with some satisfaction,
though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had
been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries

\

80 PRIDE AND PRBIUDICE.

or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them
only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of
Bingley, and then hun'ied away to dress.

But she had no reason to fear Mr and Mn Gardiner’a
curiosity; it was not their wish to force her com-
munication. It was evident that she was much better
acquainted with Mr Darcy than they had before any
idea of ; it was evident that he wal very much in love
with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to
justify inquiry.

Of Mr Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to
think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached,
there was no fault to ﬁnd. They could not be un-
touched by his politeness; and had they drawn his
character from their own feelings and his servant’s
report, without any reference to any other account,
the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
would not have recognised it for Mr Darcy. There
was now an interest, however, in believing the house-
keeper; and they soon became sensible that the
authority of a servant who had known him since he
was four years old, and whose own manners indicated
respectability, was not to be hastily rejected. Neither
had anything occurred in the intelligence of their
Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight.
They had nothing to accuse him of but pride ; pride he

rohahly had, and if not, it would certamly he imputed
by the inhabitants of a small market-town where the
family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however,
that he was a liberal man, and did much good among

the r.

\gitch respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found
that he was not held there in much estimation; for
though the chief of his concema with the son of his
patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-
known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had

rains AND PREJUDICE. 81

left many debts behind him, which Mr Darcy alter-
wards discharged.

As for Eliubeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley
this evening more than the last; and the evening,
though as it passed it seemed long, was not long
enou h to determine her feelings towards one in that
mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours en-
deavouring to make them out. She certainly did not
hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and
she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling
a dislike against him, that could be so called. The
respect created by the conviction of his nluable
qualities, though at ﬁrst unwillingly admitted, had for
some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and
it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier
nature, by the testimony so highly in his favour, and
bringing forward his disposition in so amiable alight,
which yesterday had produced. But above all, above
respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of
goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was
gratitude; —-gratitude, not merely for having once
loved her, but for loving her still well enough to
forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner
in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accom-
panying her rejection. He who, she had been per-
suaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed,
on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the
acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of
regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their
two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the
good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her
known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so
much pride excited not only astonishment but grati-
tude—for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed;

' and as such, its impression on her was of a sort to be
encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though itzconld

ll. 1‘

82 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

not be exact] deﬁned. She respected, the esteemed,

she was gratefiil to him, she felt a real interest in his

welfare; and the only wanted to know how far she

wished that welfare to depend upon henelf, and how far

it would be for the happiness of both that she should

employ the wer, which her fancy told her she still
, o bringing on the renewal of his addressee.

It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt
and niece, that such a striking civility as Miu Darcy’s
in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at
Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a late break-
fast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be
equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side;
and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to
wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They
were, therefore, to go.-—Elizabeth wat pleased; though
when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to
say in reply.

Mr Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The
ﬁshing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a
positive engagement made of his meeting some of the
gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.

chapter iii/H.

ONVINCED as Elizabeth now was that Miss
Bingley’s dislike of her had originated in jalousy,
she could not help feeling how very unwolcome

her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was
curious to know with how much civility on that lady’s
side the acquaintance would now be renewed.

On reaching the house, they were shown through the
hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it
delightful for summer. Its windows opening to the

PRIDE AND PREJUDICL 83

ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the hi h
wood hills behind the house, and of the beautiful no I
and panish chestnuts which were scattered over the
intermediate lawn.

In this room they Were received by Miss Darcy, who
was sitting there with Mrs Hurst and Min Bingley, and
the lady with whom she lived in London. Geo iana’s
reception of them was very civil, but attended With all
that emhrrnssment which, though proceeding from shy-
ness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to
those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being
proud and reserved, Mrs Gardiner and her niece, how-
ever, did her justice, and pitied her.

By Mrs Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed
only by a courtsey; and, on their being seated, at ause,
awkward as such pauses must always be, succeed for 1|
few moments. It was first broken b Mrs Annesley,
n genteel, agreeable-looking woman, w ose [endeavour]
to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be
more truly well-bred than either of the others ; and
between her and Mrs Gardiner, with occasional help
from Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss
Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to
join in it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence
when there was least danger of its being heard.

Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely
watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak
a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her
attention. This observation would not have prevented
her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been
seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not
sorry to be spared the necessity of la ing much. Her
own thoughts were em loying her. She ex cted every
moment that some ofpthe gentlemen won d enter the
room. She wished, she feared that the master of the
house might be amongst them i and whether she wished

84 rntns AND summer.

or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hear-
ing Miss Dingley's voice, Elizabeth was round I) re-
ceiving from her n cold inquiry after the hulth 0 her
family. She answered with equal indilference and
brevity, and the other said no more.

The next variation which their visit afforded was
produced by the entrance of servants with cold mat,
cake, and in variety of all the ﬁnest fruits in season ; but
this did not take place till after many a signiﬁcant look
Ind smile from Mrs Annesley to Miss Darcy had
been given, to remind her of her post. There wat now
emplu ment for the whole party—for though they could
not l i talk, they could all cat ; and the beautiful
pyramids of grapes, nominee, and peaches soon collected
them round the table.

While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity
of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the
appearance of Mr Darcy, by the feelings which pre-
vullud on his entering the room ; and then, though but
u moment before she had believed her wishes to pre-
dominate, she began to regret that he came.

He had been some time with Mr Gardiner, who,
with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was
engaged by the liver, and had left him only on learning
that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Georgiana
that morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth
wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;
—a resolution the more necessary to be made, but.
perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that
the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against
them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not
wntch his behaviour when he ﬁrst came into the room.
In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly
marked as in Miss Bingley’s, in spite of the smiles
which overspread her face wheneVer she spoke to one

PRIDE AND PREJIJDICE. 85

of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her
desperate, and her attentions to Mr Darcy were by no
means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance,
exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw
that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get
acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every
attemit at conversation on either side. Miss Bingley
saw lthis likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger,
took the ﬁrst opportunity of saying, with sneering
eivilit —-

“gray, Miss Eliza, are not the shire Militia
removed from Merywn? They must be a great loss to
Jam- family.”

In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wick-
ham’s name ; but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that
he was uppermost in her thoughts ; and the various re-
collections connected with him gave her a moment’s
distress; but exerting herself vigorously to repel the
ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in
a tolerably disengaged tone. While she spoke, an in-
voluntary glance showed her Darcy, with an heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister
ovcrcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes.
Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving
her beloved friend, she undoubted] would have refrained
from the hint ; but she had mere y intended to discom-
pose Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man
to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray a
sensibility which might injure her in Darcy’s opinion,
and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and
absurdities by which some part of her family were
connected with that co s. Not a syllable had ever
reached her of Miss arcy’s meditated elopement.
To no creature had it been revealed, where secrec
was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from :11
Bingley’s connections her brother was particularly

 

86 PRIDE AND summon.

anxious to conceal it, from that very wish which
Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their
becoming hereafter her own. He had certainly formed
such a plan, and without meaning that it should elfeet a.
his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet, it is
probable that it might add something to his lively con-
cern for the welfare of his friend.

Elizabeth’s collected behaviour, however, soon
auieted his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and
isappointed, dared not a proach nearer to Wickham,
Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to
be able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye
she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest. in
the aﬁ'air, and the very circumstance which had been
designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to
have ﬁxed them on her more, and more cheerfully.

Their visit did not continue long after the question
and answer above mentioned; and while Mr Darcy
was attending them to their carriage, Miss Bingley was
venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth’s person,
behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join
her. Her brother‘s recommendation was enough to
ensure her favour: his judgment could not err, and he
had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth as to leave
Georgiana without the ower of ﬁnding her otherwise
than lovely and amiab . When Darcy returned to
the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to
him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.

“How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr
Darcy,” she cried; “I never in my life saw any one
so much altered as she is since the winter. She is
grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were
agreeing that we should not have known her again."

However little Mr Darcy might have liked such an
address, he contented himself with coolly replying that
he perceived no other alteration than her being rsther

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 87

tanned,—no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.

“For my own part,” she rejoined, " I must confess
that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is
too thin; her complexion has no brillianey; and her
features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
character—there is nothing marked in its lines. Her
teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way;
and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called
so ﬁne, I never could perceive anything extraordinary
in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I
do not like at all ; and in her air altogether there is a
self-sufﬁciency without fashion, which is intolerable.”

Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired
Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommend-
ing herself; but ang people are not always wise; and
in seeing him at last ook somewhat nettled, she had all
the success she expected. He was resolutely silent,
however; and, from a determination of making him
speak, she continued—

“I remember, when we ﬁrst met her in Hertford-
shire, how amazed we all were to ﬁnd that she was a
reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying
one night, after they had been dining at Nethe reld,
‘ Sir: a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.’
But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I
believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.”

“ Yes,” replied Darcy, who could contain himself no
longer, " but that was only when I ﬁrst knew her, for
it is many months since I have considered her as one of
the handsomest women of my acquaintance."

He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to
all the ntisfaction of having forced him to say what
gave no one any pain but herself.

Mrs Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had
occurred during their visit, as they returned, except

88 mos um mumqu

what had ‘cularly interested them both. The looka
and behavuour of everybody they had teen were du-
cusoed, except of the pet-eon who had moody engaged
their attention. They talked of hip litter, hil friendl,
hia house, hi1 fruit—of everything but himself; yet
Elinheth was longin to know what Mn Gardiner
thou ht of him, and n Gardiner would have been
higth gratiﬁed by her niece’a beginning the rubject.

tbapttr $117].

LIZABETH had been a good deal disappointed
in not ﬁnding a letter from Jane on their ﬁrat
arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment

had been renewed on each of the morning: that had
now been spent there; but on the third her repiuing
was over, and her sister justiﬁed, by the receipt of two
letters from her at once, on one of which wu marked
that it had been missent elsewhere. Elizabeth wan
not surprized at it, as Jane had written the direction
remarkably ill.

They had just been preparing to walk an the lettert
came in g and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy
them in uiet, net of by themaelvea. The one missent
must be rat attended to; it had been written ﬁve dayl
ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little panic. and engagements, with such new: at the
country atforded; but the latter half, which was dated
a day ater, and written in evident agitation, gave more
important intelligence. It was to this effect— I

“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, aomething
has occun‘ed of a most unexpected and serious nature;
but I am afraid of alamling you—be assured that we
are all well. What I have to say relates to poor

 

 

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICI'. 89

Lydia. An express came at twelve last night, just as
we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to
inform us that she was gone off to Scotland with one
of his ofﬁcers; to own the truth, with Wickhaml
Imagine our surprize. To Kitt , however, it does not
seem so wholly unexpected. am ve , very sorry.
So imprudent a match on both sidesl gut I am will-
ing to hope the best, and that his character has been
misunderstood. Thoughtless and indiscreet I can
easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice
over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His choice is
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can
give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved.
My father bears it better. How thankful am I that
we never let them know what has been said against
him! we must forget it ourselves. They were olf
Saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but
were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The
express was sent of directly. My dear Lizz , they
must have passed within ten miles of us. goloncl
Forster gives us reason to expect him here soon.
Lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of
their invention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long
from my poor mother. I am afraid you will not be
able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have
written.”

Without allowing herself time for consideration, and
scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabeth on ﬁnishing
this letter instantly seized the other, and opening it
with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had
been written a day later than the conclusion of the
ﬁrst.

“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received
my hurried letter; I wish this may be more intelligible,
but though not conﬁned for time, my head is so be-
wildered that I cannot answer for being coherent.

90 PRIDE AND PREJU’DI“

Denrelt Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write,
but 1 have had new for you, and it cannot be delayed.
lmprudent u a marriage between Mr Wickham and
our poor Lydia would be, we are now anxiona to he
nlsured it has taken place, for there ll but too mudl
rcuon to fear they are not gone to Scotland. Colonel
l'urtter came yesterday, having left Brighton the day
before, not many hours after the expreu. Though
Lydiu't short letter to Mn: F. gave them to undernnd
that they were going to Gretna Green, Iomething wa-
tlropped by Denny expreuing hie belief that W. never
intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which
wan repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the
alarm, set off from IL, intending to trace their route.
lle llltl truce them easily to Clnphnm, but no further;
for on entering that plaice, they removed into a hacltney-
couch, and iliumiued the chaise tlnlt brought them from
lipwm. All that is known after thin in, that they were
seen to continue the London road. I know not what
to think. After making every possible in uiry on that
llth London, Colonel F. came on into ertfordahire,
nnxiuuuly renewing them at all the turnpikei, and at
the inn: in llamet and Hatﬁeld, but without any
Incceu—no such people had been teen to pan through.
With the kindelt concern he came on to Longboum,
and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner moat
creditable to hiI heart. I am sincerely grieved for him
and Mrs F., but no one can throw any blame on them.
Our diltreu, m dear Lizzy, is very gleat. My father
and mother beieve the worst, but I cannot think an
ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more
eligible for them to be married privately in town than
to purine their ﬁrst plan; and even if be could form
IIIC a design against a oung woman of Lydia’a con-
nection-, which it not ikely, (an I mppoae her to loet
to everything? Impouiblel I grieve to ﬁnd, how-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 9!

ever, that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon
their marriage; he shook his head when I expressed
my hopes, and said he feared W. was not a man to be
trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her
room. Could she exert [herself], it would be better ;
but this is not to be expected. And as to my father,
I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty
has anger for having concealed their attachment; but
as it was a matter of conﬁdence, one cannot wonder.
I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been
spared something of these distressing scenes; but now,
as the ﬁrst shock is over, shall I own that I long
for your return? I am not so selﬁsh, however, as
to press for it, if inconvenient—Adieu! I take up
my pen again to do what I have just told you I would
not; but circumstances are such that I cannot help
earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as

'ble. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well,
that I am not afraid of requesting it, thou h I have
still something more to ask of the former. IVly father
is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly,
to try to discover her. What he means to do I
am sure I know not; but his cxcensivc- distress will
not allow him to mrsnc any measure in the belt
and safest way, and1 Colonel Forster is obliged to
be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such
an cxigcnce, my uncle’s advice and assistance would
be everything in the world; he will immediately
cmrehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his
g ness."

“Oh! where, where is my uncle?" cried Elizabeth,
darting from her seat as she ﬁnished the letter, in
eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of
the time so recious; but as she reached the door it
was opened y a servant, and Mr Darcy appeared.
Her pale face and impetuous manner made him start,

92 PRIDE AND PRENDlCB.

and before he could recover himself enough to speak,
she, in whose' mind every idea was superseded by
Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “ I beg your par-
don, but I must leave you. I must ﬁnd Mr Gardiner,
this moment, on business that cannot be delayed; I
have not an instant to lose.”

“Good God I what is the matter? ” cried he, with
more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself,
“I will not detain you a minute; but let me, or
let the servant, go after Mr and Mn Gardiner. You
are not well enough ;—you cannot go yourself.”

Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under
her, and she felt how little would be gained by her
attem ting to pursue them. Calling back the servant,
there ore, she commissioned him, though in so breath-
less an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to
fetch his master and mistress home instantly.

On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to
support herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it
was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain
from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,
“ Let me call your mnid. Is there nothing you could
take to give you present relief ?——A glass of wine ;—
shall I get you one P—You are very ill."

“No, I thank you,” she replied, endeavouring to
recover herself. “There is nothing the matter with
me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by some
dreadful news which I have just received from Long-
bourn.”

She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for
a few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy,
in wretched suspense, could only say something in-
distinctly of his concern, and observe her in com-
passionate silence. At length she spoke again. “I
have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful
news. It cannot be concealed from any one. My

mo: arm rnajunrcn. 93

youngest sister has left all her friends—has eloped ;—
has thrown herself into the power of—of Mr Wick-
hnm. The are gone oli- together from Brighton.
Tn know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no
money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him to
—ehe ll lost for ever.”

Darcy was ﬁxed in astonisth “When I con-
sider,” she added in a yet more agitated voice, “that I
might have prevented it! I, who knew what he was.
Had I but explained some part of it only—some part
of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his
character been known, this could not have happened.
But it is all—all too late now.”

“ I am grieved indeed,” cried Darcy; “grieved—
Ihocked. But is it certain—absolutely certain?”

“ Oh yet! They left Brighton together on Sunday
night, and were traced almost to London, but not
beyond: they are certainly not gone to Scotland.’ '

“ And what has been done, what has been attempted,
to recover her 9 ” .

“ My father is gone to London, and Jane has
written to beg my uncle’s immediate assistance; and
we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But nothing
can be done—I know very well that nothing can be
done. How is such a man to be worked on? How
are they even to be discovered? I have not the
smallest hope. It is every way horrible! "

Darcy shook his head in silent acquicsence.

“When my eyes were opened to his real character—
Oh! had I known what I ought, what I dared to do!
But I knew not—I was afraid of doing too much.
Wretched, wretched mimke! ”

Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to
hear her, and was walking up and down the room in
earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy.
Elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it.

.

5—.

94 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Her power was sinking; everything mm! sink under
such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of
the deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor
condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought
nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no liation
of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exac y calcu-
lated to make her understand her own wishes; and
never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved
him, as now, when all love must be vain.

But self, though it would intrude, could not engross
her. Lydia—the humiliation, the misery she was bring-
ing on them all, soon swallowed up every private care;
and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth
was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situ-
ation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner
which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise
restraint, said, “ I am afraid you have been long desir-
ing my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse
ofm stay, but real, though unavailing, concern. Would
to eaven that anything could be either said or done on
my part that might offer consolation to such distress !—
But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may
seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortun-
ate aKair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having the
pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day."

“ Oh yes. Be so kind as to apologize for us to
Miss Darcy. Say that urgent business calls us home
immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it
is possible,—I know it cannot be long.”

He readin assured her of his secrecy—again expressed

" his sorrow for hisdistress, wished it a happier conclusion

than there was at present reason to hope, and leaving
his compliments for her relations, with only one serious,
parting look, went away.

As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how impro-

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 95

bable it was that they should ever see each other again
on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several
meetings in Derbyshire ; and as she threw n retrospec-
tive glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full
of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness
of those feelings which would now have romoted its
continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its
termination.

If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of aﬂ‘ec-
tion, Elizabeth’s change of sentiment will be neither im-
probable nor faulty. But if otherwise—if the regard
springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural,
in comparison of what is so often described as arising on
a ﬁrst interview with its object, and even before two
words have lacen exchanged,—nothing can be said in her
defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial
to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and
that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek
the other less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as
it may, she saw him go with regret; and in this early
example of what Lydia's infamy must produce, found
additional anguish as she reﬂected on that wretched
business. Never, since reading Jane’s second letter, had
she entertained a hope of Wickham’s meaning to marry
her. No one but Jane, she thought, could ﬂatter her-
self with such an expectation. Surprize was the least
of her feelings on this develo ment. While the con-
tents of the ﬁrst letter remain on her mind, she was all
an rize—all astonishment that Wickham should marry a
gir whom it was impossible he could marry for money;
and how Lydia could ever have attached him had a pared
incomprehensible. But now it was all too natural: For
such an attachment as this she might have sufficient
charms; and though she did not suppose Lydia to be
deliberately engaging in an elopement without the inten-
tion of marriage, she had no difﬁculty in believing that

96 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve
her from falling an easy prey.

She had never perceived, while the regiment was in
Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality for him;
but she was convinced that L dis had wanted only en-
cottrngement to attach hersel to anybody. Sometimes
one ofﬁcer, sometimes another, had been her favourite,
as their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her
sﬂ'ections had been continually ﬂuctuating, but never
without an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken
indulgenco towards such a girl—oh! how acutely did
she now feel it!

She was wild to be at home—to hear, to see, to be
upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must
now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged, a father
absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring
constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that
nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle’s interfer-
ence seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered
the room the misery of her impatience was severe. Mr
and Mrs Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, suppming
by the servant’s account that their niece was taken
suddenly ill ;-—hnt satisfying them instantly on that
head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling
on the postscript of the last with trembling energy.
Though Lydia had never been a favourite with them,
Mr and Mrs Gardiner could not but be deeply affected.
Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it ; and after
the ﬁrst exclamations of surprize and horror, Mr
Gardiner readily promised every assistance in his power.
Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with
tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one
spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily
settled. They were to be off as soon as possible.
“ But what is to be done about. Pemberley? ’ cried

PRIDE AND PREJD‘DICI. 97
.

Mrs Gardiner. “ John told us Mr Darcy was here
when ou sent for us ;—-was it so 2 "

“ es; and I told him we should not be able to keep
our en agement. Tim! is all settled.”

“ hat is all settled?" repeated the other, as she
ran into her room to prepare. “ And are they upon
such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh,
that I knew how it was! ”

But wishes were vain, or at best could serve only to
amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following
hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she
would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had
her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst
the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends
at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden depar-
ture. An hour, however, saw the whole completed;
and Mr Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account
at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and

‘Elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found
herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have
supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to
Longboum.

Cblpt" £11731

“ HAVE been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,"
said her uncle, as they drove from the town;
“and really, u n serious consideration, I am much

more inclined than was to judge as your eldest sister

does of the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely

that any young man should form such a design against a

girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and

who was actually staying in his colonel’s family, that I

am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect

H. G

98 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

that her friends would not step forward? Could he
expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such
an affront to Colonel F orster.’ His temptation is not
adequate to the risk! ”

“ Do you really think so .’ ” cried Elisabeth, brighten-
ing lﬁ for a moment.

“ pon my word," said Mrs Gardiner, “I begin to
be of your uncle’s opinion. It is really too great a
violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be
gilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham.

an you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up, as to
believe him capable of it i ”

“Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but
of every other neglect I can believe him capable. If,
indeed, it should be sol But I dare not hope it.
Why should they not go on to Scotland, if that had
been the case 2 "

“ In the ﬁrst place,” replied Mr Gardiner, “there
is no absolute proof that they are not gone to
Scotland.”

“ Oh! but their removing from the chaise into an
hackney coach is such a presumption! And, besides,
no traces of them were to be found on the Barnct
roa .”

“Well, then—supposing them to be in London.
They may be there, though for the purpose of conceal-
ment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is not likely
that money should be very abundant on either side; and
it might strike them that they could be more economi-
cally, though less expeditiously, married in London
than in Scotland.”

“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of
detection? Why must their marriage be private? Oh,
no, no—this is not likely. His most particular friend,
you see by Jane’s account, was persuaded of his never
intending to marry her. Wickham will never marry a

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 99

woman without some money. He cannot aKord it.
And what claims has Lydia—what attractions has she
beyond youth, health, and good humour that could
make him, for her sake, forego every chance of bene-
ﬁting himself by marrying well i As to what restraint
the apprehensions of disgrace in the no?” might throw
on a dishonourable elopement with her, am not able to
judge; for l know nothing of the effects that such a
step might roduce. But as to your other objection, I
am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no
brothers to s forward; and he might imagine, from
my father’s be aviour, from his indolence and the little
attention he has ever seemed to give to what was goin
forward in his family, that be would do as little, and
think as little about it, as any father could do, in such a
matter."

“ But can you think that Lydia is so lost to every-
thing but love of him as to consent to live with him on
any other terms than marriage .’ "

“It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,”
replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “ that a sister’s
sense of decency and virtue in such a point should
admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say.
Perhaps I am not doing her justice. But she is very
young; she has never been taught to think on serious
subjects; and for the last half-year—nay, for a twelve-
month—she has been given up to nothing but amuse-
ment and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of
her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to
adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the
——-—shire were ﬁrst quartered in Meryton, nothing
but love, ﬂirtation, and officers have been in her head.
She has been doing everything in her power by thinking
and talking on the subject, to give greater—what shall
I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are
naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wick-

100 PRIDE AND PREJU'DICE.

ham has every charm of person and address that can
captivate a woman.”

“ But you see that Jane,” aid her aunt, “does not
think so ill of Wickham as to believe him capable of
the attempt.”

“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is
there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she
would believe capable of such an attempt, till it were
proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I
do, what Wickham really is. We both know that he
has been proﬂigate in every sense of the word; that he
has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and
deceitful as he is insinuating.”

“ And do you really know all this?" cried Mrs
Gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intel-
ligence was all alive.

“I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “ I
told you, the other day, of his infamous behaviour to
Mr Darcy; and you yourself, when last at Longbourn,
heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had
behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards
him. And there are other circumstances which I am
not at liberty—which it is not worth while to relate;
but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are end-
less. From what he said of Miss Darcy, I was
thoroughly repared to see a proud, reserved, disagree-
able girl. §et he knew to the contrary himself. He
must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as
we have found her.’ '

“ But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she
be ignorant of what you and Jane seem so well to
understand .’ "

“Oh yesl—that, that is the worst of all. Till I
was in Kent, and saw so much both of Mr Darcy and
his relation, Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of
the truth myself. And when I retumed home, the

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 101

-—————ahire was to leave Meryton in a week or fort-
night’s time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to
whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary
to make our knowledge public; for of what use could
it apparently be to an one, that the good 0 inion which
all the neighbourhoo had of him should t en be over-
thrown? And even when it was settled that Lydia
should go with Mrs Forster, the necessity of opening
her eyes to his character never occurred to me. That
ab: could be in any danger from the deception never
entered my head. That such a consequence as l/n':
should ensue, you may easily believe, was far enough
from my thoughts."

“ When they all removed to Brighton, therefore,
you had no reason, I suppose, to believe them fond of
each other i ”

“ Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of
alfection on either side; and had anything of the kind
been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a
family on which it could be thrown away. When ﬁrst
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire
him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near
Meryton was out of her senses about him for the ﬁrst
two months; but he never distinguished [per by any
particular attention; and, consequently, after a mode-
rate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her
fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
who treated her with more distinction, again became
her favourites."

 

It may be easily believed, that however little of
novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and con-
jectures, on this interesting subject, by its repeated
discussion, no other could detain them from it long,
during the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth’s
thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the

I 02 PRIDE AND PRENDICB.

keeneat of all anguish, self-reproach, she could ﬁnd no
interval of ease or forgetfulneu.

They travelled as expeditiously as ponible, and,
sleeping one night on the road, reached Longhoum by
dinner-time the next day. It was a comfort to Eliza-
beth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.

The liule Gsrdiners, attracted by the sight of a
chaise, were standing on the steps of the house as they
entered the paddock; and, when the carriage drove up
to the door, the joyful surprize that lighted up their
faces, and displayed itself over their who e bodiea, in a
variety of capers and frisks, was the ﬁrst pleasing earnest
of their welcome.

Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of
them an hasty kiss, hun‘ied into the vestibule, where
Jane, who came running downstairs from her mother’s
apartment, immediately met her.

Elizabeth, as she aﬂhctionately embraced her, whilst
tears ﬁlled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking
whether anything had he¢n heard of the fugitives.

“ Not yet,” replied Jane. “ But now that my dear
uncle is come, I hope everything will be well."

“ Is my father in town ? "

“ Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”

“ And have you heard from him often? ’

“We have heard only once. He wrote me a few
lines on Wednesday, to say that he had an-ived in
safety, and to give me his directions, which I particu-
larly begged him to do. He merely added that he
should not write again till he had something of impun-
ance to mention.”

“ And my mother—how is she? How are you
all ? ”

“My mother is tolerany well, I trust; though her
spirits are ‘greatly shaken. She is upstairs, ,and will

rams AND PREJUDICE. 103

have great satisfaction in seeing on all. She does not
yet leave her dressing-room. ary and Kitty, thank
Heaven, are quite well.”

" But you—how are you?" cried Elizabeth. “You
look pale. How much you must have gone through! ”

Her sister, however, aseured her of her being perfectly
well; and their conversation, which had been passing
while Mr and Mrs Gardiner were engaged with their
children, was now put an end to by the approach of the
whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and
welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles
and tears.

When th were all in the drawing-room, the ques-
tions which lizabeth had already asked were of course
repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane
had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of
good, however, which the benevolence of her heart
suggested had not et deserted her; she still expected
that it would all endy well, and that every morning would
bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to
explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the
marnage.

Mrs Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired,
after a few minutes' conversation together, received them
exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamenta-
tions of regret, invectives against the villanous conduct
of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and
ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose
ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must
be principally owing.

“If I had been able,” said she, “ to carry my point
in going to Brighton, with all my family, tln': would not
have happened: butvpour dear Lydia had nobody to
take care of ’her. by did the F omters ever let her
go out of their sight? I am sure there was some great
neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of

"14 "I‘ll AID rujunu

71.!» 4» ouch a thin; «aux-amass.
“mam n verev rob-elkchp
14 In]; IM l alvlys an. I’-
IW LIIIII‘II And now here'- Mr Ben-e1 Pea-I].
ml I lmmv In will Ii Wickham, 'I'ﬂl'u' knea-
him; ml then he vi bekilMand-hnilmhen-e
"I in All! 'I'Iw Collinue- will turn In out hail: he ‘-
HM In Me “an, end if you are not kind to in, helix,
I II» ml lmuw what we Illa" do."

'I'lwy all excluimcd Ipint such lerriﬁc Hal; III
M! (Imllm, ll'ler genenl alumnus of his aﬂ'eaio-
Im luv ml all he! lumily, told her that he 3 to he
I» Imvullm clue very next day, and could «in Mr
Ilvmwl in every endeavour for recovering Lydia

“l,” mu “in! way to ulclcu alarm," added he;
” Ilmuuln it in riylit w Ix: prepared for (he wont. there
ll m; Mazatlan to look on it u cenain. It in not quite
a Wilt almm ilu-y loll. Brigham. In a few days more
wu muy will: name new: of them; and till we know
Ilmt llw mu m". murriml, and have no delign of man-ying,
II” tun. in “I “in: the "Inner over an Icon. A: won as
I um 10 mwu l ullull “a w my brother. and make him
mm- lumw with me to ('lrnccchurch Street; and then
wu mu mmlult murmur III to what in to be done.”

H (Ill I my clear brother,” rc lied Mrs Bel-met, “that
ll uuuuly wlml I could mm! Wllll for. And now do,
wlw» yma um Du lnwn, ﬁnd them out, wherever than
"my I» | and if the are not married already, male them
mmy. Aml u [hr wedding clmlm, do not let them :
wult I'ur lllllt. hm tell Lydia lhe ahnll have as much
mmwy nu elm chum to buy them, after they are married.
Aml. ulmvu nll Illingl, keep Mr llcnnet from ﬁghting.
'l‘ell him wluu n ilrmnll‘ul lune I mu in,—tliat I am
Il‘lullml out. of my wile—and have such tremblings,
Inch lluneringe, all over me—uuch spasms in my side
Ind pain: in my head, and luch heating: at heart, that

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 105

I can get no rest by night nor by day. And tell my
dear Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes
till she has seen me, for she does not know which are
the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are!
I know you will contrive it all."

But Mr Gardiner, though he assured her again of his
earnest endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recom-
mending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her
fears; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feel-
ings on the housekeeper, who attended, in the absence
of her daughters.

Though her brother and sister were persuaded that
there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the
family, they did not attempt to oppose it, for they knew
that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue
before the servants, while they waited at table, and
judged it better that one only of the household, and the
one whom they could most trust, should comprehend
all her fears and solicitude on the subject.

In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary
and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their
separate apartments to make their appearance before.
One came from her books, and the other from her
toilette. The faces of both, however, were tolerany
calm; and no change was visible in either, except that
the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she
had herself incurred in the business, had given some-
thing more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of
Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough of her-
self to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of
grave reﬂection, soon after they were seated at table—

“ This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably
be much talked of. But we must stem the tide of
malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each
other the balm of sisterly consolation.”

100 PRIDE AND PRRJUDICI

Then. mﬁvin in Elizabeth no inclination of rap] -
ing, the addt‘l. “ lnhn y u the event mutt be or
Lydia. we may draw [ﬁlm it thin useful lesson: that
Inn of virtue in a ﬁnale it imﬁenble—dut one false
atop invnlwe her in endlcu ruin—that her reputation ll
no lctt lut‘ttle (hut it is beautiful-an tint she cannot
be ton much guarded in her bdtaviour toward. the
nndtwrvim nl‘tht- other tax."

lilitalnh ﬁlial up her eye: in armament. but was
Inn much onward In make in reply. Mary, haw-
em‘. mntinunl tn «ml: 1” with Itch kind of
mural extractitma lituu the evil before than.

In the allennutn, the two elder Mitt Benneu were
akin In he fnr Inlfqn-htwr by themlvcs: and Eliza-
lwth instantly amilnl hem-lief the ontoltunity of making
any im‘nln'vu. which Jane was equally eager to ntis?.
[\llt‘t‘ wining in guwral Ltmnntatitms over the dread u
unquel nl‘thit man. which Elizabeth mam a all
but «ruin. and Mia: [lam-t could not gum to be
wholly itn nmihk. the hunter continued the ubjca, by
In ing. “ Illnl tell me all and everything about it vhich
l tau-e nnt ulmdy hand. Give me further lnrticulan.
What! did Colonel Fm nay? Had they no appre-
heninn nl‘anythmg trim: the dopamt took place?
They nnntt have suit them W for "a."

“Cttlnnd Fnraer did own that he ha! often an-
putal nnnc lurtiality. qu‘ially on Lydia': side, but
nothing to give him any ahrnt. I am an grich for
him! Hi: hohttimr “'8 attentive and kind to the
utmost. He mu mming to tn, in older to astute utof
hit content. Irfnm he had any idol of their not hing
gone to Sunk-ml: when that altpmlmu‘on ﬁl‘ got
abnnd, it Manon“! his Mutt-y."

“And was Danny minimal tlnt \V‘mkham would
notnnrry? Ditilteknowoftheirinmdingmguoﬂ‘?
Had Colonel For.” m Denny himdf?"

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 10‘]

“ Yes; but, when questioned by Lin, Denny denied
knowing anything of their plan, and would not give his
real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion
of their not marrying—4nd from [ha], I am inclined to
hope, he might have been misunderstood before.”

“ And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of
you entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really
married ? ”

“ How was it siblc that such an idea should enter
our brains I I fe t a little uneasy—a little fearful of my
sister’s happiness with him in marriage, because I knew
that his conduct had not been always quite right. My
father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt
how imprudent .1 match it must be. Kitty then owned,
with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the
rest of us, that in Lydia’s last letter she had prepared
her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other, many weeks."

“ But not before they went to Brighton ? "

“ No, I believe not.”

“And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of
Wickham himself? Does he know his real character? ”

“I must confess that he did not speak so well of
Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be
imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad affair
has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly in
debt; but I hope this may be false."

“ 0h, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told
what we knew of him, this could not have happened! ”

“ Perhaps it would have been better,” replied her
sister. “ But to expose the former faults of any person
without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed
unjustiﬁable. We acted with the best intentions.”

“ Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of
Lydia’s note to his wife? ”

" He brought it with him for us to see.”

108 PRIDE AND PREJUDICI.

Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it
to Elizabeth. These were the contents—

“Mv Dun HARRIET,—

“ You will laugh when you know where I am
gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your aurprize
to-morrow morning, as soon I am missed. I am going
to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I
shall think you a simpleton, for there in but one run
in the world I love, and he ll an angel. I should
never be happy without him, so think it no harm to beef.
You need not send them word at Longboum of my
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprize
the greater, when I write to them and sign my name
‘ Lydia Wickham.’ What a good joke it will be! I
can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses
to Pratt for not kee ing my engagement, and dancing
with him m-night. lI‘ell him I hope he will excuse me
when he knows all; and tell him I will dance with him
at the next ball we meet, with great plmisure. I shall
send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I
wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my
worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-
by. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you
will drink to our good joumey.—Your all‘ectionate
friend, Lvma Banner.”

“Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless L dia!" cried
Elizabeth when she had ﬁnished it. “ hat a letter is
this, to be written at such a moment ! But at least it
shows that :5: was serious in the object of her journey.
Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was
not on her side a aim: in infamy. My poor father!
how he must have felt it! ”

“I never saw any one so shocked. He could not
speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was
taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such
confuaioni ”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 109

“Oh! Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “ was there a ser-
vant belonging to it who did not know the whole story
before the end of the da ?”

“ I do not know—I hope there was.—But to be
guarded at such a time is very diﬂicult. My mother
was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to give her
every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do
so much as I might have done! But the horror of
what might possibly happen almost took from me my
faculties.”

“ Your attendance upon her has been too much for
you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been
with you l—you have had every care and anxiety upon
yourself alone.”

“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would
have shared in every fatigue, I am sure, but I did not
think it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and
delicate; and Ma studies so much, that her hours of
repose should notrbe broken in on. My aunt Philips
came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went
away ; and was so good as to stay till Thursda with me.
She was of great use and comfort to usall. nd Lady
Lucas has been very kind ; she walked here on Wed-
nesday morning to condole with us, and offered her
services, or any of her daughters', if they could be of
use to us.”

“ She had better have stayed at home," cried Eliza-
beth ; “ perhaps she maul well, but, under such a mis-
fortune as this, one cannot see too little of one's
neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence in-
sufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance,
and be satisﬁed."

She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which
her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for
the recovery of his daughter.

“ He meant, I believe," replied Jane, “to go to

HO PRIDE AND PRIJU'DICB.

Epoom, the place where they last changed horses, see
the poutilions, and try if anything could be made out
from them. Hi: pnncipal object mutt be to diacover
the number of the haeltney coach which took them from
Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and
at he thou ht the circumuance of a gentleman and lady’l
removing rorn one carriage into another might be re-
marked, he meant to mnkcinquirica at Clapham. If he
could anyhow discover at what house the coachman
had before net down his fare, he determined to make in-

uiriet there, and ho it might not be impossible to
Ind out the «and an number of the coach. I do not
know of any other design: that he had formed; but he
war in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirit: to greatly
discom , that I had difﬁculty in ﬁnding out even
I0 muc I as thit.”

chapter $11711].

HE whole party were in hope: of a letter from

Mr Bennet the next morning, but the fpont

,carne in without bringing a single line rorn

him. His family knew him to be, on all common

occasions, a moat negligent and dilatory corrupondent;

but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They

were forced to conclude that he had no pleating in-

telligence to tend; but even of Ilia: they would ban

been glad to be certain. Mr Gardiner had waited
only for the letters before he let off.

When he was gone, they were certain at least of
receiving constant information of what wal going on,
and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr
Bennet to return to Longboum, as soon as he could, to
the great consolation of his sister, who considered it an

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I II

the only security for her husband’s not being killed in a
duel.

Mrs Gardiner and the children were to remain in
Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thou ht
her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. bhe
shared in their attendance on Mrs Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom.
Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and
always, as she said, with the design of cheering and
heartening them up—though, as she never came
without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham’s
extravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away
without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.

All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man
who, but three months before, had been almost an
angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every
tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured
with the title of seduction, had been extended into
every tradesman’s family. Everybody declared that
he was the wickedest young man in the world; and A
everybody began to ﬁnd out that they had always dis-
trusted the a peamncc of his goodness. Elizabeth,
though she did7 not credit above half of what was said,
believed enough to make her former assurance of her
sister's ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who
believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more
especially as the time was now come when, if they had
gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained
some news of them.

Mr Gardiner left Longboum on Sunday; on Tues-
day, his wife received a letter from him : it told them
that, on his arrival, he had immediately found out his
brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch
Street; that Mr Bennet had been to Epsom and

112 PRIDE AND PREJU'DICE.

Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any
tisfactory information; and that he was now deter-
mined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as
Mr Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to
one of them, on their ﬁrst coming to London, before
they procured lodgings. Mr Gardiner himself did not
expect any success from this measure, but as his brother
was eager in it, he meant to moist him in pursuing it.
He added that Mr Bonnet seemed wholly disinclined
at present to leave London, and promised to write
again very soon. There was also a postscript to this
eKect—

“ I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to
ﬁnd out, if possible, from some of the young man’s
intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any
relations or connections who would be likely to know
in what part of the town he has now concealed himself.
If there were any one that one could apply to with a
probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of
essential conse uence. At present we have nothing to
guide us. Co onel Forster will, I dare say, do every-
thing in his power to satisfy us on this head. But, on
second thoughts, perhaps Lizzy could tell us what
relations he has now living, better than any other

rson."

Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence
this deference for her authority proceeded; but it was
not in her power to give any information of so satisfac-
tory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had
never heard of his having had any relations, except a
father and mother, both of whom had been dead many
years. It was possible, however, that some of his
companions in the —shire might be able to give
more infomiation; and though she was not very
sanguine in expecting it, the application was a some-
thing to look forward to.

PRIDE AND PREJVDICE Il3

Every day at Longboum was now a day of anxiety;
but the most anxious part of each was when the Eon
was ex cted. The arrival of letters was the rst

rand o ject of every moming’s impatience. Through
etters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would
be communicated, and every succeeding day was
expected to bring some news of importance.

But before they heard again from Mr Gardiner, a
letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter,
from Mr Collins; which, as Jane had received direc-
tions to o n all that came for him in his absence, she
according y read; and Elizabeth, who knew what
curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and
read it likewise. It was as follows :—

“ Mr Dan SIR,—

“I feel myself called upon, by our relationship,
and my situation in life, to condole with you on the
grievous aﬂliction you are now suﬂ'ering under, of
which we were yesterday infon'ned by a letter from
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs
Collins and myself sinceme sympathize with you and
all your respectable family, in your present distress,
which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding
from a cause which no time can remove. No argu-
ments shall be wanting on my part that can alleviate so
severe it misfortune—or that may comfort you, under a
circumstance that must be of all others most aﬂlicting
to a parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would
have been a blessing in corn rison of this. And it is
the more to be lamented, use there is reason to
suppose, as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this
licentiousncss of behaviour in your daughter has pro-
ceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at
the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs
Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition

H. H

114 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of
such an enormity, at so early on age. Howsoever
that may be, you are grievoust to be itied; in which
opinion I am not only joined by Mrs gollins, but like-
wise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom,
I have related the alfair. They agree with me in
apprehending that this false step in one daughter will
be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who,
as Lady Catherine herself condescendineg says, will
connect themselves with such a family? And this
consideration leads me moreover to reﬂect, with aug-
mented ntisfaction, on a certain event of last Novem-
ber; for had it been otherwise, I must have been
involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me
advise you then, my dear sir, to console yourself as
much as pessible, to throw off your unworthy child
from your alfection for ever, and leave her to reap the
fmits of her owu heinous otfence.——I am, dear sir,
&c., ac."

Mr Gardiner did not write again till he had received
an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had
nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not
known that Wickham had a single relation with whom
he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he
had no near one living. His former acquaintance had
been numerous; but since he had been in the militia,
it did not appear that he was on terms of particular
friendship with any of them. There was no one,
therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give
any news of him. And in the wretched state of his
own ﬁnances, there was a very powerful motive for
secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia’s
relations, for it had just transpired that he had left
gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount.
Colonel Forster believed that more than a thousand

PRIDI AND PIIJUDICB. I 15

undlwouldbenece-arytoelenrhinexpemesat

righton. He owed a nod deal in the town, but his

debta of honour were i more formidable. Mr Gar-
diner did not attem t to conceal these parﬁculnn from
the Longbourn fan-Ally. Jane heard them with honor.
“ A gamesterl ” the cried. “Thin is wholly unexpected.
I had not an idea of it."
' Mr Gardiner added in his letter, that they might
expect to lee their father at home on the following da ,
which was Saturday. Rendered spiritleu by the ill-
success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his
brother-in-law's entraty that he would return to his
family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion
might nuggeet to be advisable for continuing their pur-
suit. When Mrs Bennet was told of this, she did not
express so much utisfaction as her children expected,
considering what her anxiety for hi: life had been
before.

“ What, is he coming home, and without poor
Lydia?" she cried. “ Sure he will not lave London
before he has found them. Who is to light Wickhnm,
and make him marry her, if he comes away?"

As Mrs Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it
was settled that she and her children should go to
London, at the same time that Mr Bennet came from
it. The coach, therefore, molt them the first stage of
their journey, and brought its master back to Longboum.

Mn Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about
Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that had attended
her from that rt of the world. His name had never
been voluntari y mentioned before them by her niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mn Gardiner
had formed, of their being followed by a letter from
him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received
none since her retum that could come from Pemberlcy.

The present unhappy state of the family rendered any

n6 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

other excuse for the lowness of her irita unnecessary;
nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from (but,
though Elizabeth, who was by this time tolemhly well
acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectl aware
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, the co d have
borne the dread of Lydia‘s infamy somewhat better. It
would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night
out of two.

When Mr Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance
of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little
as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no
mention of the business that had taken him away, and
it was some time before his daughters had courage to
speak of it.

It was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at
tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject;
and then, on her brieﬂy expressing her sorrow for what
he must have endured, he replied, “ Say nothing of that.
Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own
doing, and I ought to feel it.”

“You must not be too severe upon yourself,” replied
Elizabeth.

“ You may well warn me against such an evil. Human
nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me
once in my life feel how much I have been to blame.
I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
It will pass away soon enough.”

“ Do you suppose them to be in London?”

“ Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”
K “ And Lydia used to want to go to London,” added

itt .

“)iihc is happy then,” said her father drily;
“ and her residence there will probably be of some
duration."

Then, after a short silence, he continued—

“ Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justiﬁed in

PRIDE AND PREJ'JDICE I [7

your advice to me last May, which, considering the
event, shows some greatness of mind."

They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to
fetch her mother’s tea.

“ This is a parade,” cried he, “ which does one
good; it ives such an elegance to misfortune! Another
day I will do the same: I will sit in my library, in my
nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as
I can ;—or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”

“ I am not going to run away, apa,” said Kitty
fretfully. “ If I should ever go to righton, I would
behave better than Lydia."

“ Ton go to Brighton. I would not must you so
near it as East Bourne for ﬁfty pounds! No, Kitty, I
have at last learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the
effects of it. No ofﬁcer is ever to enter my house
again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will
be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one
of your sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors
till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of
eve day in a rational manner.”

Iztty, who took all these threats in a serious light,

to C .

“Well,r\’ilell," said he, “ do not make yourselr un-
ha y. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I
wil take you to a review at the end of them.”

Chill"! $13”.

W0 days after Mr Bennet’s return, as Jane and
Elizabeth were walking together in the shmbbery
behind the house, they saw the housekeeper

coming towards them, and, concluding that she came
to call them to their mother, went forward to meet
her; but, instead of the expected summons, when they

I 18 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your
pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes
you might have got some good news from town, so I
took the liberty ol~ coming to ask.”

“ What do you mean, Hill ? We have hard nothing
from town."

“ Dear madam,” cricd Mrs Hill, in great astonish-
ment, “don’t you know there is an express come [or
master from Mr Gardiner? He has been here thil
half-hour, and matter has had a letter.”

Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time
for speech. They ran through the vestibule into the
breakfast-room ; from thence to the library ;-—their
father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were
met by the butler, who said—

“ If you are looking for my master, ma’am, he is
walking towards the little eopse.”

Upon this information, they instantly passed through
the hall once more, and ran across the lawn after their
father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a
small wood on one side of the paddock.

Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit
of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her
sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and gerly
cried out—

“Oh, papa, what news—what news? Have you
heard from my uncle .’ "

“ Yes, I have had a letter from him- by express.”

“Well, and what news does it bring—good or
haul ? ”

“ What is there of good to be expected I " said he,
taking the letter from his pocket. “ But perhaps you
would like to read it."

Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane
now came up.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [19

“ Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly
know myself what it is about.”

" Gracechurch Street, Monday,
August 1.
“ MY mm Blames,—

“At last I am able to send you some tidings of
my niece, and such as, upon the whole,I hope will give'
you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday,

was fortunate enough to ﬁnd out in what part of Lon-
don they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet:
it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen
them both " '

“ Then it is as I alwa s ho ,” cried Jane ; “ the
are married! " y Fed y

Elizabeth read on—

“ I have seen both. They are not married, nor can
I can ﬁnd there was any intenﬁon of being so; but if
you are willing to perform the engagements which I have
ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be
long before they are. All that is required of you is, to
assure to your daugther, by settlement, her equal share of
the ﬁve thousand pounds secured among your children
after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, more-
over, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, dur-
ing your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These
are conditions which, considering everything, I had no
hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself
privileged, for you. I shall send this by express, that
no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You
will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr
Wickham’s circumstances are not so hopeless as they
are generally believed to be. The world has been
deceived in that respect; and I am ha]: y to sa there
will be some little money, even when al his d ts are
discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own

 

I 10 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send
me full wers to act in your name throughout the whole
of this bousiness, I will immediately give directions to
Hugger-non for preparing a proper settlement. There
will not be the smallest occasion for our coming to
town again; therefore stay quietly st inngboum, and
depend on my diligence and care. Send back your
answer as soon as you can, and be careful to write ex-

licitly. We have judged it best that my niece should
be married from this house, of which I hope you will
approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall write again
as soon at anything more is determined on. Yours, 8w.

“ Enw. Gnomes.”

“Is it possible?" cried Elizabeth, when she had
ﬁnished. “ Can it be possible that he will marry
her i ”

“ Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have
thought him,” said her sister. “ My dear father, I
congratulate you."

“ And have you answered the letter?” said Eliza-
beth.

“ No ; but it must be done soon.”

Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no
more time before he wrote.

“ Oh ! my dear father,’ ’ she cried, “ come back and
write immediately. Consider how important every
moment is in such a case.’ ’

“ Let me write for you,” said Jane, “ if you dislike
the trouble yourself.”

“ I dislike it very much,” he replied ; “ but it must
be done."

And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked
towards the house.

“ And may I ask—” said Elizabeth; “ but the
terms, I suppose, must be complied with."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. III

" Complied with ! I am only ashamed of his asking
so little.”

“ And they mu! marry 1 Yet he is nub a man

“ Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else
to be done. But there are two things that I want very
much to know: one is, how much money your uncle
has laid down to bring it about; and the other, :how I
am ever to pay him.”

“ Money! my uncle
mean, sir ?”

“I mean, that no man in his senses would marry
Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year
during my life, and ﬁfty after I am gone."

“ That is very true,” said Elizabeth ; “though it
had not occurred to me before. His debts to be dis-
charged, and something still to remain! Oh! it must
be my uncle’s doings! Generous, good man, I am
afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could
not do all this.”

“ No," said her father; “ Wickham’s a fool if he
takes her with a farthiug less than ten thousand pounds.
I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very
beginning of our relationship.”

“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is
half such a sum to be repaid!"

Mr Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep
in thought, continued silent till they reached the house.
Their father then went to the library to write, and the
girls walked into the breakfast-room.

“ And they are really to be married ! ” cried Elin-
beth, as soon as they were by themselves. " How
strange this is! And for ibis we are to be thankful.
That they should marry, small as is their chance ofhappi-
ness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to
rejoice. Oh, Lydia! ”

“ I comfort myself with thinking,” replied Jane,

'n

!” cried Jane, “ what do you

122 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“that he certainl would not marry Lydia if he had
not a real regard or her. Though our kind uncle has
done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe
that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been
advanced. He has children of his own, and may have
more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds 2”

“If we were ever able to leam what Wickham’s
debts have been," said Elizabeth, “and how much is
settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know
what Mr Gardiner has done for them, because Wick-
ham has not sixpenee of his own. The kindness of my
uncle and aunt can never be required. Their taking her
home, and affording her their personal protection and
countenance, is such a sacriﬁce to her advantage as years
of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time
she is actually with them! If such goodness does not
make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be
happy! What a meeting for her, when she ﬁrst sees
my aunt! ”

“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed
on either side," said Jane: " I hope and trust they will
yet be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof,
I will believe, that he is come to a right way of think-
ing. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I
ﬂatter myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so
rational a manner, as may in time make their past im-
pmdence forgotten.”

“ Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth,
“as neither you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget.
It is useleu to talk of it.”

It now occurred to the girls that their mother was
in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had
happened. They went to the library, therefore, and
asked their father whether he would not wish them
to make it known to her. He was writing, and,
without raising his head, coolly replied—

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [23

“Just as you please.”

“ May we take my uncle’s letter to read to her i ”

“ Take whatever you like, and get away."

Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and
they went upstairs together. Mary and Kitt were both
with Mrs Bennet: one communication would: therefore,
do for all. Afters slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs Bennet could hardly
contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr Gar-
diner’s hope of Lydia’s being soon married, her joy
burst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent
from delight, as she had ever been ﬁdgety from alarm
and vexation. To know that her daughter would be
married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for
her felicity, nor humbled by any remembnnce of her
misconduct.

“ dear, dear Lydia! " she cried. “ This is
delighth“ indeed !—She will be married l—I shall see
her again !—She will be married at sixteen l—My good,
kind brotherl I knew how it would be.-—-I knew he
would manage ever thing! How I long to see her!
and to see dear ickham mo? But the clothes, the
wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner
about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to
your father, and ask him how much he will give her.
Sta , stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for
Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear,
dear Lydial—How merry we shall be together when
we meet! ”

Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief
to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts
to the obligations which Mr Gardiner’s behaviour laid
them all under.

“ For we must attribute this happy conclusion,” she
added, " in a great measure to his kindness. We are

124 PRIDE AND PRIJUDIC‘B.

Wmadedthathehaspledged himselftoa-inMr
ickharn with money.”

“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right;
whodloulddoitbut her own uncle? lfhe had not
had a family of his own, I and my children must have
had all his money, you know; anditirthelimtime
we have ever had anything from him, except a few
presents. Well! I am to happy! In a short time I
shall have a daughter married. Mn Wickham l—how
well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June.—
My dear Jane, I am in such a ﬂutter, that I am sure I
can’t write; no I will dictate, and you write for me.
We will settle with your lather about the money after-
wards; but the things should be ordered immediately."

She was then proceeding to all the particulars of
calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have
dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though
with some difﬁculty, persuaded her to wait till her father
was at leisure to be consulted. One day’s delay, she
observed, would be of small importance ; and her mother
wan too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other
schemes, too, came into her head.

“1 will go to Merymn,” id she, “as soon as I am
dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister
Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady
Lucas and Mrs Long. Kitty, run down and order the
carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good,
I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Mery-
wn? Oh I here comes Hill ! My dear Hill, have
you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to he
married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to
make mer at her wedding.”

Mrs began instantly to expreu her joy. Eliza-
beth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and
then, lick of this folly, took refuge in her own room,
that the might think with freedo

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. ! 25

Poor Lydia’s situation must, at best, be bad enough;
but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful.
She felt it so ; and though, in looking forward, neither
rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly
expected or her sister, in looking back to what they
had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages
of what they had gained.

chance: in

R BENNET had very often wished before this
M period of his life that, instead of spending his
whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if
she survived him. He now wished it more than ever.
Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not
have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour
or credit could now be purchased for her. The satis-
faction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young
men in Great Britain to be her husband might then have
rested in its proper place.

He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little
advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole
expense of his brother-in-law, and he was determined,
if possible, to ﬁnd out the extent of his assistance, and
to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.

When ﬁrst Mr Bennet had married, economy was
held to be perfectly useless; for, of course, they were
to have a son. This son was to join in cutting off the
entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
and younger children would by that means be provided
for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but
yet the son was to come; and Mrs Bennet, for many
years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that he would.

[26 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

This event had at last been d 'red of, but it was then
too late to be saving. Mrs ennet had no turn for
economy, and her husband’s love of independence had
alone prevented their exceeding their income.

Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles
on Mrs Bennet and the children. But in what propor-
tions it should be divided amongst the latter depended
on the will of the Iarcnts. This was one )oint, with
regard to Lydia, at feast, which was now to be settled,
and Mr Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to
the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknow-
ledgment for the kindness of his brother, though ex-
pressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his
perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willing-
ness to fulﬁl the engagement: that had been made for
him. He had never before supposed that, could Wick-
hnm be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be
done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the
present arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds
a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid
them ; for, what with her board and pocket allowance,
and the continual presents in money which passed to'her
through her mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses had been
very little within that sum.

That it would be done with such triﬂing exertion on
his side, too, was another very welcome surprize; for
his wish at present was to have as little trouble in the
business as possible. When the first transports of rage
which had produced his activity in seeking her were
over, he natumlly returned to all his former indolence.
His letter was soon despatched; for, though dilatory
in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution.
H: begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother, but was too angry wid: Lydia
to send any message to her.

The good news quickly spread through the house,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 127

and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood.
It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To
be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of
conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the
town ; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from
the world, in some ‘stant farm-house. But there was
much to be talked of in marrying her; and the good-
natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded
before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost
but little of their spirit in this change of circumstances,
because with such an husband her misery was considered
certain.

It was a fortnight since Mrs Bennet had been down—
stairs ; but on this happy day she again took her seat at
the head of her table, and in spirits oppressiver high.
No sentiment of shame gave a clamp to her trium h.
The marriage of a daughter, which had been the rst
object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on
the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her
words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials,
line muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was
busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper
situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or
considering what their income might be, rejected many
as deﬁcient in size and importance.

“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gould-
ings would quit it—or the great house at Stoke, if the
drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far
03' l I could not bear to have her ten miles from me ;
and as for Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”

Her husband allowed her to talk on without interrup.
tion while the servants remained. But when they had
withdrawn, he said to her, “ Mrs Bennct, before you
take any or all of these houses for your son and daughter,
let us come to a right understanding. Into on: house in
this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I

:28 am: no Pajama.

will not encourage the ' of (the, by
them at Lnnglnurn." m

AlrmgdiqxneﬁilovedthisthdallillghtMr
anetvaﬁrm. Itmnledmamdu;ndMn
mehhammt-td honor,tlnthel’hnl-~
hndwouldnotadvanoeaguinamhuydothuforhil
Hepromal thatdie dtould receive from
himnomrkofaﬂ'ectianwhateverondneoccaion.
Mu Bannet could hard! annprehend it. That his
angeroouldhearriedto Zuchapoint ol'inconoeivable
mm as to reﬁne his daughter a without
which her marriage would Ian:er seem valid, exceeded
all that she could believe She was more alive
tothedingracewhichherwantofnewdotlnmuxre-
ﬂeet on her daughter’s nuptials. than to any sense of
lhame at her eloping and living with Wickham 3 lim-
night before they took place.

Elizabeth was now most heartily lorry that the had,
from the dinreu of the mon'ieut1 been led to make Mr
Darcy acquainted with their fear: for her sister; ﬁtr
Iince her marriage would to shortly give the proper
termination to the elopernent, they might hope to conceal
it: unfavourable beginning from all thoee who were not
immediately on the spot.

She had no far of its spreading farther through his
meant. There were few people on whose aectecy the
would have more conﬁdently depended; but, at the
lame time, there was no one who-e knowledge of a
lister'l frailty would have mortiﬁed her so mucthot,
however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individu-
ally to herIell', for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf im-
pable between them. Had Lydia’a man'iage been
concluded on the more honourable terms, it was not to
be mp 11 that Mr Darcy would connect himself with
a {ami y where, to every other objection, would now be
added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind
with the man whom he so justly scorned.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 129

From such a connection she could not wonder that
he should shrink. The wish of procuring her regard,
which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derby-
shire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow
as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she re-
pented, though she hardly knew of what. She became
jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to
be beneﬁted by it. She wanted to hear of him, when
there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence.
She was convinced that she could have been happy with
him; when it was no longer likely they should meet.

What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could
he know that the proposals which she had proudly
spurned only four months ago, would now have been
gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous,
she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but
while he was mortal, there must be a triumph.

She began now to comprehend that he was exactly
the man who, in disposition and talents, would most
suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike
her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was
an union that must have been to the advantage of both :
by her case and liveliness, his mind might have been
softened, his manners improved; and from his judg-
ment, information, and knowledge of the world, she
must have received beneﬁt of greater importance.

But no such happy marriage could now teach the
admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was.
An union of: different tendency, and precluding the pos-
sibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family.

How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in
tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But
how little of permanent happineu could belong to a
couple who were only brought together because their
passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily
conjecture.

 

H. l

130 PRIDE AND PREIU'DICL

Mr Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To
Mr Bennet's acknowledgments he brieﬂy with
assurances of his eagemu to promote the welfare of
any of his family; and concluded with emu-ties that
the subject might never be mentioned to him again.
The princi l purport of his letter was to inform them
that Mr iekham had resolva on quitting the militia.

“ It was greatly my wish that he should do so," he
added, “as soon as his marriage was ﬁxed on. And
I think you will agree with me, in considering a mnoval
from that corps as highl advisable, both on his account
and my niece s. It is r Wickham’s intention to go
into the regulars; and among his former friends, there
are still some who are able and willing to assist him in
the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy in
General ’ s regiment, now quartered in the North.
It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the
kin darn. He promises fairly; and I hope among
diﬂgrcnt people, where they may each have a character
to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present
arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the
various creditors of Mr Wickham in and near Brighton,
with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have
pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble
of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Mery-
ton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his in-
formation? He has given in all his debts; I hope at
least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our
directions, and all will be completed in a week. They
will then join his regiment, unless they are ﬁrst invited
to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs Gardiner,
that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before
she leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be
dutifully remembered to you and her mother.—Yours,
5(6- E. Gasman."

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICL 13!

Mr Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages
of Wickham’s removal from the ——shire as clearly
as Mr Gardiner could do. But Mrs Bennet was not so
well pleased with it. Lydia’s being settled in the Nonh,
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride
in her com ny, for she had by no means given up her
plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe dis-
appointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia
should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted
with everybody, and had so many favourites.

“ She is so fond of Mrs Forster," said she, “ it will
be quite shocking to send her away! And there are
several of the young men, too, that she likes very much.
The oilicers may not be so pleasant in General ’s
regiment."

His daughter’s request, for such it might be con-
sidered, of being admitted into her family again before
she set 03 for the North, received at ﬁrst an absolute
negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wish-
ing, for the sake of their sister’s feelings and conse-
quence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by
her parents, urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally
and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at Long-
boum, as soon as they were married, that he was pre-
vailed on to think as they thought, and act as they
wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of
knowing that she should be able to show her married
daughter in die uei hbourhood before she was banished
to the North. hen Mr Bennet wrote again to his
brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to
come; and it was settled, that as soon as the ceremony
was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. EliLa-
bcth was suqu-ized, however, that Wiekham should
consent to such a scheme, and had she consulted only
her own inclination, any meeting with him would have
been the last object of her wishes.

 

132 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Cbspttr I].

HEIR sister’s wedding-day arrived; and Jane
and Elizabeth felt for her, probably more than
she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to

meet them at , and they were to return in it by
dinner-time. Their arrival wss dreaded by the elder
Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave
Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself.
had 4b: been the culprit, and was wretched in the
thought of what her sister must endure.

They came. The family were assembled in the
breakfast-room to receive them. Smiles decked the
face of Mrs Bennet as the carriage drove up to the
door; her husband looked impenetrany grave; her
daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.

Lydia’s voice was heard in the vestibule; the door
was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her
mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed
her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate
smile to Wickham, who followed his lady, and wished
them both joy, with an alacrity which showed no
doubt of their happiness.

Their reception from Mr Bennet, to whom they
then turned, was not quite so cordial. His counten-
ance rather ained in austerity, and he scarcely opened
his lips. he easy assuranCe of the oung couple,
indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was
disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia
was Lydia still,——untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and
fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding
their congratulations; and when at length they all sat
down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of
some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh,
that it was a great while since she had been there.

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 133

Wickham was not at all more distressed than her-
self ; but his manners were always so pleasing, that had
his character and his marriage been exactly what they
ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed
their relationship, would have delighted them all.
Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to
such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within
herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of
an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but
the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion
suffered no variation of colour.

There was no want of discourse. The bride and
her mother could neither of them talk fast enough;
and Wickham, who haPpened to sit near Elizabeth,
began inquiring after his acquaintance.in that neigh-
bourhood with a good-humoured easexwhich she felt
very unable to equal in her replies. They seemed
each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with Pain;
and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters
would not have alluded to for the world.

“Only think of its being three months," she cried,
“ since I went away! It seems but a fortnight, I
declare; and yet there have been things enough hap-
pened in the time. Good gracious! when I went
away, I am sure 1 had no more idea of being married
till I came back again! though 1 thought it would be
ve good fun if I was."

er father lifted up his eyes, Jane was distressed,
Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who
never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to
be insensible, gaily continued—"Oh! mamma, do the
pee le hereabouts know I am married to-day? Iwas
afraid they might not; and we overtook William
Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he
should know it, and so I let down the side glass next

I34 PRIDE AND PRBNDICL

to him, and took all my glove and let my hand just
NR upon the window-hum, to that he might see the
ring; and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”

Eliubeth could bar it no longer. She got up and
ran out of the room, and returned no roore till she
heard them passing through the hall to the dining-
parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see
Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother’s
right hand, and hear her ﬂy to her cldm sister, “Ah,
Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower,
because I am a married woman! ”

It was not to be supposed that time would give
Lydia that embarrassment from which the had been
so wholly free at ﬁrst. Her ease and good spirits in-
creased. She longed to sue Mrs Philips, the Lucases,
and all their other neighbours, and to hear hersell
called “Mrs Wickham" by each of them; and, in
the meantime, she went after dinner to show her ring,
and boast of being married, to Mrs Hill and the two
hunsemaids.

“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all rc-
tumed to the breakfast-room, “ and what do you think
of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am
sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hare they
may have half my good luck. They must al go to
Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. What.
a pit it is, mamma, we did not all go l "

“ ery true; and if I had my will, we should.
But, my dear Lydia, I don’t at all like your going
such a way off. Must it he so ?”

“Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall
like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters,
mutt conic (lmvn and see us. We shall he at New-
castle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
hlll, and I will take care to get good partners for
them all.”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [35

“I should like it beyond anything!" said her
mother.

“And then, when you go away, you may leave one
or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say
I shall get husbands for them before the winter is
over.”

“I thank on for my share of the favour,” said
Eliubeth; “lint I do not particularly like your way
of getting husbands.”

Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with
them. Mr Wickham had received his commission before
he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the
end of a fortnight.

' No one but Mrs Bennet regretted that their stay
would be so short; and she made the most of the time,
by visiting about with her daughter, and having very
frequent rties at home. These patties were accept-
able to al: to avoid a family circle was even more
desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.

Wickham’s affection for Lydia was just what Eliza-
beth had expected to ﬁnd it—not equal to Lydia's for
him. She had scarcely needed her resent observation
to be satisfied, from the reason of3 things, that their
elopement had been brought on by the strength of her
love rather than by his; and she would have wondered
why, without violently caring for her, he chose welope
with her at all, had she not felt certain that his ﬂight
was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and
if that were the case, he was not the young man to
resist an opportunity of having a companion.

Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her
dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be
Put in competition with him. He did everything heat
m the world; and she was sure he would kill more
birds on the ﬁrst of September than anybody else in the
country.

:36 none AII'D Pumice.

OnemmnhtgmaftertheirarriraLaadtewa
sitting with her two elderistenuheaaidtn Elizabeth—

“ Lizzy, I never gave’ol an account of my wedding.
Ibelieve. Ynuwerenotbywhenltold mm and
dicothenallaboutit. Annotyarcurioutohar
how it was managed ? ”

“ No, really,” replied Elizabeth ; “ I think there
annot be too little aid on the subject."

“La! Youare-o mange! But I mug tell you
how it went off. We were married, you know, at St
Clemt’l, beau: Wickharn't lodgings were in that
parish. And it was settled that we should all be there
by eleven o’clock. My uncle and aunt, and I, were to
gotogether;andtheothenwemlomectusatdte
church Well, Monday morning came,and l was in
such a fun! I was so afraid, you know, that some-
thing would happen to put it of, and then I should have
gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the
time I was dressing, preaching and talking away a
if the was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear
above one word in ten, for I wan thinking, you my
suppose, of my dear Wickharn. I longed to know
whether he would he married in his blue coat.

“Well,and so we breakfasted at ten,as um]. I
thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you
are to understand that my uncle and aunt were horrid
unpleannt all the time I was with them. If you’ll
believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors,
though I wan there a fortnight. Not one party, or
leherne, or anything! To be sure, London waa rather
thin; but, however, the Little Theatre wan open.—
Well, and no, as the caniage came to the door, my
uncle wan called avray upon business to that hon-id man,
Mr Stone. And then, you know, when once they get
together, there it no end of it. Well, I was no Fright-
ened, I did not know whatto do; for my unclewasto

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 137

give me away; and if we were beyond the hour we
could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came
back again in ten minutes’ time, and then we all set out.
However, I recollected afterwards, that if he bad been

revented going, the wedding need not be put off, for
[Ir Dare might have done as well."

“ Mr ﬁarcy! ” repeated Elizabeth, in utter amaze-
ment.

“ Oh, yes l—he was to come there with Wickham,
you know. But, gracious me ! I quite forgot! I
ought not to have said a word about it. I promised
them so faithfully ! What will Wickham say? It
was to be such a secret! ”

“ If it was to be a secret,” said Jane, “say not an-
other word on the subject. You may depend upon my
seeking no further.”

“ 0h ! certainly,” said Elisabeth, though burning
with curiosity; " we will ask you no questions."

“ Thank you,” said Lydia ; “ for, if on did, I
should certainly tell you all, and then Wiczham would
be so angry.”

On such encouragement to ask, Elipabcth was forced
to ppt it out of her power, by tuning away.

ut to live in ignorance on such a point was impos-
sible ; or, at least, it was impossible not to try for infor-
mation. Mr Darcy had been at her sister’s wedding.
It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where
he had apparently least to do, and least tern tadon to go.
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild,
hurried into her brain; but she was satisﬁed with none.
Those that best pleased .her, as placing his conduct in
the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could
not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of
paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an
explanation of what Lydia had dropped, if it were
compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.

138 PRIDE arm nemmcn.

“You rm mdil comprehend," the added, “wht
my curiosity :1“ I)er know how a per-on unconnected
wltll anz us, and (comparatively whing) a manger
toour -mily,shouldhaVebeenamongIt youat such a
time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it—
unleu it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the
sear which Lydia seem: to think necessary; and
then must endeavour to he adsﬁcd with ignorance.”

“ Not that I [ha/I, though,” she added to herself, and
she ﬁnished the letter: “ and, my dear aunt, if you do
not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly
be reduced to tricks and stratang to ﬁnd it out.”

Jane’s delicate sense of honour would not allow her
to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had let
fall : Elizabeth was glad of it ;—till it a peared whether
her inquiries would receive any satisllsiction, she had
rather be without a conﬁdante.

Gibson: 2]].

LIZABETH had the satisfaction of receiving an
answer to her letter as soon as she ssibly could.
She was no sooner in possession o it than, hurr -
ing into the little copse, where she was least likely to
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and
prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter eon-
Vinced her that it did not contain a denial.

“ Gracechurch Street, Sept. 6.
“ Mv DEAI NIECB,—

“I have just received your letter, and shall
devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee
that a [in]: writing will not comprise what I have to tell
you.—I mun confess myself surprized by your applica-

pawn AND snowmen. 139

tion; Idid not expect it from Jon. Don't think me
angry, however, for I only mean to let you know that
I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on Jnur
side. If on do not choose to understand me, forgive
my imperhnence. Your uncle is as much surprized as
I am, and nothing but the belief of your being a party
concerned would have allowed him to not us he has
done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I
must be more explicit.

“ On the ve day of my coming home from Long-
houm, your unc e had a most unexpected visitor. Mr
Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours.
It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was not so
dreadfull racked as yours seems to have been. He came
to tell r Gardiner that he had found out where your
sister and Mr Wickham were, and that he had seen and
talked with them both—Wickham repeatedly, Lydia
once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire
only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the
resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed
was his conviction of its being owing to himself that
Wickham’s worthlessness had not been so well known
as to make it impossible for any young woman of char-
acter to love or conﬁde in him. He generously im-
puted the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed
that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his
private actions open to the world. His character was
to speak for itself. He called it, therefore, his duty
to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which
had been brought on by himself. If he bad Muller
motive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He
had been some days in town before he was able to dis-
cover them ; but he had something to direct his search,
which was more than we had; and the consciousness
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow
us.

140 PRIDE AND PREJUDXCI'.

“ There is a lady, it seems, a Mn Younge, who was
some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapproln-
tion, though he did not say what. She then took a
large house in Edward Street. and has since maintained
herself by letting lodgings. This Mn Younge, was,
he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham ; and he
went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to
town. But it was two or three days before he could
get from her what he wanted. She would not betray
her trust, I an pose, without bribery and corruption, for
she mlly did now where her friend was to be found.
Wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their ﬁrst arrival
in London, and had she been able to receive them into
her house, they would have taken u their abode with
her. At length, however, our kind riend procured the
wished-for direction. They were in Street.
He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing
Lydia. His ﬁrst object with her, he acknowledged,
had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could
he prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance as
far as it would go. But he found Lydia absolutely re-
solved on remaining where she was. She cared for none
of her friends ; she wanted no help of his ; she would not
hear of leaving Wiekham ; she was sure they should be
married some time or other, and it did not much signify
when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained,
he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which,
in his very ﬁrst conversation with Wickham, he easil
learnt had never been bi: design. He conﬁrmed himse f
obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts
of honour which were Very pressing, and scmpled not
to lay all the ill consequences of Lydia’s ﬂight on her
own folly alone. He meant. to resign his commission
immediately; and as to his future situation, he could

 

PRIDE AND PREJVJDICE. I4!

conjecture very little about it. He must go some-
where, but he did not know where, and he knew he
should have nothing to live on.

“Mr Dare asked him why he had not married your
sister at once Though Mr Bennet was not imagined
to be very rich, he would have been able to do some-
thing for him, and his situation must have been bene-
fited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this
question, that Wickham still cherished the hope of
more effectually making his fortune by marriage in some
other country. Under such circumstances, however, he
was not likely to be proof against the temptation of
immediate relief.

" They met several times, for there was much to be
discussed. Wickham, of course, wanted more than he
could get, but at length was reduced to be reasonable.

“ Everything being settled between (Inn, Mr Darcy’s
next st was to make our uncle acquainted with it,
and he?rst called in Jucechurch Street the evening
before I came home. But Mr Gardiner could not be
seen, and Mr Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your
father wan still with him, but would quit town the next
morning. He did not judge your father to be a person
whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and
therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name,
and till the next day it was only known that a gentle-
man had called on business.

“ On Saturday he came again. Your father was
gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they
had a great deal of talk together.

“ They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him
too. It was not all settled before Monday: as soon as
it was, the express was sent oil to Longboum. But
our visitor was ve obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the re: defect of his character after all.

I 42 PRIDE AND PREJ'UDICE.

He has been accused of many faults at different times,
but flu} is the true one. Nothing was to be done that
that he did not do himself; though I am sure (and I
do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing
about it) your uncle would most readily have settled the
whole.

“They battled it together for a long time, which was
more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it
deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield,
and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece,
was forced to put up with only having the probable credit
of it, which went sorely against the grain ; and I really
believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure,
because it required an explanation that would rob him of
his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was
due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself,
or June at most.

“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been
done for the young people. His debts are to be paid,
amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a
thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her
own settled upon I)”, and his commission purchased.
The reason why all this was to be done by him alone
was such as I have given above. It was owing to him,
to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that
Wickham’s character had been so misunderstood, and,
consequently, that he had been received and noticed as
he was. Perhaps there was some truth in Ibis ,- though
I doubt whether bi: reserve, or anybody: reserve, can be
answerable for the event. But in spite of all this ﬁne
talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured
that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not
given him credit for (umber intern-I in the affair.

“ When all this was resolved on, he rctumed again to
his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley; but it
was agreed that he should be in London once more when

PRIDE AND PREJU’DICE. 143

the wedding molt lace, and all money matters were
then to receive the as: ﬁnish.

“ I believe I have now told you everything. It is a
relation which you tell me is to give you great surprize;
I ho at least it will not afford you any displeasure.
Lydla came to us; and Wickham had constant admis-
sion to the house. lie was exactly what he had been
when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not
tell you how little I was satisﬁed with her behaviour
while she stayed with us, if I had not rceived, by
Jane’s letter last Wednesday, that her conﬁct on com-
ing home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore
what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I
talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, re-
presenting to her the wickedness of what she had done
and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family.
If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she
did not listen. Iwas sometimes quite provoked, but
then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for
their sakes had patience with her.

“ Mr Darcy was punctual in his return, and, as
Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He dined
with us the next day, and was to leave town again on

r Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with
me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying
gwhat I was never bold enough to say before) how much

like him? His behaviour to us has, in eve t,
been as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshlre. His
understanding and opinions all please me 3 he wants
nothing but a little more liveliness, and llml, if he marry
prudent/y, his wife may teach him. I thought him very
sly ;-—he hardly ever mentioned your name. But sly-
ness seems the fashion.

“ Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming ; or
at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from
P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all

I“ PRIDE AND mu

mnddieplrk. Ahvphmwithaninelitﬂzpair
ofponiegwwldbednuydu‘ng.
“Bmlmwiumm Thadildruluve
bmmdnguthithlf-hur.
“Yummy-heady.
“MGAIIIIEI.”

'I‘heconnenuofthislmadzmlilinbahinma
ﬂunaofqiﬂminvhichh'udiﬁcdtmdaam'ne
vhahuplunmupainhuethegtuum The
"sue-Mummva meanion

maddwthrD-rcynighlhwhumddngm

huim'lmndyvhidldxhadfandmm-
mungeuucxaﬁonofgoodnumogxmmbe
pmbabk,andalthcsameﬁmcdrudedmhejlm,ﬁun
thepainofobligaﬁmmpovcdbqonddurglum
exummbeu-ue! Hehadfollowedxhunpupmclym
mumlmhzdlakmonhinnulfaﬂdtuuﬂcaulmui-
ﬁaﬁmamdantmmchamoh;invhichuwli-
udonlndhcenmlymawomvlmhemu
abolnimltanddespin,andwbuehevnmdnmlm
bribe—dummvhomheduysmonvindmauid,
Indvhoaeverynameilwupmidlmmlimmpm-
lacunae. Hehnidoneallthisﬁnragid'hnhcmld
ndmhcrngmdmreneun. Hahndid'hiqludnt
helmddaneilfother. Mhmahqndll‘ly
checkcdbynxhamln'duaﬁonsandshelmfdttht
even lm‘vanilyminnﬁcimgwhu lvqlimdhodqnnd
onhitaﬂacﬁonﬁrher,ﬁxnvununwbohdahu‘ly
Id‘uxdﬁmulblemomtuﬁmmknm
aWagaimxdﬂiondﬁp'th‘dhn—
Bruin—bl“! of Wicklum!—Evay kind (I [link
mmhfmmthcconnmim Rebuttal-cum
mm-«memm-ndu.
Mkmﬁmamhﬂmw

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 145

asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reason-
able that he should feel he had been wrong; he had
libemlity, and he had the means of exercising it; and
though she would not place herself as his principal in-
ducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining
partiality for her might assist his endeavours in a cause
where her peace of mind must be materially concerned.
It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they
were under obligations to a person who could never
receive a retum. They owed the restoration of Lydia,
her character, everything to him. Oh! how heartily
did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had
ever encouraged, every sau speech she had ever directed
towards him. For hersel , she was humbled; but she
was proud of him. Proud that in a cause of compassion
and honour he had been able to get the better of himsele
She read over her aunt’s commendation of him again
and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her.
She was even sensible of some pleasure, though
mixed with regret, on ﬁnding how steadfastly both
the and her uncle had‘ been persuaded that aﬂ'ection
and conﬁdence subsisted between Mr Darcy and
herself.

She was roused from her seat and her reﬂections by
some one’s approach; and before she could strike into
another path she was overtaken by Wickham.

“ I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my
dear sister?” said he, as he joined her.

“ You certainly do,” she replied with a smile ; “but
it does not follow that the interruption must be un-
welcome.”

“I should be sorry indeed if it were. We were
alwa s good friends ; and now we are better."

“ me. Are the others coming out ? ”

“ I do not know. Mrs Bennet and Lydia are going
in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I

ll. 1»:

146 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

ﬁnd from our uncle and aunt that you have actually seen
Pembcrley."

She replied in the afﬁrmative.

“ I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe
it would be too much for me, or else I could take it in
my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old house-
keeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always
very fond of me. But of course she did not mention
my name to you.”

“ Yes, she did.”

“ And what did she say ? "

“That you were gone into the army, and, she was
afraid, had—not turned out well. At such a distance
as rim, you know, things are strangely misrepresented.”

“ Certainly," he replied, biting his lips.

Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him ; but he soon
afterwards said——

“ I was surprizcd to see Darcy in town last month.
We passed each other several times. I wonder what
he can be doing there 2 "

“ Perhaps preparing for his maniage with Miss de
Bourgh,” said Eliubeth. “ It must be something
particular to take him there at this time of year.’ ’

“ Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at
Lambton 2 I thought I understood from the Gardiners
that on ha ."

“ I[es ; he introduced us to his sister."

“And do you like her? "

“ Very much.”

“ I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly im-
proved within this year or two. When I last saw her
Ill Wu not very promising. I am very glad you liked
her. I hope she will turn out well.”

“I dare say she will; she has got over the most

q‘m e."
, you go 11 the village of Kympwn f”
“ I do not recollect that we did."

PRIDE AND PREJUDICI. I47

“I mention it because it is the living which I ought to
have had. A most delightful place l—Excellent Parson-
age House ! It would have suited me in every re t.”

“ How should you have liked making sermons ”

“ Exceedineg well. I should have considered it as
part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been
nothing. One ought not to re ine; but, to be sure, it
would have been such n thing l3: me ! The quiet, the
retirement of such a life, would have answered all my
ideas of ha iness ! But it was not to be. Did you
ever hear arcy mention the circumstance when you
were in Kent ? ’

“I have heard, from authority which I thought a:
good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the
will of the present atron.”

“ You have !— es, there was something in (but ,- I
told you so from the ﬁrst, you may remember.”

“ I ﬁt! hear, too, that there was a time when semen-
making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at
present—that you actually declared our resolution of
never taking orders, and that the business had been
compromised accordingly.”

“ You did l—and it was not wholly without founda-

tion. You may remember what I told you on that
point, when ﬁrst we talked of it.”
The were now almost at the door of the house, for
she had, walked fast to get rid of him, and, unwilling
for her sister‘s sake, to provoke him, she only said in
reyly, with a good-humoured smile—

" Come, Mr Wickham, we are brother and sister, you
know. Do not let us quanel about the gash In future,
I hope we shall be always of one mind.

She held out her hand; he kissed it with alfectionale
gallantry, though he hardly knew how to look, and they
entered the house.

I48 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

tbspttr 1333.

R WICKHAM was so perfectly satisﬁed with
this conversation, that he never again distrer
himself or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth

by introducing the subject of it ; and she was pleased to
ﬁnd that she had said enough to keep him quiet.

The da of his and Lydia’s departure soon came'
and Mrs ﬁennet was forced to submit to a separation
which, as her husband by no means entered into her
scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
continue at least a twelvemonth.

“ Oh! my dear Lydia," she cried, “ when shall we
meet again 2 ’

“ Oh, Lord! I don’t know. Not these two or
three cars, perhaps.”

“ rite to me very often, my dear."

“ As often as I can. But you know married women
have never much time for writing. My sisters may
write to Mt. They will have nothing else to do.”

Mr Wickham’s adieus were much more sﬁeetionate
than his wife's. He smiled, looked handsome, and
said many pretty things.

“He is as ﬁne a fellow," said Mr Bennet, as soon
as they were out of the house, “ as everI saw. He
simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am
gradigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William

.ucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law."

The loss of her daughter made Mrs Bennet very
dull for several days.

“ I often think," said she, “that there is nothing so
had as parting with one’s friends. One seems so forlorn
without them.”

“This is the consequence, you see, madam, of
marrying a daughter," said Elizabeth. V “It must

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I49

make you better satisﬁed that your other four are
single.”

“It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me
because she is married, but only because her husband’s
regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been
nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”

But the spiritlcss condition which this event threw
her into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened
again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news
which then began to be in circulation. The house-
keeper at Netherﬁeld had received orders to prepare for
the arrival of her master, who was coming down in a
day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs
Bennet was quite in the ﬁdgets. She looked at Jane,
and smiled, and shook her head by turns.

“Well, well, and so Mr Bingley is coming down,
sister” (for Mrs Philips ﬁrst brought her the news).
" Well, so much the better. Not that I care about it,
though. He is nothing to us, u know, and I am
sure I never want to see him again. But, however, he
is very welcome to come to Netherﬁeld, if he likes it.
And who knows what may happen? But that is
nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long ago
never to mention a word about it. And so, is it quite
certain he is coming ? ”

“You may depend on it," replied the other, “for
Mrs Nichols was in Meryton last night; I saw her
passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know
the tmth of it; and she told me that it was certainly
tnie. He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very
likely on Wednesday. She was going to the butcher’s,
she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just
ﬁt to be killed.”

Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming
without changing colour. It was many months since

150 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as
soon as they were alone together, she said—

“I saw you look at me to—day, Liuy, when m
aunt told us of the present report; and I know
appeared distressed; but don’t imagine it was from any
ml y cause. I was only confused for the moment, be-
cause I felt that I than!!! be looked at. I do assure
you that the news does not affect me either with
pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing—that he
comes alone; because we shall see the less of him.
Not that I am afraid of myself, but I dread other
people’s remarks."

Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had
she not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have sup-
posed him capable of coming there with no other view
than what was acknowledged; but she still thought
him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater
probabilin of his coming there with his friend’s per-
mission, or being bold enough to come without it.

“ Yet it is hard,” she sometimes thought, “ that this
poor man cannot come to a house which he has legally
hired without raising all this speculation! I will leave
him to himself.”

In spite of what her sister declared, and really be-
lieved to be her feelings, in the expectation of his
arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits
were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more
an ual, than she had often seen them.

he subject which had been so warmly canvassed
between their parents about a twelvemonth ago was
now brought forward again.

“ As soon as ever Mr Bingley comes, my dear,”
said Mrs Bonnet, “ you will wait on him, of
course.”

“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last
year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 15!

marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing,
and I will not be sent on a fool’s errand again.’ ’

His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary
such an attention would be from all the neighbouring
gentlemen, on his returning to Netherﬁeld.

“’Tis an eligume I despise,” said he. “ If he wants
our society, let him seek it. He knows when: we live.
I will not spend my hours in running after my neigh-
bours every time they go away and come back again.”

“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominath
rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that
Ihan’t prevent my asking him to dine here, I am deter-
mined. We must have Mrs Long and the Gouldings
soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there
will be just room at table for him.”

Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able
to bear her husband’s incivility; though it was very
mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see
Mr Bingley, in consequence of it, before 15:] did. As
the day of his arrival drew near,

“I begin to be sorry that he comes at all,” said Jane
to her sister. " It would be nothing; I could see him
with perfect indiﬁ‘erence; but I can hardly bear to hear
it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well ;
but she does not know—no one can know—how much
I suﬁer from what she says. Happy shall 1 be when
his stay at Netherﬁeld is over! ”

“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,”
replied Elizabeth; “ but it is wholly out of my power.
You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preach-
ing patience to a suﬁ‘erer is denied me, because you
have always so much."

Mr Bingley arrived. Mrs Bennet, through the
assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest
tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness
on her side might be as long as it could. She counted

152 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

the days that must intervene before their invitation
could be sent—hopeless of seeing him before. But, on
the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she
nw him from her dressing-room window enter the
paddock and ride towards the house.

Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her
jo . Jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but
E izabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window,
—she looked—she saw Mr Darcy with him, and sat
down again by her sister.

“ There is a gentleman with him, mamma,” said
Kitty; “who can it be ? ”

“ Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose;
I am sure I do not know."

“ La! ” replied Kitty, “ it looks just like that man
that used to he with him before,—Mr what's his name.
-—'l‘hat lull, proud man.”

“Good gracious! Mr Dm'cyl—and so it does, I
vow. Well, any friend of Mr Bingley’s will always
be welcome here, to be sure ; but else I must say that I
hate the very sight of him.”

Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprizu and concern.
She knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and
therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend
her sister, in seeing him almost for the ﬁrst time after
receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were un-
comfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and
of course for themselves; and their mother talked
on, of her dislike of Mr Darcy, and her resolu-
tion to be civil to him only as Mr Bingle ’s friend,
without being heard by eitherof them. gut Elin-
heth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had
courage to show Mrs Gardiner’s letter, or to relate her
own change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he
could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. [53

and whose merit she had undervalued ; but to her own
more extensive information, he was the person to whom
the whole family were indebted for the ﬁrst of beneﬁts,
and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not
The so tender, at least as reasonable and just as what

ane felt for Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming
—at his coming to Netherﬁeld, to Longhoum, and
voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what
she had known on ﬁrst witnessing his altered behaviour
in Derbyshire.

The colour which had been driven from her face,
returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a
smile of delight added lustre to her e es,aa she thought
for that space of time, that his a eetiou and wishes
must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.

“ Let me ﬁrst see how he behaves," said she; “ it
will then be early enough for expectation.”

She sat intently at work striving to be composed, and
without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity
carried them to the face of her sister, as the servant was
approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than
usual, but more sedate than Elinbeth had expected.
0n the gentlenrcn’s appearing, her colour increased ; yet
she received them with tolerable ease, and with a pro-
priety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of
resentment, or any unnecessary complainance.

Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would
allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eager-
ness which it did not often command. She had ventured
only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as
usual, and, she thought, more as he had been used to
look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pem-
berley. But, perhaps, he could not in her mother's
presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt. It
was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.

Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in

r 54 Prime um enemies.

that short period aw him looking both eased and
embarrassed. He was received by Mrs net with
a degree of civility which made her two daughters
ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and
ammonium politeness of her curtaey and address of his

en .

Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother
owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite
daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and dis-
tressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill-
applied.

Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr and Mrs
Gardiner did—a question which she could not answer
without confusion—said scarcely anything. He was
not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his
silence ; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There
he had talked to her friends, when he could not to her-
self. But now several minutes elapsed, without bring-
ing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, un-
able to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes
to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane as at
herself, and fre uently on no object but the ground.
More thoughtftilness, and less anxiety to please than
when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was
disappointed, and angry with herSelf for being so.

“Could I expect it to be otherwise!” said the.
“ Yet why did he come?"

She was in no humour for conVemtion with any
one but himself; and to him she had hardly courage to
speak.

She inquired after his sister, but could do no more.

“It is a long time, Mr Bingley, since you went
away," said Mrs Bonnet.

He readin agreed to it. “ I began to be afraid you
would never come back again. Peo le id say, you
meant to quit the place entirely at Nlichaelmas; but,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 155

however, I he it is not true. A great many changes
have ha pene in the neighbourhood since you went
away. iss Lucas is married and settled. And one
of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard of
it ; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was
in the Times and the Courier, I know; though it was
not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, ' Lately,
George Wiekham, Es . to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ with-
out there being a syllab c said of her father, or the place
where she lived, or anything. It was my brother
Gardiner’s drawing up too, and I wonder how he
came to make such an awkward business of it. Did
you see it 2 "

Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratu-
lations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How
Mr Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell.

“ It is a delightful thing, so be sure, to have a
daughter well married,” continued her mother; “but,
It the same time, Mr Bingley, it is very hard to have
her taken awa from me. They are gone down to
Newcastle, 3 prance quite' northward, it seems, and there
the are to stay I do not know how long. His
regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his
leaving the shire, and of his being gone into the
regulars. Thank Heaven! he has more friends, though,
perhaps, not so many as he deserves."

Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr Darcy,
was in such misery of shame that she could hardly keep
her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of
speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done
before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to
make any may in the country at present. A few weeks,
he believed.

“ When you have killed all your own birds, Mr
Bingley,” said her mother, “ I beg you will come here,
and shoot as many as you please, on Mr Bennet’s manor.

 

156 an): urn mmlcr.

Immheﬁﬂkndyhlgmaﬂigemandvﬂl
unaﬂthehe‘nflheewia you."

Elinhah'l Ilia-y harmed at and: my,
Maid-amnion! Wmdheameﬁirpqua
waﬂznprmlulndﬂmuuddmayurago,
«winging-awn“kuka
dummxadmnmncluion. Alduxin‘andufelt
Mymdhﬁmmﬂmmhlmorhmlf
amdsformnuofldpainﬁdmnﬁﬁm.

“'I'heﬁruvidlofmyban,"niddrmhenel£
“innercrmorembeinoompanywitheizhuofdm
Thdrncktyanaﬂhrdmplammlhalvﬂlmfor
Inchvrttchedne-athis! Letlneocvcruccithcr
oneordneotheragain!"

Yetdrminry,forwhichyunoflnppimnvmm
offernocompcnudouueeeivednonafmvardsmmial
nliefﬁomohervinghowmchdtehautyofhcrliuer
rckindlcdthc admiration of her foam lover. When
ﬁmheameimhehadqokmmhcrhnlinlc,”
everyﬁvemiuumncemedwbegivinghermreofhi-
attention. Hefoundhcranhaodnomeulhehadhm
lutyarr—a- good-natured and a unaﬂircusd, though
notquircaochmy. Jamwumximndnlnodiﬂ'er-
enccdlouldbeperceived in hernalLaudwumlly
pcrmdeddmlhctalkednmuchuevcr. Bmher
mind run In busily engaged that 1h: did notalwayl
know when ahe wu silent.

Wheuthegemlcmcn roulogoaway,MnB¢-nnetw
mindful of her intended civility. and they were invimd
and engagedwdineazLongboum in afew dayu’time.

“You are nil: a visit in my debt, Mr Bingley,"
the added; “ orwhcn you want to town lastwinter
you yromilcd to take afamily dinner with usa noon
3: you returned. Ihave not forgot, you see; andI
auureyou Iwas very much dinppointzd that you did
not come back and keep your engagement.”

- PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. X57

Bingley looked a little silly at this reﬂection, and
said something of his concern at having been prevented
by business. They then went away.

Mrs Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them
to stay and dine there that da ; but, though she always
kept a very good table, she did not think anything less
than two courses could be good enough for a man on
whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the
appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a-year.

chums 1317.

S soon as they were gone Elizabeth walked out
to recover her spirits,——or, in other words, to
dwell without interruption on those subjects

that must deaden them more. Mr Darcy’s behaviour
astonished and vexed her.

“ Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and
indiﬂerent,” said she, " did he come at all 1’

She could settle it in no way that ave her pleasure.

" He could be still amiable, stil pleasing to my
uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and wh not to
me? If he fears me, why come hither? I he no
longer cares for me, why silent i—Teazing, testing
man! I will think no more about him.”

Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily
kept by the ap roach of her sister, who joined her
with a cheerful ook, which showed her better satisﬁed
with their visitors than Elizabeth.

“Now,” said she, “ that this ﬁrst meeting is over,
I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I
shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am
glad he dines here on Tuesday: it will then be publicly

158 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE..

seen that on both sides we met only as common and
indifferent acquaintance."

“Yes, very indifferent indeed,” said Elizabeth,
laughingly. “ Oh, Jane! take care.”

“ My dear Lizzy, you mnnot think me so weak II
to be in danger now.’

“I think u are in very great danger of making
him as much in love with you as ever."

 

The did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday;
and Ng’s Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to
all the hap y schemes which the good humour and
common po iteness of Bingley, in half-an-hour’s visit,
had revived.

On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at
Longboum; and the two, who were most anxiously
expected, to the credit of their unctuality as sports-
men, were in very good time. hen they repaired to
the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see
whether Bingley would take the place which, in all
their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister.
Her pmdent mother, occupied by the same ideas, for-
bore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the
room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to
look round, and happened to smile; it um decided—
he placed himself by her.

Eliubeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked to-
wards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference,
and she would have imagined that Bingley had received
his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes like-
wise turned towards Mr Darcy, with an expression of
half-laughing alarm.

His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner-
time, as showed an admiration of her which, though
more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that
if left wholly to himself, Jane s happiness, and his own,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICB. 159

would be speedily secured. Though she dared not
depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure
from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the ani-
mation that her spirits could boast ; for she was in no
cheerful humour. Mr Darcy was almost as far from
her as the table could divide them. He was on one
side of her mother. She knew how little such a situa-
tion would give pleasure to either, or make either appear
to adnntage. She was not near enough to hear any
of their discourse; but she could see how seldom they
spoke to each other, and how fomial and cold was their
manner whenever they did. Her mother’s ungmious-
nest made the sense of what they owed him more pain-
ful to Elizabeth’s mind ; and she would, at times, have
given anything to be privileged to tell him that his
kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole
of the family.

She was in hopes that the evening would afford some
opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole
of the visit would not pass away without enabling them
to enter into somethin more of conversation, than the
mere ceremonious sa utation attending his entrance.
Anxious and uneasy, thc period which past in the
drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was weari-
some and dull to a degree that made her almost uncivil.
She looked {onward to their entrance as the point on
which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must
depend.

“If he does not come to me Mm," said she, “I
shall give him up for ever."

The gentlemen came ; and she thought he looked as
if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the
ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet
was taking tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coﬂee,
in no close a confederacy, that there was not a single
vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And

160 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

on the gentlemen’s approaching, one of the girls moved
closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper—

“ The men ahan’t come and part us, I am determined.
We want none of them ; do we 2 ”

Dare had walked away to another rt of the room.
She fol owed him with her eyes, envted every one to
whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to hel
anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against hersef
for being so silly!

“ A man who has once been refused! How could
I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his
love? Is there one among the sex who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to
the same woman 2 There is no indignity so abhorrent
to their feelings! ”

She was a little revived, however, by his bringing
back his coffee-cup himself; and she seized the oppor-
tunit of saying, “ Is your sister at Pemberlcy still?"

" es, she will remain there till Christmas.”

“ And quite alone? Have all her friends left
her 3 ’ '

“ Mrs AnnesIey il with her. The others have been
gone on to Scarborough these three weeks.”

She could think of nothing more to say; but if he
wished to convene with her, he might have better
success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes,
in silence; and, at last, on the young ladies whispering
to Elizabeth again, he walked away.

When the tea-things were removed, and the card-
tahles placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was
then hoping to be soon joined by him. when all her
views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to
her mother’s rapacity for whist-players, and in a few
moments after seated with the rest of the party. She
now lost everhexpectation of pleasure. They were
conﬁned for the evening at different tables, and she had

nuns AND PREJUDICE. 161

nothing to h , but that his eyes were so often turned
towards her side of the room, as to make him play as
unsuccessfully as herself.

Mrs Bennet had designed to keep the two Nether-
fleld gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was un-
luckily ordered before any of the others, and she had no
opportunity of detaining them.

" Well, girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to
themselves, “ what say you to the day? I think every-
thing has passed oﬂ uncommonl well, I assure you.
The dinner was as well as any I ever saw.
The venison was roasted to a tum—and everybody
said, they never saw so fat at haunch. The soup was
fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases’
last week; and even Mr Darcy acknowledged, that
the partridges were remarkably well done; and I
suppose he has two or three French cooks at least.
And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater
beauty. Mrs Long said so too, for I asked her
whether you did not. And what do you think she
said besides? ‘ Ah! Mrs Bennet, we shall have her
It Netherﬁeld at last.’ She did indeed. I do think
Mrs Lung is as good a creature as ever lived—and her
nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all
handsome: I like them prodigiously.”

Mrs Bonnet, in short, was in very great spirits. She
had seen enough of Bingley’s behaviour to Jane, to be
convinced that she would get him at last; and her ex-
pectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite
disappoian at not seeing him there again the next
day to make his proposals.

“ It has been a very agreeable day,” said Miss
Bennet to Elizabeth. “ The party seemed so well
selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
may often meet again.”

u. L

:62 puma AND PREJUDICE.

Elizabeth smiled.

“Lizzy, you must not do to. You must not eul-
pect me. It mortiﬁes me. I assure you that I have
now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable
and sensible young man, without having I with beyond
it. I am perfectly satisﬁed from what his manners now
are, that he never had any design of engaging my affec-
tion. It is only that he is blessed with greater aweet-
ness of address, and a stronger desire of generally
pleating, than any other man."

" You are very cmel," said her sister; uyou will
not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every
moment.”

“ How hard it is in some canes to be believed! " "'

“ And how impossible in otherv! ”

“ But why should you wish to persuade me that I
feel more than I acknowledge?" -

“That is a uestion which I hardly know how to
answer. We all love to instruct, though we can teach
only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if
you persist in indifference, do not make me your
conﬁdante.”

chum: 117.

FEW days after this visit, Mr Binglcy called
again, and alone. His friend had left him that
morning for London, but was to return home

in ten days’ time. He sat with them above an hour,
and was in remarkably good spirits. Mn Bennet

“ [This sentence ll here [epinch from the next in accord-
ance with a reference in a letter of Miss Austen’s to the page
of the ﬁrst edltlon on which It occurs. “ The grant! blunder
in printing it in p. :10 v. 3, where two sentence! are made
into one."-—En.]

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 163

invited him to dine with them; but, with many ex-
pressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged
elsewhere.

“ Next time you call,” said she, " I hope we shall
be more lucky.”

“ He should be particularly ha py at any time, 8m,
&c.,and if she would give him ease, would take an
early opportunity of waiting on them.”

“ Can you come to-morrow.’ ”

" Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; ”
and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.

He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies
were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs Bennet to her
daughters’ room, in her dressing gown, and with her
hair half ﬁnished, crying out, “ My dear Jane, make
haste and hurry down. He is come—Mr Bingley is
come—He is indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here,
Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and half
her on with her gown. Never mind Miss Lizzys
hair.”

“We will be down as soon as 'we can," said Jane;
“ but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us,
for she went upstairs half an hour ago."

“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it?
Come, be quick, be quick! where is your sash, my
dear P "

But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be
prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.

The same anxiety to get [them] by themselves, was
visible again in the evening. After tea, Mr Bonnet
retired to the library, as was his custom, and Mary
went upstairs to her instniment. Two obstacles of the
live being thus removed, Mrs Bennet sat looking and
winking at Elinbeth and Catherine for a considerable
time, without making any impression on them. Eliza-
beth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty

164 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

did, she ve innocently said, “What is the matter,
mammal a/hat do you keep winking at me for!
What am I to do?”

“ Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you.”

She then sat still ﬁve minutes longer; but, unable to
waste such a recious occasion, she suddenly got up,
and saying to ﬁiuy, “ Come here, my love, I want to
speak to you," took her out of the room. Jane in-
stantly gave a look at Elizabeth, which spoke her
distress at such remeditation, and her entreaty that :5:
would not give in to it.

In a few minutes, Mrs Bennet half opened the door,
and called out, “ Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak
with you.”

Elizabeth was forced to go. “ We may as well leave
them by themselves, you know," said her mother as
soon as she was in the hall. “ Kitty and I are going
upstairs to sit in my dressing-room.” -

Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her
mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and
Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawing-
room.

Mrs Bennet’s schemes for this day were ineﬂ'ccmal.
Bingley was everything that was charming, except the
professed lover of her daughter. His ease and cheer-
fulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-'udgcd oﬂicious-
ness of the mother, and heard all her siily remarks, with
a forbearance and command of countenance particularly
grateful to the daughter.

He scarcely needed an invitation to ma supper; and
before he went away, an engagement was armed, chiefly
through his own and Mrs Bennet’s means, for his coming
next morning to shoot with her husband.

After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference.
Not a word passed between the sisters concerning

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 165

Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in the ha py belief
that all must speedily be concluded, unless r Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however,
she felt lolembly persuaded that all this must have taken
place with that gentleman’s concurrence.

Bingle was punctual to his appointment; and he
and Mr bennet spent the morning together, as had been
agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than
his companion expected. There was nothing of pre-
sumption or folly in Bingley, that could provoke his
ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more
communicative and less eccentric than the other had
ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to
dinner; and in the evening Mrs Bennet's invention was
again at work to get everybody away from him and her
daughter. Eliubeth, who had a letter to write, went
into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after tea;
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards,
she could not be wanted to counteract her mother’s
schemes.

But on muming to the drawing-room when her letter
was ﬁnished, she saw, to her inﬁnite surprize, there was
reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious
for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister and
Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation ; and had this led to no suspicion, the
faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away
from each other, would have told it all. Tlm'r situation
was awkward cnou h; but be", she thought, was still
worse. Not a syﬁable was uttered by either; and
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when
Bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly
rose, and whispering a few words to her sister, ran out
of the room.

Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where
conﬁdence would give pleasure; and instantly embrac-

1 66 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

ing her, acknowledged with the liveliest emotion, that
she was the happiest creature in the world.

“’Tis too much," she added,—“ by far too much.
I do not deserve it. Oh! why is not everybody as
happy I ”

E izabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerit ,
a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly
express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source
of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself
to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be
said, for the present.

“I must go instantly to my mother," she cried; “ I
would not on any account triﬂe with her affectionate
solicitude, or allow her to hear it from any one but
myself. He is gone to my father already. 0h! Lizzy,
to know that what I have to relate will give such
pleasure to all my dear family! how shall I hear so
much happiness! ’

She then hastened away to her mother, who had
purposely broken up the card party, and was sitting
upstairs with Kitty.

Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the
rapidity and ease with which an affair was ﬁnally settled,
that had given them so many previous months of
[suspense] and vexation.

“And this," said she, “is the end of all his friend's
anxious circumspection ! of all his sister’s falseth and
contriyancel the happiest, wisest, and most reasonable
end! '

In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose
conference with her hither had been short and to the
purpose.

“ Where is your sister 2 ” said he hastily, as he opened
the door.

“ With my mother upstairs. She will be down in a
moment, I dare say.”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 167

He then shut the door, and coming up to her, claimed
the good wishes and affection of a sister. Elizabeth
honestly and hartin expressed her delight in the
prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality ; and then till her sister came down, she
had to listen to all he had to say of his own ha piness,
and of Jane’s perfections; and in spite of his ing a
lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of
felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding and su r-excellent
di ’tion of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling
an taste between her and himself.

It was an evening of no common delight to them all.
The satisfaction of Miss Bonnet’s mind gave such a
glow of sweet animation to her face, as made her look
handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and
hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs Bennet could
not give her consent or speak her approbation in terms
warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked
to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour; and when
Mr Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner
plainly showed how really happ he was.

Not a word, however, passe his lips in allusion to it,
till their visitor took his leave for the night ; but as soon
as he was gone, he turned to his daughter and said—

“ Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very
happy woman."

Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked
him for his goodness.

“ You are a good girl,” he replied, “ and I have great
pleasure in thinking on will be so happily settled. I
have not a doubt of your doing very well together.
Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each
of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved
on ; so easy, that every servant will cheat you ; and so
generous, that you wil always exceed your income.’ ’

168 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in
mone matters would be unpardonable in nu."

“ xceed their income I My dear Mr Bennet."
cried his wife, “what are you talking of .’ Why, he
has four or ﬁve thousand 3-year, and very likely more."
Then addressing her daughter, “Ohl my dear, dear
Jane, I am so hap y, I am sure I shan’t get a wink of
sleep all night. i knew how it would be. I always
said it must be so, at last. I was sure on could not
be so beautiful for nothing! Iremem r, as soon as
ever I saw him, when he ﬁrst came into Hertfordshire
last year, I thought how likely it was that you should
come together. Oh ! he is the handsomest young man
that ever was seen! ”

Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was
beyond competition her favourite child. At that
moment she cared for no other. Her younger sisters
soon began to make interest with her for ob’ects of
happiness which she might in future be able to 'spense.

Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Nether-
ﬁeld; and Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there
every winter.

Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor
atZLongbourn,—coming frequently before breakfast, and
always remaining till after supper,—unless when some
barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough tit-tested,
had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought
himself obliged to accept.

' Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation
with her sister; for while he was present, Jane had no
attention to bestow on anyone else; but she found her-
self considerably useful to both of them, in those hours
of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence
of Jane, he always attached himself to Eliubeth for the
pleasure of talking of her; and when Bing] was gone,
ane constantly sought the same means of re ief.

PRIDE AND nuance :69

“ He has made me so happy,” said the, one evening,
“ by telling me, that he was totally ignorant of my being
in town last spring! I had not believed it possible.”

“I suspected as much,” replied Elizabeth. " But
how did he account for it ? "

“It must have been his sisten’ doing. They were
certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which
I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much
more advantageously in many respects. But when they
see, as I trust they will, that their brother is hapr wi
me, they will learn to be contented, and we sh be on
good terms again; though we can never be what we
once were to each other.’

“That is the most unforgiving speech," said Eliza-
beth, “that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It
would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of
Miss Bingley’s pretended regard! ”

“Would ou believe it, Lizz , that when he went
to town last ovember, he really oved me, and nothing
but a persuasion of my being indifferent would have
prevented his coming down again! ”

“ He made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is
to the credit of his modesty.”

This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane
on his ditﬁdence, and the little value he put. on his
own good qualities.

Elizabeth was leased to ﬁnd that he had not
betrayed the intertirence of his friends; for, though
Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in
the world, she knew it was a circumstance which
must prejudice her against him.

“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that
ever existed! ” cried Jane. "0h! Lizzy, why am
I thus singled from my family, and blessed above them
all! If I could but see you as happy! If there were
but such another man for you! "

I70 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“If you were to give me forty such men, I never
could be so happy as you. Till I have your disposi-
tion, your goodness, 1 never can have your ha iness.
No, no, let me shift for myself; and perhaps, it? have
Very good luck, I may meet with another Mr Collins
in time.”

The situation of alfairs in the Longboum family
could not be long a secret. Mrs Bennet was rivileged
to whisper it to Mrs Philips. and rise ventured: without
allay pemiission, to do the same by all her neighbours in

eryton.

The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the
luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks
before, when Lydia had ﬁrst run away, they had been
generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.

chasm 119’].

NE morning, about a week after Bingley’s
engagement with Jane had been formed, as
he and the females of the family were sitting

together in the dining-room, their attention was
suddenly drawn to the window, by the sound of a
carriage; and they perceived a chaise-and-four driving
u the lawn. It was too early in the morning for
Visitors, and besides, the equipage did not answer to
that of any of their neighbours. The horses were
post; and neither the carriage nor the livery of the
servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As
it was certain, however, that somebody was coming,
Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the conﬁnement of such an intrusion, and walk away
with him into the shrubbery. They both set 01?, and
the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I 7 l

with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open,
and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de
Bourgh.

They were of course all intending to be surprised;
but their astonishment was beyond their ex ctatiou;
and on therrt of Mrs Bennet and Kitty, tlltugh she
was perfec unknown to them, even inferior to what
Elizabeth fe t.

She entered the room with an air more than usually
ungracious, made no other reply to Elizabeth’s saluta-
tion than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down
without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her
name In her mother on her ladyship’s entnnce, though
no request of introduction had been made.

Mrs Bennet, all amazement, though ﬂattered by
having a guest of such high importance, received her
with the utmost liteness. After sitting for a moment
in silence, she said, very stillly to Elizabeth—

"1 hope you are well, Miss Bonnet. That lady, I
sup se, is your mother .’ ”

lizabeth replied very concisely that she was.

“ And llml, I suppose, is one of your sisters? ”

“ Yes, madam,” said Mrs Bennet, delighted to speak
to a Lady Catherine. “She is my youngest girl but
one, my youngest of all is lately married; and my
eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with
a youn man, who, I believe, wil soon become a part
of the amily.”

“ You have a very small park here," returned Lady
Catherine, after a short silence.

" It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady,
I dare say; but, I assure you, it is much larger than
Sir William Lucas’s.”

“ This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room
for the evening in summer: the windows are hill
west."

173 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Mrs Bennet auured her that they never lat there
after dinner, and then added—

“May I take the liberty of asking our ludyship
whether you left Mr and Mrs Collim well?”

“ Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last."

Elizabeth now expected that she would produce o
letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the onl
probable motive for her culling. Ilut no letter appea ,
and she was completely puzzled.

Mrs Bonnet, with great civility, begged her Iadyahip
to take tome refreshment; but Lad Catherine very
resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating any-
thing; and then riuing up, said to Elizabeth—

“Misa Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyiah kind
of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I
should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour
me with your com any.”

“ Go, my dear, ’ cried her mother, “ and show her
ladyship about the different walks. I think she will be
pleased with the hermitage."

Elizabeth obeyed, and, running into her own room
for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs.
As [they] (passed through the hall, Lady Catherine
opened the oors into the dining-parlour and drawing-
room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be
decent-looking rooms, walked on.

Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth
saw that her waitin -woman was in it. They ro-
ceeded in silence algong the gravel-walk that l to
the copee ; Elizabeth wan determined to make no effort
for conversation with a woman who was now more than
usuall inaolent and disagreeable.

“ ow could -I ever think her like her nephew?”
said she, as she looked in her face.

As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine
began in the following manner:—

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 173

“ You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand
the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your
own conscience, must tell you why I come."

Eliubeth looked with unaffected astonishment.

“ Indeed, you are mistaken, madam. I have not
been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you
here.”

“Miss Bennet,” replied her ladyship, in an angry
tone, “ ou ought to know that I am not to be trilled
with. ut. however insincere you may choose to be,
you shall not ﬁnd me so. M character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity an frankness, and in a cause
of such moment as this I shall certainly not depart
from it. A report of a most alarming nature leached
me two days ago. I was told that not only your
sister was on the point of being most advantageously
married, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Bonnet,
would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to
my nephew—my own nephew— Mr Darcy. Though
I him it must be a scandalous falsehood—though I
would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth
of it ossible, I instantly resolved on setting off for
this pace, that I might make my sentiments known
to you.”

“If you believed it impossible to be true,” said
Elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain, “ I
wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What
could your ladyship propose by it .’ "

“ At once to insist upon having such a report univer-
sally contradicted.”

“Your coming so Longbourn, to see me and my
family,” said Elizabeth coolly, “will be rather a
conﬁrmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in
existence."

“If! do you, then, pretend to be ignorant of it?
Has it not. been industrioust circulated by yourselves?

X74 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Do you not know that such a report is spread
abroad ? "

“ I never heard that it was."

“ And can you likewise declare, that there is no
foundation for it ? ”

“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with
your ladyship. Ton may ask questions, which I shall
not. choose to answer.”

“ This is not to be borne! Miss Bonnet, I insist on
being satisﬁed. Has he, has my nephew, made you an
offer of marriage 2 "

“ Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.”

“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains
the use of his reason. But yaur arts and nllurements
may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget
what he owes to himself and to all his family. You
may have drawn him in.”

“ If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”

“Miss Bonnet, do you know who I am? I have
not been accustomed to such language as this. I am
almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am
entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”

“ But you are not entitled to know mine,- nor will
such behaviour as this ever induce me to be explicit.”

“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to
which you have the presumption to aspire, can never
take place. No, never. Mr Darcy is engaged to In]
daughter. Now, what have you to say 2 ” .

“ Only this: that if he is so, you can have no reason
to suppose he will make an offer to me."

Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then
replied—

“The engagement between them is of a peculiar
kind. From their infancy, they have been intended
for each other. It was the favourite wish of H:
mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we

PRXDE AND PRENDICE. I75

planned the union: and now, at the moment when the
wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in their
marriage, to be prevented by a youn woman of inferior
birth, of no importance in the word, and wholly un-
allied to the family? Do you pay no regard to the
wishes of his friends—to his tacit engagement with
Miss dc Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say
that from his earliest hours he was destined for his
cousin i”

" Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that
to me? If there is no other objection to m marrying
your nephew,I shall certainly not be kept rom it by
knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to man
Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you coul ,
in planning the marriage; its completion depended on
others. If Mr Darcy is neither by honour nor inclina-
tion conﬁned to his cousin, why is not he to make
another choice? and if I am that choice, why my I
not accept him ? "

“ Because honour, decorum, pmdence—na , interest,
forbid in Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for a not ex-
pect to be noticed by his family or friends if you wil-
fully act against the inclinations of all. You will be
censured, slighted, and despised by every one connected
with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name
will newer even he mentioned by an of us.”

“These are heavy misfortunes, ’ replied Elizabeth.
“ But the wife of Mr Darcy must have such extraordi-
nary sources of happiness necessarily attached to her
situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
to repinc.”

“ obstinate, headstrong girll I am ashamed of

oul Is this your gratitude for my attentions to you
last spring? Is nothing due to me on that score 2
“ Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss

176 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

Bonnet, that I came here with the determined resolu-
tion of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded
from it. I have not been used to submit to any per-
son’s whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking
disap intment.”

“ Iml will make your ladyship’s situation at present
more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me."

“I will not be interrupted! Hear me in silence.
My daughter and my nephew are formed for each
other. They are descended, on the maternal side,
from the same noble line; and, on the fathers’, from
respectable, honourable, and ancient, though untitled
families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid.
They are destined for each other by the voice of every
member of their respective houses; and what is to
divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young
woman without family, connections, or fortune. Is

' this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be!
If you were sensible of your own good, you would
not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been
brought up.”

“ In marrying your nephew I should not consider
myself as quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I
am a gendeman’s daughter: so far we are equal."

“ True. You are a gentleman’s daughter. But who
was your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts?
Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition.”

“ Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth,
“if your nephew does not object to them, they can be
nothing to you.”

“ Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him l”

Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose
of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this ques-
tion, she could not but say, after a moment’s delibera-
tion, “ I am not.”

Lady Catherine seemed pleased.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I 77

“ And will you promise me never to enter into such
an engagement ? ”

“ I will make no promise of the kind."

" Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I
expected to End a more reasonable oung woman. But
do not deceive yourself into a beief that I will ever
recede. I shall not go away ﬁll you have given me the
assurance I require.”

“ And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to
be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable.
Your ladyship wants Mr Darcy to marry your daughter 5
but would my giving you the wished-for promise make
rba'r marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to
be attached to me, would m, refusing to accept his hand
make him wish to bestow it on his cousin ? Allow me
to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which
you have supported this extraordinary application have
been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged.
You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I
can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How
far your nephew might nppmvc of your interference in
bi: affairs I cannot tell ; but you have certainly no right
to concern yourself in mine. I must be , therefore, to
he importuned no farther on the subject.’

“ Not so hasty, if ou please. I have by no means
done. To all the OZjections I have already urged, I
have still another to add. I am no stranger to the

niculars of your youngest sister’s infamous elo ment.
Iaknow it all ; that the young man’s marrying er was
a patched-up business, at the expense of your father and
uncle. And is web a girl to be my nephew's sister?
Is her husband, who is the son of his late father's
steward, to be his brother! Heaven and earth—of
what are you thinking I Are the shades of Pernberley
to be thus polluted?"

“You can now have-nothing farther to say," she

11. M

I 7 8 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

resentlirlly answered. “ You have insulted me, in every
possible method. I must beg to return to the house."

And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose
also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly
incensed.

“You have no regard, then. for the honour and
credit of my nephew! Unl'eeling, selﬁsh girl! Do
you not consider that a connection with you must
disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?"

“Lady Catherine, I have nothing farther to By.
You know my sentiments."

“ You are, then, resolvad to have him?”

“ I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to
act in that manner which will, in my own opinion, con-
stitute my hap iness, without reference to you, or to any

non so who 1y unconnected with me.”

“ It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You
refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and grati-
tude. You are determined to min him in the opinion
of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the
world.”

“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied
Elizabeth, “ has any possible claim on me in the present
instance. No principle of either would be violated by
my marriage with Mr Darcy. And with regard to
the resentment of his family or the indignation of the
world, if the former «uzrt excited by his marrying me,
it would not give me one moment's concem—and the
world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.”

“ And this is your real opinion! This is your ﬁnal
resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act.
Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will
ever be gratiﬁed. I came to try you. I ho red to ﬁnd
you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I wil carry my
point.”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 179

In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they
were It the door of the carriage, when, turning hastily
round, she added— ‘

“ I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no
compliments to your mother. You deserve no such
attention. I am most seriously displeased.”

Eliubeth made no answer, and, without attempting
to rsuade her Isdyship to return into the house,
will ed quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage
drive away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressingvroom,
to ask why Lady Catherine would not come in again
and rest herself.

“ She did not choose it," said her daughter; “ she
would go.”

“ She is a very line-looking woman ! and her calling
here was prodigious] civil! for she only came, I sup-
pose, to tell us the ollinses were well. She is on her
road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing through
Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I
suppose she had nothing particular to say to you,
lezy ? ”

Elizabeth was forced to give in m a little falsehood
here; for to acknowledge the substance of their con-
versation was impossible.

¢blpttr 117]].

HE discomposure of spirits which this extra-
ordinary visit threw Elizabeth into could not
be easily overcome, nor could she for many

hours learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady
Catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of
this journey from Rosings for the sole purpose of

180 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

breaking of? her supposed engagement with Mr Darcy.
It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what
the report of their engagement could originate, Eliza-
beth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that
bi: being the intimate friend of Bingleyl and brr being
the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the ex-
pectation of one wedding made everybody eager for
another, to supply the idea. She had not herself for-
gotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring
them more frequently together. And her neighbours
at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communi-
cation with the Collinses the report, she concluded, had
reached Lady Catherine), had only set Ilia! down as
almost certain and immediate, which :5: had looked
forward to as possible, at some future time.

In revolving Lady Catherine’s expressions, however,
she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the
possible consequence of her persisting in this inter-
ference. From what she had said of her resolution to
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she
must meditate an application to her nephew; and how
I): might take a similar representation of the evils
attached to a connection with her, she dared not ro-
nounce. She knew not the exact degree of his agec-
tion for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment,
but it was namral to suppose that he thought much
higher of her ladyahip than M: could do; and it was
certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage
with on: whose immediate connections were so unequal
to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest
side. With his notions of dignity, he would probably
feel that the arguments which to Elizabeth had ap-
peared weak and ridiculous, contained mrrch good sense
and solid reasoning.

If he had been wavering before as to what he should
do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 181

entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt,
and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case, he would
return no more. Lady Catherine might see him in her
way through town, and his engagement to Bingley of
coming again to Netherﬁeld must give way.

“ If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise
should come to his friend within a few days,” she
added, “I shall know how to understand it. Ishall
then give over every expectation, every wish of his
constancy. If he is satisﬁed with only regretting me,
when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I
shall soon cease to regret him at all.”

 

The surprize of the rest of the family, on hearing
who their visitor had been, was very great; but they
obligingly satisﬁed it with the me kind .of supposition
which had appeased Mrs Bennet’s curiosity; and Eliza-
beth was spared from much teasing on the subject.

The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she
was met by her father, who came out of his library with
a letter in his hand.

“ Lizzy," said he, “I was going to look for you ;
come into my room.”

She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know
what he had to tell her was heightened by the supposi-
tion of its being in some manner connected with the
letter he held. It suddenly struck her that. it might be
from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay
all the consequent ex lanations.

She followed her ather to the ﬁreplace, and they both
sat down. He then said—

“ I have received a letter this morning that has
astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns
yourself, on ought to know its contents. I did not
know he ore that I had two daughters on the brink of

182 . PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very im-
portant conquest.”

The colour now rushed into Elizabeth’s cheeks in the
instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the
nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined
whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at
all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed
to lwrself; when her father continued—

“ You look conscious. Young ladies have great ene-
tmtion in such matters [as] these; but I think may
defy even our sagacity to discover the name of your
admirer. his letter is from Mr Collins.”

“ From Mr Collins! and what can b: have to say ?”

“Something very much to the purpose, of course.
He begins with congratulations on the approaching
nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which it seems he
has been told, by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by
reading what he says on that point. What relates to
yourself is as follows: ‘Having thus offered you the
sincere congratulations of Mrs Collins and myself on
this happ event, let me now add a short hint on the
subjecto another; of which we have been advertised
by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is
presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner
of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the
most illustrious personages in this land.’

“Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by
this 3—‘ This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar
way, with everything the heart of mortal can most
dcsire,—splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive
patronage. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me
warn my cousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils
you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentle-
man’s proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined
to take immediate advantage of.’

enrnc AND PREJUDICE. 183

“ Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is?
But now it comes out—

“ ‘ My motive for cautioning you is as follows: we
have reastm to imagine that his'aunt, Lady Catherine
de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly
e e.’

y“ Mr Barry, you see, is the man I Now, Lizzy, I
think I Iva-w surprised you. Could he or the Lucnses
have pitched on any man, within the circle of our
acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related P Mr Darcy,
who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish,
and who tobany never looked at you in his life? It
is admirab e! ”

Elizabeth tried to .join in her father’s pleasantry, but
could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had
his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.

“ Are you not diverted ? ”

“Oh! yes. Pray read on."

“ ‘ After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to
her Iadyship last night, she immediately, with her usual
condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion;
when it became apparent, that on the score of some
family objections on the part of my cousin, she would
never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful
a match. I thought it my duty to give the speedicst in-
telligence of this to my cousin, that she and her noble
admirer ma be aware of what they are about, and not
run hastil into a marriage which has not been properly
sanctioned.’—Mr Collins, moreover, adds, ‘ I am truly
rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad business has been
so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should he
so generally known. I must not, however, neglect the
duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amaze-
ment, at hearing that you received the young couple into

184 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of
Longboum, I should very strenuously have opposed it.
You ought certainly to forgive them, as a Christian, but
never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names
to be mentioned in your hearing.'—Tbal is his nation
of Christian forgiveness! The rest of his letter is only
about his dear Charlotte’s situation, and his expecta-
tion of a young olive-branch. But, Lizzy, you look as
if you dld not enjoy it. You are not going to be
ruinirb, I hope, and pretend to be aﬁ‘ronted at an idle
report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our
neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn? '

" 0h ! ” cried Elizabeth, “ I am excessively diverted.
But it is so strange! ”

“ Yes—that is what makes it amusing. Had they
ﬁxed on any other man, it would have been nothing;
but bi: perfect indifference, and year pointed dislike,
make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate
writing, I would not give up Mr Collin’s correspondence
for any consideration. Nay, when I reada letter of his,
I cannot help giving him the preference even over
Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypo-
crisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said
Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to
refuse her consent?”

To this question his daughter replied only with a
laugh ; and as it had been asked without the least sus-
picion, she was not distressed by his repeating it.
Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to
laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had
most smelly mortiﬁed her by what he said of Mr Darcy's
indifference, and she could do nothing but wonder at
such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead
of his seeing too Iitlle, she might have fancied too nub.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 185

Chapter 1171]].

NSTEAD of receiving any such letter of excuse
from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr
Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him

to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady
Catherine’s visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and
before Mrs Bennet. had time to tell him of their having
seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary
dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, ro-
sed their all walking out. It was agreed to. lVIrs
gleanet was not in the habit of walking. Mary could
never spare time, but the remaining live set olf together.
Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to
outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth,
Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very
little was said b either: Kitty was too much afraid of
him to talk ; E izabeth was secretly forming adesperate
resolution ; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same.

They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty
wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no
occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty
left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now
was the moment for her resolution to be executed;
and, while her courage was high, she immediately
said—-

“ Mr Darcy, I am a very sellish creature; and for
the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not
how much I may he wounding yours. I can no longer
help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my
poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been
most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I
feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should
not have merely my own gratitude to ex rem."

“I am sorry, exceedingly son'y," repllied Darcy, in

I86 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

a tone of surprise and emotion, “that you have ever
been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have
given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs Gardiner
was so little to be trusted.”

“You must not. blame my aunt. Lydia’s drought-
lenness ﬁrst betrayed to me that you had been concerned
in the matter; and, of course,I could not rest till I
knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and
again, in the name of all my family, for that generous
compassion which induced you to take so much trouble,
and bear so many mortiﬁcations, for the sake of dil-
covering them.”

“ If you will thank me,” he replied, “let it be for
yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to

ou might add force to the other inducements which
ed me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your
family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them,l
believe I thought only of you.”

Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word.
After a short pause, her companion added, “You are
too generous to triﬂe with me. If your feelings are still
what they were last April, tell me so at once. My
affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word
from you will silence me on this subject for ever."

Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awk-
wardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself
to speak; and immediately, though not very ﬂuently,
gave him to understand that her sentiments had under-
gone so material a change since the period to which he
alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and
pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which
this reply produced was such as he had probably never
felt before, and he expressed himself on the occasion as
sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can
be supposed to do. Had Elibabeth been able to en-

counter his eyes, she might have seen how well the

rams: arm PREJUDICE. r87

expression of heartfelt delight diﬂirsed over his face
becanre him 3 but, though she could not look, she could
listen, and he told her of feelings which, in proving of
what importance she was to him, made his aﬂ'ection
eve'Ey moment more valuable.

hey walked on, without knowing in what direction.
There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said,
for attention to any other objects. She soon learnt that
they were indebted for their present nod understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who 41' call on him in her
return through London, and there relate her journey to
Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her con-
vermtion with Elizabeth ; dwelling emphatically on every
expression of the latter which, in her ladyship’s appre-
hension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assur-
ance, in the belief that such a relation must assist her
endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew
which :1» had refused to give. But, unluckily for her
ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrarywrse.

“It taught me to ho e,” said he, "as I had scarcely
ever allowed myself to ope before. I knew enough of

our disposition to be certain, that had you been abso-
utely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and
openly.”

Elizabeth coloured and Ian hed as she replied, “ Yes,
,you know enough of my frugal“ to believe me capable
of that. After abusing on so abominany to your face,
I could have no sen-p e in abusing you to all your
relations.”

“What did you say of me that I did not. deserve?
I" or, though your accusations were ill-founded, formed
on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time
had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable.
I cannot think of it without abhorrence.”

“ We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame

188 mm: AND PREJUDICE.

annexed to that evening," said Elizabeth; “the con-
duct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproach-
able. But since then we have both, I hope, improved
in civility.”

“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The
recollection of what I then said—of my conduct, my
manners, my expressions during the whole of it—is now,
and has been many months, inexprcssibly painful to me.
Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget:
‘ Had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.’
Those were your words. You know not, you can
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me ;—-—-though
it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable
enough to allow their justice.”

“ I was certainly very far from expecting them to
make so strong an impression. I had not the smallest
idea of their being ever felt in such a way.”

“I can easily believe it. You thought me then
devoid of every proper feeling, I am sure you did.
The turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as
you said that I could not have addressed you in
any ’possible way that would induce you to accept
me.’

“Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These
recollections will not do at all. I assure you, that I
have long been most heartily ashamed of it."

Darcy mentioned his letter. “Did it," said he,
“ did it man make you think better of me? Did you,
on reading it, give any credit to its contents? "

She explained what its effect on her had been, and
how gradually all her former prejudices had been
removed.

“I knew,” said he, “that what I wrote must give
you pain; but it was necessary. I hope you have
destroyed the letter. There was one part, especially
the opening of it, which I should dread you having the

 

13mm: AND PREJUDICE. r89

power of reading again. I can remember some expres-
sions which might ‘ustly make you hate me."

“ The letter sha I certainly be bumt, if you believe it
eucntill to the preservation of my regard: but, thou h
we have both reason to think my a inions not entire y
unaltemble, they are not, I hope, quite so easily changed
as that implies. ’

“ When I wrote that letter,” replied Darcy, “ I
believed myself perfectly calm and cool ; but I am
since convinced that it was written in a dreadful
bitterness of spirit.”

“ The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness; but it did
not end so. The adieu is charity itself—But think no
more of the letter. The feelings of the person who
wrote and the person who received it are now so widely
different from what they were then, that every un-
pleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten.
You must learn some of my philosophy.—Think only
of the past as its remembrance gives you leasure.”

“ I cannot give you credit for any phi osophy of the
kind. Tour retrospections must be so totally void of
re roach, that the contentment arising from them is not
of? philosophy, but, what is much better, of ignorance.
But with me it is not so. Painful recollections will
intmde, which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled.
I have been a selﬁsh being all my life, in practice,
though not in principle. As a child, I was taught what
was right ,- but I was not taught to correct my temper.
I was given good principles, but left to follow them in
pride and conceit. Unfortunately, an only son (for
many years an only child), I was spoiled by my parents,
who, though good themselves (m father particularly,
all that was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encour-
aged, almost taught me to be selﬁsh and overbearing—
to care for none beyond my own family circle, to think
meanly of all the rest of the world, to 111in at least to

I 90 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

think meanly of their tense and worth compared with
my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-and-
twenty; and such I might still have been but for you,
dearest, loveliest Elizabeth I What do I not owe you !
You taught me a lemon, hard indeed at ﬁrst, but most
advantageous. By you I ma properly humbled. I
came to you without a doubt o my reception. You
showed me how insufficient were all my pretensiont to
pleaee a woman worthy of being pleued.’ ‘

“ Had you then persuaded yourself that I should i”

“ Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity?
I believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses."

“ My manners must have been in fault, but not inten-
tionally, I auure you. I never meant to deceive you,
but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you
must have hated me after lbal evening I ”

“ Hate you I I was angry, perhaps, at limit, but my
anger soon began to take a pro 'r direction.”

“ I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of
me when we met at Pemberley. You blamed me for
coming ? "

“ No, indeed, I felt nothing but surpn'zc."

“Your surprize could not be greater than mine in
being noticed by you. My conscience told me that I
deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that
I did not expect to receive more than my due."

“My object lbw,” replied Darcy, “ was to show
you, by every civility in my power, that I was not no
mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to obtain your
forgiveness, to lessen your ill-opinion, by letting ou
see that your reproofs had been attended to. ow
Ioon any other wishes introduced themselves I can
hardly tell, but I believe in about half-an-hour after I
had seen you."

He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her
acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. l9!

interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of
tltat interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister
had been formed before he quitted the inn, and that
his gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from
no other struggles than what. such a purpose must
comprehend.

She expressed her gratitude again; but it was too

painful a suh'eet to each to be dwelt on farther.
‘ After waking several miles in a leisurely manner,
and too busy to know anything about it, they found at
last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be
at home.

“ What could become of Mr Bingley and Jane!”
was a wonder which introduced the discussion of tber‘r
affairs. Darcy was delighted with their engagement;
his friend had given him the earliest information of it.

“I must ask whether you were surprized?” said
Elizabeth.

“Not at all. When I went. away, I felt that it
would soon happen."

“ That is to say, you had given your permission. I
guessed as much.”

And though he exclaimed at the terns, she found
that it had been pretty much the case.

“ On the evening before my going to London," said
he, “I made a confession to him which I believe I
ought to have made long ago. Itold him of all that
had occurred to make my former interference in his
alfairs absurd and impertiuenL His surprize was great.
He had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him,
moreover, that I believed myself mtstaken in supposing,
as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him ;
and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to
her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness
together.”

I92 PRIDE All) mm

Wmﬂuiﬁ-‘Egniuy—u
dﬁeu'gﬂﬁhd.
dz.“vhcnyoulnldhdn-y—nlndl-,¢
mdyﬁuqhhﬂimhﬁ!"

'Fn-theh-u. [Md—nudyd-nulln'
dnhglheNovi-‘nvlichlh‘lhdynckh’
haga-dlvamuinmdnfhu'aﬁliu."

“And yuu’ m of "I. I man, atrial
Mancini-nah"

"Itdid. Bi: ism Minds.
thiﬁdunhdgpt’umdhidqaﬁgmhion
Mmthnmxhunmbmhiminmm-in
mdeau-ydingasy. Ivanhligcdmml'enmc
dingvlichforadngandmnjnlpofanbdlin
[mnldnotallovmydflomldﬂymimhd
huninmvndummhh'iner—dhtlhd
kwnhandpmyomlykqtiﬁunlim. Hens
angry. Bmhhangcr,lampu‘nded,hlndno
hngulhanhemiudinanydnhofyowhﬂ'l
claimants Hehashanily fotgivenmenov.”

EIiubuhlongcdmohumthaxMrBingkyhd
bemanmdcﬁghlﬁdﬁimd—nailyguﬂmhk
ionhnlinnlmhle;bmdnchcchdhudﬁ She
Rmdmtdlhnhehadynmleammbehughcdn,
:ndhwnlhcrmoadymbegin. Inamicipuing
IhehappincnofBingky, which ofeoune'ambe
inferior unlym hisown,hecoutimled 1112mm
Inthchzlllhcyplmd.

PRIDE sun PREJUDICE. 193

than!" 13%.

" Y dear Lizzy, where can you have been walk-
ing to?" was n question which Elizabeth
received from Jane as soon as she entered the

room, and from all the others when they sat down to
able. She had only to say in reply, that they had
wandered about till she was beyond her own know-
ledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that,
nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the tmth.

The evening quietl , unmarked by anything
extraordinary. he acknow edged lovers talked and
laughed; the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy
was not of a di 'tion in which ha piness overﬂows
in mirth; and E‘liorful , agitated am‘lp confused, rather
lam that she was happy, than ﬁll herself to be so;
for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were
other evils before her. She anticipated what would he
felt in the family when her situation became known;
she was aware that no one liked him but Jane, and
even feared that with the others it was a it“: which
not all his fortune and consequence might do aw .

At night she opened her heart to Jane. hough
suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet’s general
habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.

“ You are 'oking, Lizzy. This cannot bel—en-
gaged to Mr l)a l—No, no, you shall not deceive
me. I know it to impossible. '

“This is a wretched beginning indeedl My sole
d ndence was on you; andI am sure nobody else
wi I believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in
earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves
me, and we are enga ."

Jane looked at her doubtingly. “Oh, Lizzy! it
cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”

H. N

I94 PRIDE AND PREJUDICL

“You know nothing of the matter. The! in all to
be forgot. Perha I did not alwayn love him I) well
as I do now. ut in such case: as three a good
memory is unpardonable. This ll the lag time I Ihall
ever remember it myself."

Min Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth
again, and more seriously, assured her of in truth.

“Good Haven! can it be really no? Yet now I
run: believe you," cried Jane. “ My dear, dear Lizzy,
I would—I do congratulate you—but are you certain—
forgive the queoion—are you quite certain that you can
be harfpy with him l ”

“ here can be no doubt of that. It is aettled
between us already that we are to be the ha ieat
couple in the world. But are you pleated, anal
Shall you like to have such a brother?”

“ Very, very much. Nothing could give either
Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered
it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really
love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do any-
thing rather than many without aﬂ‘ection. Are you
quite sure that you feel wlnt you ought to do 2 ”

“ Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I
ought to do, when I tell you all.”

“ What do you mean ? ”

“ Why I must confess that I love him bener than I
do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry."

“ My dearest sister, now be, be serious. I want to
talk very seriously. Let me know everything that I
am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how
long you have loved him?"

“ It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly
know when it began. But I belieVe I must (kite
it from my ﬁrst seeing his beautiful grounds at
Pemberley.”

Another entreaty that she would be serious, however,

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. I 95

produced the desired died, and she soon satisﬁed Jane
y her solemn assurances of attachment. When con-
vinced on that article, Miss Benuet had nothing further
to wish.

“ Now I am quite ha py,” said she, “for you will
be as ha y as myself. ll always had a value for him.
Were it r nothing but his love of you, I must always
have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and
your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself
more dear to me. But, Lizzy, you have been very sly,
very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of
what passed at Pemberley and Lambtonl I owe all
that I know of it to nnother, not to you.”

Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She
had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the un-
settled state of her own feelings had made her ually
avoid the name of his friend. But now she won d no
longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage.
All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in
conversation.

“ Good gracious! ” cried Mrs Bennet, as she stood
at a window the next morning, “if that disagreeable
Mr Darcy is not coming here again with our dear
Bingleyl What can he mean by being so tiresome as
to be always coming here? I had no notion but he
would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not
disturb us with his company. What shall we do with
him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that
he may not he in Bingley’s way.”

Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient
a proposal, yet was really vexed that her mother should
be always giving him such an epithet.

As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at herso
expressively, and ahook hands with such warmth, as left
no doubt of his good information; and he soon after-

 

196 PRIDE AND PRBJUDICE.

wards said aloud, " Mr Bennet, have you no more
lanes hereahouu in which Lizzy may lose her way
again to-day ? "

“ I advise Mr Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,” said
Mrs Bennet, “to walk to Oakhsm Mount thin mom-
ing. It is a nice long walk, and Mr Darcy has never
seen the view.”

“ It may do very well for the others," ied Mr
Bingley; “ but I am sure it will he too much or Kitty.
Won’t it, Kitt 2"

Kitty ownedythat she had rsther stay at home. Darcy

rol'eued s lgreat curiotity to see the view from the
ount, and lizabeth silently consented. As she went
upstairs to get ready, Mrs Bennet followed her, saying—

“ I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should he forced
to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I
hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane’s snke, you
know; and there is no occasion for talking to him,
except just now and then. So do not put yourself to
inconvenience.”

During their walk, it was resolved that Mr Bennet’s
content should be asked in the course of the evening.
Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her
mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his
wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her
abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently
set against the match, or violently delighted with it,
it was certain that her manner would be equally ill
adapted to do credit to her sense; and the could no
more hear that Mr Darcy should hear the ﬁrst raptures
of her joy than the ﬁrst vehemence of her disappmhation. -

 

In the evening, soon after Mr Bennet withdrew to
the library, the saw Mr Darcy rise also and follow
him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She

 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 197

did not fear her father’s opposition, but he was going to
he made unhapp , and that it should be through her
means that 15:, his favourite child, should he distressing
him by her choice, should be ﬁlling him with fears and
regrets in dis ing of her, was it wretched reﬂection,
and she sat Iu misery till Mr Darc ap red again,
when, looking at him, she was a lit e reieved by his
smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where
she was sitting with Kitty, and, while pretending to
admire her work, said in a whisper, “ Go to your father ;
he wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.

Her father was walking about the room, looking grave
and anxious. “ Lizzy,” said he, “ what are you
doing? are you out of your senses, to he acoepting this
man? Have not you always hated him ?"

How earneatly did she then wiah that her former
opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more
moderate! It would have spared her from explanations
and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to
give ; but they were now necesaa , and she assured him,
with some confusion, of her attic ment to Mr Darcy.

“Or, in other words, you are determined to have
him. He is rich, to be euro, and you may have more
fine clothes and line can'iages than Jane. But will they
make ou happy 2”

“Plan you any other ob'ection," said Elizabeth,
“ than your belief of my indi rence i ”

“None at all. We all know him to he a proud,
unpleasant tort of man; but this would be nothing if
you really liked him."

“ I do, I do like him,” she replied, with tears in her

es; “ I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride.

2 is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he
really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him
in such terms.”

“ Lizzy,” said her father, “ I have given him my

198 nuns AND “memos.

consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I
should never dare refuse anything which he condescended
to ask. I now give it to Jon, if you are resolved on
having him. But let me advise you to think better of
it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you
could be neither happy nor respectable unless you tnsly
esteemed your husband—unless you looked up to him as
a superior. Your lively talents would place on in the
greatest danger in an unequal marria e. on could
scarcely escape discredit and misery. y child, let me
not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your
partner in life. You know not what you are about."

Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn
in her reply ; and at length, by repeated assurances that
Mr Darcy was really the object of her choice, by ex-
plaining the gradual change which her estimation of him
had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his
aﬂecdon was not the work of a day, but had stood the
test of many months suspense, and enumerating with
energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her
father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.

“ Well, my dear,” said he, when she ceased speak-
ing, “1 have no more to my. If this be the case, he
deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my
Lizzy, to any one less worthy.” To compete the
favourable impression, she then told him what Mr
Darcy had voluntarily done [or Lydia. He heard
her with astonishment.

“This is an evening of wonders, indeed I And so,
Darcy did everything—made up the match, gave the
money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his com-
missionl So much the better. It will save me a
world of trouble and economy. Had it been your
uncle’s doing, I must and would have paid him; but
these violent oung lovers carry everything their own
way. I shal offer to pay him to-morrow: he will

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 199

rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be
an end of the matter." He then recollected her em-
barrassment a few days before, on his reading Mr
Collins’s letter; and after laughing at her some 'time,
allowed her at lasl. to go, saying, as she quitted the
room, “If any young men come for Mary or Kitty,
send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”

Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a very
heavy weight, and, after half-an-hour’s quiet reﬂection
in her own room, she was able to join the others with
tolerable composure. Everything was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there
was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and
the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.

When her mother went up to her dressing-room at
night she followed her, and made the important com-
munication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for,
on ﬁrst hearing it, Mrs Bennet sat quite still, and un-
able to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, man
minutes, that she could comprehend what she heard:
though not in general backward to credit what was for
the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape
of a lover to any of them. She began at length to
recover, to ﬁdget about in her chair, get up, sit down
again, wonder, and bless herself.

"Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think!
dear me! Mr Darcy! Who would have thought it?
And is it really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how
rich and how great you will be! What pin-money,
what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane’s is
nothing to it—nothing at all. I am so pleased—so
ha py! Such a charming man l—so handsome! so
mlll—Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for m
having disliked him so much before. I hope he wil
overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy! A house in town!
Everything that is charming l Three daughters

200 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

married! 'Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! what
will become of me? I shall go distracted.’ ’

This was enough to rave that her approbation need
not be doubted; and lizabeth, re‘oicing that such an
eﬂ'usion was heard only by hersef, soon went away.
But before she had been three minutes in her own
room, her mother followed her.

" My dearest child," she cried, "I can think of
nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely
more! ’Tis as good as 3 lord! And a special
license! You must and shall he married by a special
license! But, m dearest love, tell me what dish
Mr Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it
to-morrow.”

This was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour
to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth
found, that though in the certain possession of his
warmest aﬁ'ection, and secure of her relations’ consent,
there was still something u) he wished for. But the
morrow passed of much better than she expected; for
Mrs Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended
son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to him,
unless it was in her power to offer him any attention,
or mark her deference for his opinion.

Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father
taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr
Bonnet soon assured her that he was rising every hour
in his esteem.

“I admire all my sons-in-law highly,” said he.
“Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I

shall like your husband quite as well an Jane’s.”

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 20!

Chant" if.

LIZABETH’S irits soon rising to playfulness
again, she wan Mr Darcy to account for his
having ever fallen in love with her. “How

could you begin?" said she. “I can comprehend
your going on charmingly, when you had once made
a beginning; but what could set you off in the ﬁrst
place i ”

“ I cannot ﬁx on the hour, or the spot, or the look,
or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too
Ion ago. Iwas in the middle before I knew that I

begun.”

" My beauty you had early withstood, and as for
my manners—my behaviour to you was at least always
bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you
without rather wishing to give you 'n than not.
Now, be sincere; did you admire me or my impeni-
nence ? ”

“ For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”

" You ma as well call it impem’nence at once. It
was very litt e less. The fact is, that you were sick of
civility, of deferenCe, of oﬂicious attention. You were
disgust with the women who were always speaking
and looking and thinking for your a robotion alone.
I mused and interested you, because was so unlike
than. Had you not been really amiable, you would
have hated me for it; but, in sfite of the pains you took
to disguise yourself, your fee ings were always noble
and just; and, in your heart, you thoroughly despised
the persons who so assiduously courted you. There—
I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and
really, all thin I considered,I begin to think it perfectly
reasonable. 150 be sure, nu know no actual good of
nae—but nobody thinks of},le when they fall in love.”

202 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

“ Was there no good in our affectionate behaviour
to Jane, while she was ill at etherﬁeld ? "

“ Dearest Jane! Who could have done less for
her? But make a virtue of it by all means. My good
qualities are under your protection, and Jon are to
exaggerate them as much as possible; an , in return,
it belongs to me to ﬁnd occasions for teasing and quar-
relling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin
directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling to
come to the point at last? What made you so shy of
me when you ﬁrst called, and afterwards dined here?
Why, especially, when you called, did you look as if
you did not care about me 2"

“ Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no
encouragement.”

“ But I was embarrassed.”

“And so was I."

“ You might have talked to me more when you came
to dinner."

" A man who had felt less, might."

“ How unlucky that you should have a reasonable
answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as to
admit it! But I wonder how long you would have
gone on if you had been left to yourself! I wonder
when you would have spoken, if I had not asked youl
My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to
Lydia had certainly great effect—too much, I am afraid ;
for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs
from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have
mentioned the subject. This will never do.”

“ You need not distress yourself. The moral will be
perfectly fair. Lady Catherine's unjustiﬁable endeavours
to sepamte us were the means of removing all my doubts.
I am not indebted for my present happiness to your
eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in
a humour to wait for an opening of yours. My aunt’s

PRiDE AND PREjUDlCE. 203

intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined
at once to know everything."

“Lady Catherine has been of inﬁnite use, which
ought to make her ha py, for she loves to be of use.
But tell me, what di you come down to Netheri'ield
for? Was it merely to ride so Longboum, and be
embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious
conse uenccs i”

“ y rul purpose was to see Jon, and to judge, if I
could, whether I might ever hope to make you love me.
My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to
see whether your sister was still artial to Bingley, and,
if she were, to make the con ssion to him which I
have since made." .

“ Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady
Catherine what is to befall her i ”

“ I am more like] to want time than courage,
Elizabeth. But it oug t to be done; and if on will
give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done direc y.”

“ And if I had not a letter to write myself, might
sit by you, and admire the evenness of your writing, as
another young lad once did. But I hsve an aunt, too,
who must not be onger neglected.”

From an unwillingness to confess how much her inti-
macy with Mr Darcy had been ovenated, Elizabeth
had never yet answered Mrs Gardiner’s long letter, but
now, having lbs! to communicate which she knew
would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to ﬁnd
that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of
happiness, and immediately wrote as follows :—

“ I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as
I on ht to have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory
detai of particulars; but, to say the truth,I was too
cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But new suppose as much as you chuse; give a loose

204 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

to our fans , indul e our ima 'nation in eve
siblz ﬂight wliich thegsubyject will galfford, and mam
believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err.
You must write again very soon, and praise him a great
deal more than you did in your last. I thank on,
again and again, for not going In the Lakes. ow
could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the
ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every
day. I am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps
other people have said so before, but no one with such
"notice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles,
laugh. Mr Darc sends you all the love in the world
that can be spared rom me. You are all to come to
Pemherley at Christmas—Yours, 81c."

Mr Darcy’s letter to Lady Catherine was in a
diﬁ'erent style, and still different ﬁ'om either was what
Mr Bennet sent to Mr Collins, in reply to his last.

“ Dean Sui,—

“I must trouble you once more for congratula-
tions. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr Darcy.
Console Lady Catherine as well as you an. But, if I
were you, I would stand by the nephew; he has more
to give.—Yours sincerely, 5(C."

Miss Bingley’s congratulations to her brother on his
approaching marriage were all that was aﬂ'ectionate and
insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to
express her delight, and repeat all her former professions
of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected,
and, though feeling no reliance on her, could not help
writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was
deserved.

The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving
similar information was as sincere as her brother’s in

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 205

sending it. Four sides of paper were insufﬁcient to
contain all her delight, and all her meet desire of
being loved by her sister.

Before any answer could arrive from Mr Collins, or
any congratulations to Elizabeth, from his wife, the
Longboum family hesrd that the Collinses were come
themselm to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine
had been rendered so exceedin ly angry by the contents
of her nephew's letter, that harlotte, really rejoicing
in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm
was blown over. At such a moment the arrival of her
friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in
the course of their meetings she must sometimes think
the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr Darcy
exposed to Ill the ing and obseqnious civility of
her husband. He Ie it, however, with admirable
calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas,
when he complimented him on carrying away the
brighten 'ewel of the country, and expressed his hopes
of their 1 meeting frequently at St Jsmes’s, with ve
decent composure. If he did shmg his shoulders, it
was not till Sir William was out of sight.

Mrs Philips's vulgarity was another, and, perha
greater tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs Phlllps,
us well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to
speak with the familiarity which Bingley’s good humour
encouraged, yet, whenever she (Ed speak, she must be
vulgar. Nor was her t for him, though it made
her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant.
Eliubeth did all she could to shield him from the

nent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep
him to herself, and to those of her family with whom
he might converse without mortiﬁcation ; and though
the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took
from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it

206 paws AND PREJUDICE.

added to the ho of the future; and she looked for-
ward with delig t to the time when they should be
removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all
the comfort and elegance of their family party at
Pemberley.

Chapter 1%].

APPY for all her maternal feelings was the day
t on which Mrs Bennet at rid of her two most
deserving daughters. ith what delighted pride
she afterwards visited Mrs Bingley, and talked of Mrs
Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the
sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest
desire in the establishment of so many of her children
produced so hap y an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-in ormed woman for the rest of her life;
though, perhaps, it was lucky for her husband. who
might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a
form, that she still was occasionally nervous, and invsri-
3ny silly.

Mr Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly;
his aﬁ'ection for her drew him oftener from home than
anything else could do. He delighted in going to
Pemberley, especiall when he was least expected.

Mr Bingley and ane remained at Netherlield only a
twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and
Mcryton relations was not desirable even to In": easy
temper, or ber- alfectionate heart. The darling wish of
his sisters was then gratiﬁed : he bought an estate in a
neighbouring county to Derbyshire; and Jane and
Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happi-
ness, were wirhin thirty miles of each other.

Kitty, to her very material advantage, s nt the chief
of her time with her two elder sisters. n society so

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 207

superior to what she had generally known, her improve-
ment was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
tem er as Lydia: and, removed from the. inﬂuence of
Lytiia’s example, she became, by proper attention and
management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid.
From the further disadvantage of Lydia’s societ she
was of course carefully kept; and though Mn ick-
haln frequently invited her to come and stay with her,
with the promise of balls and young men, her father
would never consent to her going.

Mary was the only daughter who remained at home;
and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of ac-
complishments by Mrs Bennet’s being quite unable to
sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the
world, but she could still ruuralizc over every morning
visit; and as she was no longer mortified by compari-
sons between her sisters’ beauty and her own, it was
suspected by her father that she submitted to the change
without much reluctance.

As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered
no revolution from the marriage of her sisters. He
bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must
now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
and falsehood had before been unknown to her, and, in
s ite of everything, was not wholly without. h e that

arcy might et be prevailed on to make his ortune.
The congrat atory letter which Elizabeth received from
Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by his
wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was
cherished. The letter was to this effect—

“ Mv DEAR LIZZY,—

“ I wish you joy. If you love Mr Darcy half so
well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy.
It is a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you
have nothing else to do,I hope you will think of us. I

:08 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE.

am sure Wickham would like a lace at court very
much, and I do not think we have quite money
enough to live upon without some help. Any place
would do, of about three or four hundred a year : but,
however, do not speak to Mr Darcy about it, if you had
rather noL—Yours, ac."

As it happened that Elizabeth had ll!!!" rather not,
she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to eve
entreaty and expectation of the kind. Such relie,
however, as it was in her wer to afford, by the prac-
tice of what might be calm economy in her own pri-
vate expenses, she frequently sent them. It had always
been evrdent to her that such an income as theirs, under
the direction of two persons to extravagant in their
wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insuﬂi-
cient to their support; and whenever they changed
their uurters, either Jane or herself were sure of being
applie to, for some little assistance towards discharging
their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was
unsettled in the extreme. They were always moving
from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and
always spending more than they ought. His affection
for her soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a'little
longer; and in spite of her youth and her manners, she
retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage
had given her.

Though Darcy could never receive bin: at Pemberley,
yet, for Elixabeth’s sake, he assisted him further in his
profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there,
when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London
or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them
frequently stayed so long, that even Bingley’s good
humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as u)
[all of giving them a hint to be gone.

PRIDE AND PREJUDICI. :09

Miss Bingley was very deeply mortiﬁed by Darcy’s
marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the
right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropped all her re-
sentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost
as attentive to Dare as heretofore, and paid off every
srrear of civility to liubcth.

Pemberley was now Georgiana’s home; and the
attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy had
hoped to see. They were able to love each other, even
as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest
0 inion in the world of Elizabeth ; though at ﬁrst she

n listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm
at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother.
He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which
almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object
of open leasantry. Her mind received knowledge
which had, never before fallen in her way. By Eliza-
beth’s instructions she began to comprehend that a
woman ma take liberties with her husband, which a
brother wil not always allow in a sister more than ten
yenrs younger than himself.

Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the
marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all
the genuine frankness of her character, in her reply to
the letter which announced its an'angement, she sent
him language so ve abusive, especially of Elizabeth,
that for some time al intercourse was at an end. But
at length, by Eliubeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed
on to overlook the offence, and seelt a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his
aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection
for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted
herself: and she condescended to wait on them at
Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods
had received, not merely from the rcsenoe of such a
mistress, but the visits of her uncle an aunt from the city.
