 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world’s books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difﬁcult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this ﬁle — a reminder of this book’s long journey from the
publisher to a library and ﬁnally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the ﬁles We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these ﬁles for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each ﬁle is essential for informing people about this project and helping them ﬁnd
additional materials ﬂarough Google Book Search, Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any speciﬁc use of
any speciﬁc book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google’s mission is to organize the world‘s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http: //books . google . com/

 

 

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

 

 

 

 

 

 

       
     
       

‘ it
Emma:

summmmm W}!
L 13

Elysian lﬁm’uim
WIN T

“‘9 ill-E

   

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

M Ma;

 

u

 

 

 

 

 

 

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS

EDITED IV

REGINALD BRIMLEY JOHNSON

IN TEN VOLUMES

VOL. I.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
VOL. I‘

. .49?

 

 

 

 

 

 

x53,”

 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONﬁ

Pan-um or JANE Ausrsu . . . anlixpix:

Eunox Duwma . . . . MG: :7
Aims . . . . . . ,, 81
IMI-I-zurmmr Cukmsrrv . . . ,, :26

The fmntlsplece ls from I pnnnit of June Arman, uld to
have been palntecl, when the war on I vlslt to Bath, It Ibo“!
the age of Min-n, by Johann Zoﬂ'nny. The original ill In the
pounlon of the Rev. J. Morlnnd Rice, Rector of Bnmber,
Suuex, Ind grandson of Mlu Amun‘n second brother, Edward.
R la here reproduced by the klnd permlssion of Mr Klee, who
tell: me that ll formerly belongtd to Colonel Austen of Klpe
plngmnﬂ demand“: of the kind “ Uncle Fr-nclu' Amlen,
who Wu Mlu Austen'u great-uncle, and tha early friend of her
father. He gave It to hla frlend, Mn HIrdlnge~Newmnn, t
devoted Idmlrer of the novelinl, and her Amp-son, Dr Hardlnge-
Newmnl, left I! a; Mr Elm—En.

 

Hr: fullming i: u [in qf Min Amkn’t "welt, chrono-
lngically arrangth :bmiug bow man} Etﬁliom 9f tat/J
were pub/[lived in bar [ilk-lime :—

Dy JANE Austin. Born, Dec. I775. Died, July I8|7.

Mum. nu. gr Wm... Pi.
PRIDE AND Pluvulcl, Oct. l796-AIIg. 1797, I813 (3 add.)
3rd at, 1817

Swan AND Smsxsxun-
(In its present form), . Nov. I797-I798, . .8”, I813
Nol'l'llllhlulﬂt Aluzv (WM:
3 Biographlnl Notice

of the Author). . . . I798, . . III8
Mussle PARK, . . I814, 18:6
Euun. . I8n-I8I6, 18:6
PIIIUIIOION, . HMS

In this edition the novels will be printed in the order
of publication, and from the text of the last edition:
revised by the author. For access to a sci. of ﬁrst
editions, and for other valuable assistance, I am in-
debted to the kindness of Miss Austen’s grand-nephew,
the Rev. A. Austen-Leigh, Provost of King’s College,

X

Cambridge, who» father wrote the memoir of her in
the Slnmlon edition of her novels. My special thanh
are also due to my sister, Min Alice John-on, for her
careful revision of the introduction and helpful suggestion:
with regard to it.

In his life of Jane Austen,” Mr Goldwin Smith
has aaid: “It would be vain to ask that ‘Lady
Susan’ should not be included in future edition: of
Jane Aunten’l work; but such, if Ihe could be hard,
would Certainly be the prayer of her Ihade.” I may
here point out that the prayer will be marlin-d in this
edition.

' “ Great Write" " Series.

 

JANE AUSTEN.

R AUSTEN-LEIGH declares in his memoir
that “there was scarcely a charm in Jane
Austen’s most delightful characters that was

not a true reﬂection of her own sweet temper and
loving heart," and when we think of the two eldest
Miss Bennets, of Emma and “poor Miss Taylor,” of
Elinor Dashwood, Fanny Price, Anne Elliot, and the
"unhernic” Catherine Morland, we realise the com-
prehensiveness of the compliment.

Although few authors have shown a less obtrusive
personality, it is true that we can study her nature
most ﬁll in her books. From the women in them
whom 1e intends us to admire we may perceive her
correct but sincere sentiments, her limited but d3
sympathies, her warm aﬁ'ections, and her sprightly mi
From the characters she ridicules we discover her keen
observation, her love of satire, and her slightly {addioua
reﬁnement, for few have combined so much good nature
and absence of cynicism with an equal seventy towards
vulgarity. To the conception of Jane Austen which
we may gain from her novels, however, the memoir by
her nephew, Mr Austen-Leigh, and the correspondence
edited by Lord Braboumc have added something be-
yond the mere pleasure which the last news of a
favourite author must afford.

Her nephew has given an enthusiastic description of
her appearance, from which we picture her as a “union!

xii JANE AUSTEN.

brunette, with bright hazel eyes and round cheeks,
which Sir Egerton Brydgec called a little too full.
She had good features, and dresred neatly, but her chief
charm arose from the character which animated her face
and her actions.

The description of Anne Elliot’s wise devotion to
her sister’s children, and several other sym iatlmic
references to young people, may prepare us to (ind that
Miss Austen was a great favourite with her nephew-
and nieces, and need to hold them spell-bound by de-
lightfully endlels stories of fairies and fairyland, which
were unlike anything that they had ever read. The art
of understanding children was not generally cultivated
in those days, and in her care sprang from a uyrnpathetic
and unselﬁsh sweetness of nature, which had its bani!
in genuine religious faith.

It seems to me, however, that in hit affectionate
loyalty Mr Austen-Leigh has laid too great a men on
the sweetness of her character as opposed to it: strong
individuality. Her letteru show that she could speak at
sarcastically of her acquaintancel as of the creatures of
her imagination, though she would have scorned to
frighten or hurt anyone by her clevemeu. Elizabeth
Bennet'a remark to Darcy may be accepted an her
creator’s nplagia. "I hope I never ridicule what is
wise or good. Follies and nonleme, whim and
inconsistencien, do divert me, I own, and I laugh at
them whenever I can.” For her family the loved to
point an epigntm or improve an anecdote,nnd the would
often raise a laugh by describing her friends in imaginary
situations, and then making fun of the actions she had
invented for them. ln her letter», almost all of which
were written in her siuler, and therefore should not be
judged as if they had been intruded for publication, it
is not always easy to tell when the sharp laying: are to
be taken seriously, though they would never have been

JANE nus-nan. . ' xiii

misunderstood by her correspondent. These letters
have been often, but perhaps too hastily, dismissed as
disappointing. T are treated as if—to use her own
expression—she ha been merely “ ringing the changes
of the glads and sorrys" throughout. But. though
not revelations like the novels, they are bright and well
written, and give very much the name impression that the
once formulated to her sister, “ I have been talking to

on as fast as I could through the whole of this letter.”

hey show that in many ways she resembled her heroines,
bein ﬁrmly attached to her family, and siren to neigh-
bour y charity, but not averse to dancing, ﬂirting, match-
making, nnd forming new acquaintances. It appears
further that she was an admirable needle-woman, and
had an eye for dress. Like Elinbeth Bennet, she
was a fast and energetic walker.

The letters contain many satiric passages u piquant
as those in the novels, and only less interesting to
in because they refer to persons of whom we know
nothing. The eﬁ'ect produced by her writings upon
one 0 her contemporaries is shown by the following

ge from the biographical notice preﬁxed to Mons.
meimhe de F.’s French translation of Norlbanger
A : “Son talent pour crécr des mracuzres était
nature] et inﬁn. Le Ityle du conespondnnoc était le
méme que celui de aes nouvclles. Tout ce que an
plume tragait étnit parfait; clle avnit des idées claires
sur chaque Iujet, ses expression: éuient toujours bicn
choisies, et je crois ne rien hasarder en ammnt qu’elle
n’a rien écrit, ni lertre, ni billet, qui ne fut digne de
l’impression." This is obviously an exaggeration, but,
from a French writer, it is a striking tribute to Miss
Austen's powers of style. It was written in r814, and
must therefore, so far as it concerns her correspondence,
have been founded on the few letters that were printed
in the original preface to Norlbanger Aug.

XlV JANE AUSTEN.

Something of her character hat been revealed, but of
the events of her life there is little to know. She was
born on December r6, I775, in the pretty little country
parsonage of Steventon, in Hampshire, where she lpent
the ﬁrst twenty-six years of her life. In r801 her
father gave up his parochial duties to his son, and went
with his familyto Bath, where they remained till hie
death in February 1805. The mother and daughter:
then lived for awhile at Southampton, but in r
tettled into what her nephew hat litly called Jane’e
second home at Chawton, near Winchetter, on the
estate which her brother Edward inherited from Mr
Knight of Godmerthnm Park, who had adopted him.
It was here that during the year 18I6 her lalt illness
laid it! hold upon her. She did not quickly give way
to it, and, indeed, suffered comparatively little, but
those who watched her law with :rlnnn how nearlin
her weakness increased, and in May l8l7 the wal

nuaded to move to Winchelter to oomult a Mr

yford—a surgeon of tome reputation. In that city
she died on July 18th, 1817, having at the end told her
attendanu that she wanted “ nothing but death." She
was buried in Winchetter Cathedral.

Of the penont among whom this niet life war (pent,
Mr Austen-Leigh has told in torn ing. Her father,
called at Oxford “the handsome proctor,” and her V
mother, the great niece of old Dr Th hilus Leigh,
sometime matter of Balliol, were not 0 ina people,
the former being distinguished for hie charm o manner
and Ianguine temperament, the latter for her strong
common-sen: and lively imagination. Jane’s live
brothers were all upright and agreeable men, apparently
sharing her affection in equal proportionl, though the
fact of the two youngett having been sailor: accounts
for the enthusiasm for the profession which in nlmwn in
some of her noveln, and the eldest it laid to have
directed her early reading. But the nielnber of the

JANE AUSTEN. XV

family with whom Silt! had the cloocot bond was her
sister Camndra, the “ amiable Min Austen," an the
calll her. Being three earl Jane’s Ienior, ahe was
treated to a sort of con user, and ahe was eminently
ﬁtted for the position by her sympathetic and well-
halanced nature, which had been matured by an un-
mnhitrcring disappointment in love. It we to her that
Jane's letters were nearly all written, and they won
her to have been an ideal elder sister. She was probably
not an intellectual woman, but she wan accomle
according to the mndnrd of her circle, and her rtmit
of her liner, reproduced at the begu'nning of Mr unten-
Leigh’t life, in not without merit.

Cassandra and Jane received their education together,
at .1 school to which the familiar mange in Emma might
probabl he applied.‘ “ Mrs G dard was the mime: of
a achoo -not a seminary, or an establishment, or anything
which professed, in long aentencee of reﬁned nonsense, to
combine liberal acquiremenu with elegant morality, upon
new principch Ind new systems—and where oung ladien
for enormoul pay might be Icrewed out 0 health and
into vanity—but a real, hone-t, old-fullioned boarding
school, where a reasonable quantity of accomplishment.
were told at a reasonable price, and where girl. might
be sent to be out of the way, and ecramble themnelvu
into a little education, without any danger of coming
back prodigien.” They would have been neither able
nor anxioul to indulge in the Min. Bennma’ childiuh
beau. “‘ How long ago i! it, aunt, since we med to

t the chronological order of the Kingsol' England,
With the dates of their accenion, and most of the
principal evenu of their reignc.’ ‘Yea,’ added the
other, ‘ and of the Roman emperor: as low as Sever-m;
besides a real: deal of the heathen mythology, and all '
the met: a, semi-metals, plants, and didnguithed
philoaopheru.’ "

’ An indeed Mr Goldwlmsmllh hu annulled.

xvi JANE AUS‘I‘EN.

Jane Austen had, however, a decided talent for
music, and shared with her family the mate for reading
aloud to which the so often given expnmion in her
book; She also vauired what wan for those days, a
very good knowledge of the French language from a
coulin who came to live with them after her husband,
the Comte do Fcuillade, hall been guillotincd, and who
ultimately married Henry Austen. This lady had
adopted a good many French habit: and ﬂutes, and it
was thin perhaps that led her to take a leading part in
the private theatricala, which the tinnin were accus-
tomed to get up when Jane wat a girl, and which are
wﬁpwaed to have given her material for the [mango in

outﬁeld Part, where Edmund Bertram forsake. hi:
principles to appear on the boards.

Beyond her family were alto many friends and
relatives who came and went acrou the path of
her life, stirring her to various degrees of infection.
But of ac uaintancet formed by literary fame the
had racticaly none. Though her book: were pub-
liehet anonymously, the secret of their autltonhip wan
not very rigorouer kept; but no one teem: to have
sought out the young novelist, and she never thought at
trying to enter any society beyond her family circle.
It i: said that she refused to be introduced as the
author of Prid: (tan Prgjwﬁce, and she once declared
that she was rather frightened by barring that come one
withed to make her acquaintance :—“ If I am a kind of
wild heart I cannot help it. It ll not my own fault.”
In marked contmt to auch writer: as Min Bumey and
George Eliot, the worked all her life without the
stimulus of the intellectual companion-hip and camera:-
tion of literary men. lt is a most renutrkahle fact that
she never alluded to this want, of which she cannot
have been entirely unconscioul. She did not regard
the posseuion of geniun as any excuse for losing her

JANE AUSTEN. xvii

interest in the passing concerns of those around her,.
or even allowing it to slacken. Her correspondence
shows her to have been " one who, among women
of letters, was almost alonejn her freedom from a
lettered vanit "1—a freedom which has indeed been
seldom equallled by authors of her critic’s sex. She
wrote to amuse her correspondents, and seldom re-
ferred to her books. We should have been
to regret the large share of her time And attention which
was given to the aﬂhirs of everyday life if her work
a peared to have suffered from it. But her whole
mlopment was thoroughly healthy and well-balanced.
The self-respect of true genius led her to take pride
and delight in the exercise and perfectingof her were,
and prevented her from yielding to false i als of
self-sacriﬁce.

She began to write at an early I e, and the l imen
which Mr Austen-Leigh gives 0 her chil ' com-
Lositions is certainl clever. Some idea of its date may

gathered from er letter of advice to a. niece, in
which she recommends her to cease writing till the
age of sixteen on the ground that “ she had herself often
wished the had read more and written less in the corre—

nding years of her life.” These lirst nonsensical
pieces were followed by burlesques of the style of
romance which was then fashionable. It seems to me
probable that Lady Susan was written soon after these,
since it is Certainly inferior to her other work, and was
generally believed by her family to be a youthful com-
position. Moreover, it is in the form of letters, like the
ﬁrst draft of Strut and Sensibility.

Her ﬁrst period of serioun composition began early,
and was of brief duration. Pride am! Prg'mﬁre, Sam
and Smribiliq, and Narlbanger Abbey were all written
at Steventon between the ages of twenty-one and twenty-

'Andrew Lang :0 June Allbsten. Lam: “Mention.

xviii JANE ausrnn.

three. During the eight years she spent at Bath and
Southampton the produced nothing but the fragment of
Tb: Walmu, with which she was evidently dissatisﬁed,
and which she never attempted to ﬁnish. When she
had settled in Chawton she revised the three former
novels for the press, and also wrote Emma, wadd
Purl, and Persuasion between the ages of thirty-six
and forty-one. It is generally admitted that she
producod one masterpiece during each of the two
periods. At the time of her death she was engaged
upon a novel, of which a few extracts have been pub-
lished, but we have not sulﬁcient material to judge even
of its promise.

We are told that she wrote always on little slips of
paper in the famil sitﬁng—mom, and never resented
Interruptions, her riends, indeed, not being generally
aware of what she was doing. As Mr Goldwin Smith
has suggested, she was probably enabled to work thus
only after a good deal of thought, and much may have
been elaborated in her mind before the business of
transcribing began. Although she wrote entirely about
the class in which she mixed, her characters were never
exact portraits. She considered the drawing from
individuals to be an “invasion of social proprieties," and
added that she was “too proud of her nrlernen to
admit that they were only Mr A. and alone] B."
She did not ﬁnd her inspiration in books, though the
correctness and ﬁnish of her style must have been partly
due to her reading. We do not hear that she had
any wide acquaintance with literature, but she was
familiar with the works of Richardson and Miss
Burney, while she loved Dr Johnson and Crabbe,
especially the latter, and declared that “if ever she
married at all, she could fancy being Mrs Crabbe."
It is fortunate, however, that she did not attempt to
imitate any of them in her writings.

JANE AUSTEN. XIX

A curious correspondence has been published, and
often commented upon, between Jane Austen and the
Prince Regent's worthy librarian, Mr Clarke. The
Prince is said to have admired her novels, and, on hear-
ing that she was visiting town, commissioned Mr Clarke
to show her his library, and ive her leave to dedicate
a Future novel to his Royal I-iighness. She was shown
every attention, and the librarian, we presume on llil
own authority, afterwards roposed to her two subjects
on which she might sui I employ her ius—the
life of a model and cultivate! clergyman, an thehiltory
of the House of Cobourg. Miss Austen. of course.
declined the oli'er with all the demure propriety of
which she was mistress. It was this incident in rt.
no doubt, that suggested the spirited Plan if a we!
«curring la Hint:er Van'mu Quartz", in which Ilse
touches of? the conventional British hero of funk and
noble masculinity, and the heroine of the sweet ivy type
in the midtt of a world of inedeemble villains.

With singular self-insight Jane Austen spoke once of
the “little bit of ivory two inches wide, on which she
worked with a brush so ﬁne as to produce little elTect
after much labour." She gives us a further glimpse of
her methods in the following comments on a young
relative’s attem ts in the art of novel writing:—“ You
are now collecting your people delightfully, getting them
exactly into such a spot as is the delight of my life.
Three or four families in a country village is the very
thing to work on, and I ho you will do a great deal
more, and make full use 0 them, while they are no
favourably arranged," 0n the “two-inch hit of
ivo ” of a country village she drew her ﬁnished
miniatures, and took every advantage of the “ favourable
arrangement.” Moreover, there is a sense in which

she roduced little effect after much labour. Her
nove s are practically without plot or passion, and treat

XX JANE AUSTEN.

only of a limited class during a particular period. The
country life of the upper middle class at the beginning
of the century is her theme, and she makes no effort to
vary it. It is moreover in the course of their daily
life that her characters betray themselves, on those trivial
occasions when humanity does not take the trouble to
act a part. \Vith the supreme moments of misery or
exaltation she has seldom concerned herself.

The well-known entry in Sir Walter Scott’s journal,
under March 1+, 1826, contains an allusion to the
same characteristics. “ Read again, and for the third
time at least, Miss Austen’s very ﬁnely written novel,
Pride and Prg'mﬁu. That young lady had a talent for
describing the involvements and feelings and characters of
ordinary life, which is to me the most wonderﬁil I ever
met with. The big Bow-Wow strain I can do myself
like any now going; but the exquisite touch, which
renders ordinary commonplace things and characters
interesting from the truth of the description and the
sentiment, is denied to me. What a pity such a gifted
creature died so early.” This is a genial apprecia-
tion, more judicious perhaps than his article in the

uarrtrly for 18:8. Not even the authority of Sir

alter Scott can convince us that Eliubeth Bennet
was induced to accept Darcy by the sight of his ﬁne
estate, or that Mr Woodhuuse and Miss Dates are “ too
often brought forward, and too long dwelt upon.”
His conclusion is interesting, however. “Upon the
whole, the tone ol‘ this author’s novels bars the same
relation to that of the sentimental and romantic cast,
that comlields and cottaves and meadows bear to the
highly adorned grounds air: show mansion or the rugged
sublimitics of a mountain landscape. It is neither so
captivating as the one, nor so grand as the other, but it
sﬂords to those who frequent it a pleasure nearly allied
with the experience of their own social habits."

JANE AUSTIN. XXI

In I821 Archbishop Whately reviewed her novels
for the Quarterly in a more enthusiastic ayle. pronounc-
in Permuion to be “ one of the most elegant ﬁctions
0 common life we ever remember to have met with."

There is abundant internal evidence of Miss Austen'-
lteen interest in her worlt, which is all) diocloeed in
her lettcrn. Norlbmrger Aug contains a preterit against
the novelist's conventional abun of novels, in which
she dcscribel incidentally her own ideal. She complains
that they join the public in “ slighting the performances
which have only genius, wit, and taste to recommend
them," and will not sull'er their heroines to de rade them-
selvel by the meal of “ some worlt in wlu': lb: 'mlul
powers sf 1 Mimi are rl'irﬂryul, in wbitb l mu!
Ibongb lam/edge of Lumen nature, lb: happier! (Is/inm-
tioa qf it: wrim‘u, IL: livelier! axiom 4] soil am!
bumr, are ton-or}!!! (r [be 10 in to: but than
language.”

Such was Miss Austen’e notion of what her art
should be, and the application of the words to her own
writings would hardly be :In cxaggemtion.

She had not perhaps the most complete knowledge of
human nature, but within her range she succeeded in
producing a marvellous variety. Lord Macaulay has
emphasised this point with his accustomed generority of
treatment in his essay on Fanny Bumey. “Highest
of those who have exhibited human nature by means of
dialogue stands Shakerpenre. His variety to like the
variety of nature, endless diversity, scarcely any mons-
trosity. . . . . Shakespeare has neither equal nor second.
But among the writers who, in the point which we have
noticed, have approached nearest to the manner of the
great matter, we have no hesitation in placing Jane
Austen, a woman of whom England is juatly proud.
She has given us a multitude of characters, all, in a
certain sense, commonplace, all such a: we meet every

xxii nun aus'rnu.

day. Yet they are all as perfectly discriminated from
each other as if they were the most eccentric of human
beings. There are, for example, four clergymcn, none
of whom we should be su rised to ﬁnd in an panon-
age in the kingdom—Mr 'dward Ferraro, r Henry
Tilne , Mr Edmund Bertram, and Mr Elton.

are nl specimens of the upper part of the middle class.
They haw all been liberally educated. They all lie
under the restraints of the same sacred profeuion.
They are all young. They are all in love. Not one
of them has any hobby-horse, to use the phrase of
Sterne. Not one has a ruling passion, such as we read
of in Po . Who would not have ex ted them to
be intipi likenesses of each other? 0 such thing.
Ha gon is not more unlike to Jourdain, Joseph
Suriiize in not' more unlike to Sir Lucius 0’ Trigger,
than every one of Miss Aulten's young divines is to all
his reverend brethren. And almost all this is done by
touches to delicate that they elude analysis, that they
defy the powers of description, and that we know them
to exist only by the general eﬁ'ect to which they have
contributed.”

Lord Macaulay might, perhaps, have chosen a more
fortunate set of examples, for it would scarcely be rash
to say that the ﬁrst three young clergymen could often
have changed places without doing much violence to
their characters. But it would be diﬂicult to ﬁnd any
other persons in Miss Austen's novels to whom the
process could he applied, and the truth of his general
statement remaint unshaken. Where he has hesitated
to analyse the touches of dilferentiation, we may safely
any that they are almost indescribable.

Individuality is naturally most marked in her heroines,
in whom she took an especial pride. Elizabeth Bonnet
was her own favourite, and merits the distinction. She
had the feminine capacity for making up her mind at

JAM: ausnzn. xxiii

once on any subject, and was generally in the right.
She expressed her opinions, moreover, with wit and
decision. But when moon and a clearer knowledge
of the facts proved her to be in the wrong, she was
magnanirnous enough to acknowledge her mistake, and
conquered her own prejudices while she disarrned her
lover’s pride. To a critical and independent mind, and
a strong sense of justice, she united an aﬂ'ectionzte and
sympathetic heart. Her good sense deserted her but
once in her life, when she let L din go to Brighton
without telling her father so 'ng of Wickham’s
character. 'l‘ he exi ncies of the lot may require the
blunder to be made, ut amnot |y excuse it. And
we must feel that—with the exception of a few ex-
aggerations, perhaps allowable in satiric sketches such as
Lady Catherine or Mr Collins, and a few ungentlemanly
exhibitions of Darcy’s arrogance—it is the only blot on
this most brilliant novel of character.

There are many of Miss Austen's admirers who ﬁnd
Emma more attractive than Elizabeth :—“ Such' an
eyel—the true hazel eye—and so brilliant! regular
falturcs, open countenance, with a complexion! oh,
whnt .1 bloom of full health, and such a pretty height and
size! such a ﬁrm and upright ﬁgurel There is health
not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, her
glance. One hears something of a child being the
‘ 'cture of health ' ; now, Emma always gives me the
i ea of being the corn lete icture of grown-up health.
She is loveliness itseli. r Knightley, is not she?”
cries Mrs Weston, and the ruder is carried away by
her enthusiasm. Emma is impulsive also, but her ruling
passion is a love of making plans and managing people.
“Ah! m dear, I wish you would not make matches
and forete | things, for whatever you say always comes
to pass,” remarks her old father, with the most unin-
tentional sarcasm.

xxiv JANE nus-ran.

Emma, however, learns wisdom the failure of
her schemes while she loses none 0 the courageous
vivacity which led her to disregard the ‘ble criti-
cisms of her neighbours. In this story in Austen
seems to advocate the theory that a man and woman
may venture to judge of each othcr't wsoeptibilities, and
may cultivate a friendship without the danger of raising
expectations which they are not prepared to fulﬁl.
Emma has sufﬁcient acuteness to nteamre the extent
of Frank Churchill’s interest in her. She deliberately
chooses his society without wishing to attach him, and

rmita his marked gallantry without yielding her hurt.

hey understand each other rfectly well, and are only
put into a false position by is unjustiﬁable manner of
keeping the secret of his engagement, for which his tem-
porary discomﬁture is scarcely a suﬂicient punishment.

It seems to me that these are Min Austen's great
conceptions. Her other heroine: but play their rt,
though it be a leading one, in the stories they am,
and cannot stand alone. They were created to ﬁll the
centre of a pre-conceived plot, as Emma and Pride and
Prg’udirr, were written to illustrate the character: of
their heroines. Elinor and Marianne Dashwood exist
only to draw out each other; Fanny Price preserves
her innocence amidst worldly frivolity; Anne Elliot's
sWL-et tern r and resignation in contrasted with the
selﬁsh rid): of her family; and Catherine Morland
stands or young enthusiasm, steeped in romance and
destined to learn that life is diﬁ‘erent from Mn Rad-
cliﬂ'e’s novels. ‘ Each poms an individual character
carefully maintained, but she does not by any means
absorb the reader’s interest and attention.

Miss Auuten’s agreeable women do not tmrtsgress the
limits of a somewhat narrow ideal of feminine excel-—
lence, in which the main ingredients are strong aﬁections,
constancy, a love of nature and books, good looks, good

JANE AUSTEN. XXV

temper, and good breeding. Greater laxity is allowed
the men. Darcy is without the opener: of diepoaition
that charms in Wickharn and Willoughby; while
Bingley, Wentworth, and Edward Ferrara have none of
that proper muculine obetinacy and self-conﬁdence
which compel our reqiect for Darcy and Mr Knightley,
and Edmund Bertram and Henry Tilney are prigt,
respectively tolemn and vivacious.

And while the conception of a gentleman it lets
deﬁnite, the women are aometimel unable to die-
tinguioh between the reality and the imitation. One
ll lurprieed to ﬁnd Mr Knightley and Wickham, Darcy
and Mr Elton, included by their acquaintance: in the
name category. Mina Austen it, of course, aware of
the diﬂ'erencet, and let: her reader into the Iecret; but
the does not tcruple to describe her heroine! u partially
deceived, in tpite of their natural reﬁnement. Till!
auumption of an uncritical attitude on the part of women
belongs to her inaggreuive canventionaliam and comer-
vatiam. Mr Goldwin Smith has detected “ a llth of
Radical tympnthy with the o rented governess," in the
treatment of " poor Mien Taiylor " ; but on the subject
of marriage, with which her novels are mainly con-
cerned, Ihe adopted the princiylet of the more rational
and high-minded portion of her conservative contem-
Porarieu, only applying them with an unutual width of
judgment.

he lIIl held u to ridicule the folliel and evil: of
matchmaking in r! Bennet, Mn Norrie, and Emma,
but, in her own reﬁned way, the was hernell‘ a match-
maker at heart. She had a personal affection for the
daughters of her pen, and delighted in getting them
good huxbnnds; regarding marriage at woman'l voca-
tion, and n second attachment at “ the only thoroughly
natural, happy, and sufﬁcient cure ” for an early dit-
appointment in love, though theoretically, as Emma tells

xxvi JANE AUSTEN.

the wondering Harriet, “it is poverty only which make:
celibacy contemptible to s generous public! A tingle
woman with a very narrow income must be a ridiculous,
disagreeable old maid! the proper sport of boys and
girls; but a single woman of good fortune is always
mectable, and may be as sensible and plenum a: any-

y else! And the distinction is not quite so much
against the carndour and common-sense of the world as
appears at ﬁrst; for a very narrow income has a
tendency to contract the mind, and tour the temper.
Those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a
very small, and generally very inferior, society, may
well be illiberal and cross."

This ﬁrm and not unreasonable belief in the dair-
ubleneso of a competency tingcs the matrimonial views
of Miss Austen's heroines, who, it must he admitted,
have a tendency to hill in love “ very suitably.” But
apart from her treatment of Willoughby and Lucy
Steele, the has shown her contempt for mercenary
marriages in the caustic sentence pasted on Maria
Bertram—“In all the important preparations of the
mind she wan complete : being prepared for matrimony
by a hatred of home, restraint, and tranquillity ; by the
misery of disappointed affection, and contempt of the
man the was to marry ;" as well as in the whole story
of Charlotte Lucas’s marriage. She named an early
day because “the stupidity with which [Mr Collins]
was favoured by nature must guard his courtship front
any charm that could make a woman wish for its con-
tinuance,” and when they were married the encouraged
his taste for gardening and chose for herself a back
sitting-room that he might be less often tempted to
disturb her. Elizabeth visited her friend and found
that Charlotte—

" Like a well-conditcted person,
Went on cutting bread and butter "

JANE aus'rrm. xxvii

and ﬁlling her mind entirely with domestic concerns.
She had “to acknowledge that it was all done very
well,” but there was a heavy price to pay, and Char-
lotte’s life must have been a poor one.

Miss Austen’s heroines expect to derive instruction, I:
well as a competency from their husbands. Here, again,
she ridicules the extreme form of a convention, while
tacitly assuming its correctness in moderation. The com-
monplace masculine attitude towards women has seldom
been so severely handled as in the following pus:
from the description of one oantherine Morland s ear y
conversations with Henry 'I"|lney-——" She was hardly
ashamed of her ignorance-4 milplaced shame. Where
gople wish to attach, they shoud always be ignorant.

0 come with a well-informed mind is to come with an
inability of administer-in to the vanity of others, which a
sensible person would a ways wish to avoid. A woman,
e ‘ ly, if she have the misfortune of knowing my
thlng, should conceal it as well as she can.

“ The advantages of natural folly in a beautiful girl
have been already set forth by the capital pen of a sister
author, and to her treatment of the subject I will only
add, in justice to men, that though, to the larger and
more triﬂing part of the sex, imbecility in females is a
great enhancement of their personal charms, More 1': a
portion of (Iran m Runnable, mu! loo well-bme [Lern-
ulsm, lo (lair: anytlving more in a woman [ban ignoranre.”

Even Mr Kni htley and Darcy, however, cannot
entirely avoid a di tic tone towards the women they
admire, who are indeed comparatively uninformed, not
having the patience to perfect themselves in any accom-
plishments, but yet are characterised intellectually by
quick intuitions, iympathetic receptivity, and power of
apt expression. he Miss Dashwoods and Fanny Price
take more interest in literary pursuits, but also illus-
trate the familiar truth on the acceptance 0 which the

xxviii is": AUSTEN.

novelist’s popularity must ordinarily depend : that “the
proper study of mankind is man."

he preponderance of human interest in her novels is
shown also in the strong Family affections she depicts.
It was the unity of her own family, and especially her
affection for her only sister, which led her to make
this feature so prominent and produced the two delight-
ful pairs of sisters that udorn her earliest novels. But
though Jane and Elinor, and Elizabeth and Marianne
may slightly resemble Cassandra and Jane Austen

ctively, it is obvious that th are not rtraits.

uch are some of the characteristics of iss Austen’s
heroes and heroines, and of the society in which they
move. But this by no means exhausts the interest of
her novels, in which the minor characters play an im-
pomsnt part Though she had a strong natural distaste
for pictures of guilt and misery, she has drawn us some
villains who wear sheep's clothing for a considerable

riod, and seriously interfere with the coune of true

ove. Wickhsm belongs to a somewhat commonplace
type, being cool, selﬁsh, and calculating, pleasing in his
address and a skilful liar. Willoughhy’s unaffected
rem-ibin is a more original conception, which is well sus-
tained. But the superior members of this class are the
Crawfords. They must be called villains, inasmuch as
they play the part of evil genius to hero and heroine
respectively ; but they are the cleverest and most attrac-
tive people in Mar-yield Part. Miss Austen seems to
have yielded to a sort of retributive conscientioomess,
when she allowed Henry Crawford to come to a had
end after permitting him so much regeneration. It is
the only one of her novels in which one regrets the
climax of the plot. Henry’s tactful geniulity and sell"-
conﬁdence would have developed Fanny, as much as
Mary’s spirits and good sense would have awakened
Edmund; and the actual Edmund Bertram must have
been a prodigioust dull couple.

JANE MISTER. xxix

The development of the story often depends in port
on the singular stupidit of the parents and gum-dime.
With the exception 0 the Gardinen, the Westons,
and Lady Russell, they are either too feeble-minded
or too eccentric to guide the young people under their
charge, and seldom show any uneasiness on account
of the fact. The incﬂicicncy of Mr and Mrs Bonnet
and of Lady Bertram is described with peculiar humour,
while It the head of Miss Austen’s marvellous gallery
of satiric portraits, surpassing even Mr Collins and Miss
Bates, looms the pompous person of Lady Catherine
de Burgh, who constitutes herself director-general to
humanity, and elTects no more than the annihilation of
her dau hter’s individuality. Mrs Norris has some-
thing of; the same spirit, but, being without Lady
Catherine’s supreme self-satisfaction, is altogether a less
successful conception

In these characters Miss Austen realises another part
of her deﬁnition of the rfect novel which should con-
tain “ the liveliest eﬂ'usrons of wit and humour,"—two
nalitics which nrc not in fact generally found together.
here is wit in her compact, pithy style and spirited
conversations, humour in many: subtle suggestion, situa-
tion, and delicate piece of character drawing. Elizabeth
Bennett, for instance, is witty, her father humorous.
Again. Mrs Norris is a creation of wit, Lady Bertram
of humour, and other exam les of both might be given.
But 'the inn h is never latter, the gaicty rings true.
The cheerfu ness and even high spirits of her tone
seem the more remarkable when we consider the some-
whnt monotonous tenor of her own life, and the same
teanmmL-nt is conspicuous in her heroines.

nd linnlly, says the deﬁnition, the knowledge and
skill of the novelist should be “ conveyed to the world
in the best chosen language." It is clear that Miss
Austen took great pains to perfect her style, and no one

:

XXX JANE AUSTBN.

will quarrel with the result. Her phralel are evidently
polished with care, and words are chosen both for their
sound and sense. One may almost say that the root.
effective word is always found. And yet, a rt from
the grammatical inaccuracies which belong to her
period, the was sometimes reckless about details. such
as the use of pronouns, and, if she could express an
idea clearly and ultisfy herself as to the balance of a
sentence, the did not always take much trouble over in
construction. She says of Pride and Prg‘udiur—
“There are a few typical more. A ‘nid he' or
‘ said she’ would sometimes make the dialogue more
immediately clear; but‘I do not write for such dull
elvet’ at have not a great deal of ingenuit in them-
selves." Familiarity with her books, as wel at a cer-
tain delicacy of perception, is necessary for their hill
enjoyment, but her phrases, when once awrcciatctl,
remain in the memory from their exquisite appropriate-
ness. She can touch of? a character in a sentence, or ﬁll
in the ﬁrst sketch by a marvellously minute elaboration
of that which the reader had already In rfect.
Her favourite device of giving the Eu gilto conver-
sations without actually mailing them, may perhaps be
mentioned here. She omits no detail, however trivial,
that can amuse the reader or illustrate character, and
yet avoids the prolixity of a verbatim report. Mn:
Elton is saved from dulnets by this method, and a
striking example of it occurs in Stilt: um! Smribiﬁly,
where n large party are expressing their opinions as to
the relative heights of two boys in the presence of one
of them. There are the relations of each to ﬂatter, and
cveryonc’s civility is put to the test.——“ Lucy, who was
hardly lets anxious to please one parent than the other,
thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age,
and could not conceive that there could be the smallest
dilTerence in the world between them; and Miss Steele,

JANE AUSTEN. mi

with yet greater address, gave it, as fast she could, in
favour of each.”

Perhrt s the best epitome of Miss Austen’s style is to
be found’ in her own account of her impressions on
hearing Pride and Prg'udiee read aloud, which also
illustrates the pleasure she took in applying humorous
criticisnr to herself :—-“ Upon the whole, however, I
am quite vain enough and well satisﬁed enough. The
work is rather too light, and bright, and qmrkling;
it wants shade, it wants to be stretched out here and
there with a long chapter of sense, if it could be had ;
if not, of solemn specious nonsense, about something
unconnected with the story, an essay on writing, a
critique on Walter Scott, or the history of Buonapruu,
or something that would form I contrast. and bring the
reader with increased delight to the playfulness and
epigrarnmaticism of the general style."

REGINALD Bum.“ Jamison.

We learn from the preface to [nub Swan that Sam
and Semibilily was ﬁrst written in the form of letters.
The reference here is evidently to the earlier story of
Elinor and Marianne, which was partially incorporated in
Smut um! Sunribiliy, and which gives it a claim to he con-
sidcrcd the earliest of her published compositions. In
its present form the story was begun, says Mr Austen-
Lcrgh, in November 1797. and ﬁnished in r798,
though it was not revised for press till after Miss
Austen’s settlement at Chnwton in r809. The follow-
ing editions appeared during her life-time :—

A. " Sense and Sensibility,” a novel, in three volumes. by a
lady. London. l’rlnted {or the author by C. Roworth. Bell-

ysrd, Temple Bar, and published by'l'. Egerton, Whitehall,
18H.

xxxii JANE AUSTEN.

E. “Settle Ind Sen-lblllty." I navel, In three volumee, by
the authnr of “Prlde and Prejudlee." the Iewnd edition.
London. Printed lot the author, by C. Rmnh, Bell—yard,
Temple Bar, and publlthed by 'l‘. Exerton. Whitehnll, I'lg.

The book has tince been brought out by various
publishera, and in several series. It form: the EM
volume of Megan Bentley'l Library Edition, known at
the S/wmlau Edition, 1882, 81:. To the reprint in
Bentley’n Standard Now/r, 183 ,‘il irclixcd a memoir
of Miss Amten, which her [anti he icve to have been
written by her brother. the Rev. . Aumn. It contain:
little more than the memoir of I8I8, which in very
likel from the lame pen.

he present edition in a reprint of B. In the few
case: where obvious ermrt have crept into the text, the
reading of A. ha: been followed, and thie in indicated
by the word! being enclosed in equare brackets.

For the sale of Sam and Strait-'54, Miss Auuen
received £1 50, which oeemed to her a magniﬁcent nun.
In a letter to her sitter Cassandra, dated April 15th
181 I, the writes: “No, indeed, I am never too busy
to think of S. and 8.: I can no more forget it than a
mother can forget her tucking child . . . the innate:
remain 3: they were, but I will get them altered if I can
. . . I think [Mrs Knatchhull] will like my Elinor, but
cannot build on anything else." She canﬁdcd to her
family that “Anne Steele never luccccdul in catching
the doctor."

ii»

 

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

‘.

chapter 3.

HE family of Dnshwood had been long settled
in Sussex. Their estate was large, and their
residence was at Nurlnnd Park, in the centre of

their property, where for msny generations they had
lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general
good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance. The
ate owner of this estate was a single man, who lived
to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life had a constant companion and housekeeper in his
sister. But her death, which happened ten years before
his own, produced a great alteration in his home; for '
to supply her loss, he invited and received into his house
the amily of his nephew, Mr Henry Duhwood, the
legal inheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to
whom he intended to bequeath it. In the society of
his nephew and niece, and their children, the old
gentleman’s days were comfortably spent. His mach-
ment to them all increased. The constant attention of
Mr and Mrs Hemy Dashwoorl to his winhcs, which
proceeded not merely from interest, but from goodness
of heart, gave him every degree of solid comfort which
his age could receive; and the cheerfulnesl of the
children added u relish to his existence.

I. A

I SENSE AND SENSIMLITY.

By a former marriage, Mr Henry Dashwood had
one son; [3 his yresent lady, three daughters. The
son, a stea y, ble oung man, was amply pro-
vided for by the omme 0 his mother, which had been
large, and half of which devolved on him on his coming
of age. By his own mania e, likewise, which hap
soon afterwards, he ad to his walth. To him,
therefore, the succession to the Norland estate was not
so really important as to his sisters; for their fortune,
independent of what might arise to them from their
father’s inheriting that property, could be but small.
Their mother had nothing, and their father only seven
thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the remain-
ing moiety of his ﬁrst wife’s fortune was also secured to
her child, and he had only a life interest in it.

The old gentleman died; his will was read, and like
almost every-lather will, gave as much disappoith as
plmure. e was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateful,
as to leave his estate from his nephew; but he left it to
him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest. Mr Dashwood had wished for it more for
the sake of his wife and daughters than for himself or
his son ; but. to his son, and his son's son, a child of four
ears old, it was secured, in such a way, as to leave to

'mself no power of providing for those who were most
dear to him, and who most needed a provision, any
charge on the estate, or by any le of its vs unble
woods. The whole was tied up for the hem-fit of this
child, who, in occasional visits with his father and
mother at Norland had so far gained on the affections
of his uncle, by such attractions as are by no was
unusual in children of two or three years old: an im-
perfect articulation, an earnest desire of having his own
way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as
to outweigh all the value of all the attention which, for
years, he had received from his neice and her daughters.

SENS! AND SINSXBILITV. 3

He meant not to be unkind, however, and as a mark of
his affection for the three girls, he left them a thousand
pounds a-piece.

Mr Dashwood’s diaa intment was at ﬁrst severe;
but his temper was chee ul and sanguine, and he might
reasonably hope to live many yearn, and by living econ-
omically, lay by .1 considerable sum from the produce of
an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. But the fortune, which had been so
tardy in coming, was his only one twelvemonth. He
survived his uncle no longer; and ten thousand pounds,
including the late legacies, was all that remained for his
widow and daughters. '

His son was sent for, as soon as his danger was
known, and to him Mr Dashwood recommended, with
all the strength and urgency which illness could com<
mad, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.

Mr John Dnshwood had not the strong feelings of
the rest of the family; but he was affected by a res
commendation of such a nature at such s time, Ind
he promised to do everything in his power to make
them comfortable. His father was rendered easy by
such an assurance. and Mr John Dnshwood had then
leisure to consider how much there might prudently be
in his power to do for them.

He was not an ill-disposed young man, unlcsn to be
rather coli-heaned, and rather llellllllll, is to be ill-
di sed: ut he was, in nem,we respected; for
lreﬁnducted himself with gpempriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties. Had he married a more amiable
woman, he might have been made still more respectable
than he was; he might even have been made amiable
himself; for he was very young when he married, and
very fond of his wife. But Mrs John Dashwood was
a siren caricamre of himself; more narrow-minded
and sel sh.

4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

When he gave his promise to his father, he meditlted
within himself to increase the fortunes of his ﬁtters
by the present of a thousand pounds .1- iece. He then

’ really thought himself equal to it. e pmsycct of
four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother‘s fortune,
warmed his heart and made him feel ca hie of generos-
ity. “Yes, he would give them three oumnd pounds :
it would be liberal and handsome! It would be
enough to make them completely ea . Three thous-
and pounds! he could re so cansi cable A sum with
little inconvenience.” e thought of it all day long,
and for many days successively, and he did not repent.

No sooner was his father’s funeral over, than Mn
John Dalhwood, without sending an notice of her
intention to her mother-in-law, nrriv with her child
and their attendants. No one could dilpute her right
to come; the house was her husband’s from the mo-
ment of his father’s decease; but the indelicacy of her
conduct was so much the greater, and to a woman in
Mrs Dashwood’s situation, with only common feelingu,
must have been highly unpleating; but in her mind
there was a sense of honour to keen, a generosity so
romantic, that any offence of the kind, by whomsoever
given or received, was to her a source of immovable
disgust. Mrs John Dashwood had never been a favour~
in: with any of her husband’s Family: but she had had
no opportunity, till the present, of showing them with
how little attention to the comfort of other people she
could act when occasion required it.

So acutely did Mrs Dashwood feel this ungracious
behaviour, and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-
in-law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she
would have quitted the house for ever, had not the
entreazy of her eldest girl induced her ﬁrst to reﬂect
on the propriety of going, and her own tender love for

SENSE AND SINSIBIHTY. 5

all her three children determined her afterwards to
stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach with their
brother.

Elinor, this eldest daughter whose advice was so
effectual, possessed a strength of understanding, and
coolness of judgment, which qualiﬁed her, though only
nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and enabled
her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them
all, that eagerness of mind in Mrs Dashwood which
must generally have led to imprudence. She had an
excellent heart; her disposition was affectionate, and
her feelings were strong: but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet
to learn, and which one of her sisters had resolved never
to b»; taught; ab

arianues ilities were, in man respects, uite
equal to Elinor’s. She was sensibley and clever? but
eager in everything; her sorrows, her jo I, could have
no moderation. She was generous, amiah e, interesting:
she was everything but prudent. The resemblance
between her and her mother was strikingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's
sensibility; but by Mrs Dashwood it was valued and
cherished. They encouraged each other now in the
violence of their afﬂiction. The agony of grief which
overpowered them at ﬁrst, was voluntarily renewed, wan
sought for, was created again and again. They gave
themselves up wholly to their sorrow, seeking increase
of wretchedness in every reﬂection that could afford it,
and resolved against ever admitting consolation in
future. Elinor, too, was deeply afﬂicted; but still she
could struggle, she could oxen herself. She could
consult with her brother, could receive her sister-in-law
on her arrival, and treat her with proper mention : and
could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion,
and encourage her to similar forbearance.

6 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humoured,
well-disposed "d 3 but as she had already imbibed a
good deal of an'anne’s romance, without having much
of her sense; the did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sisters at a more advanced period of life.

cbsotn 3].

RS JOHN DASHWOOD now installed her-
self mistress of Norland; and her mother and
sisterhin-law were degraded to the condition of

visitors. As such, however, they were treated by her
with quiet civility; and by her husband with as much
kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond him-
self, his wife, and their child. He really pressed them,
with some eamestness,to consider Norland as their home;
and, as no plan appeared so eligible to Mn Dashwood
as remaining there till she could accommodate heroelfwith
a house in the neighbourhood, his invitation was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everythin reminded
her of former delight, was exactly what suit her mind.
In season: of cheerfulness, no temper could be more
cheerful than hers, or 230m", in a greater degree, that
sanguine expectation o happiness which is hs
itself. But in narrow she must be equally carri away
by her faucy, and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure
she was beyond alloy.

Mrs John Dashwood did not at all approve of what
her husband intended to do for his sisters. To take
three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear
little boy, would be inqmvcrishing him to the most
dreadful degree. She begged him to think again on
the subject. How could he answer it to himself to rob
his child, and his only child too, of so large a sum?

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7

And what poteible claim could the Min Dadrwoods,
who were related to him only by half blood, which the
considered an no relationship at all, have on hi: gener-
oeity to to large an amount? It war very well known
that no affection war ever In to exist between the
children of any man by di rent man-iagee; and why
was he to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by
giving away all his money to his half-listen?

“It was my father’l last request to me," replied
her hudxrnd, “that I should auxin his widow and
daughters.”

“ He did not know what he was talking of, I dare
to 3 ten to one but he wan light-headed at the time.

he been in his right senses, he could not l'nve
thought of euch a thing in begging on to give away
half our fortune from ur own chil "

“ e did not Itipu ate for any particular urn, my
dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terror,
to audit them, and make their situation more comlort-
able than it was in his power to do. Perhapa it would
have been at well if he had left it wholly to mylelf.
He could hardly suppose I rhould neglect them. But
an he required the promise, I could not do lea than
give it: at least I thought so at thetime. The pro-
mite, therefore, was given, and must be
Something must be done for them whenever they leave
Norland and settle in a new home.”

“Well, then, It! Iomething be done for them; but
rim! oomething need not be three thouund
Consider,” the added, “ that when the money ll once
parted with, it never can return. Your listen will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it could
ever be restored to our poor little in . . . .”

“Why, to be mire," raid her husband, very gravely,
“ that would make a neat dill'erence. The time may
come when Harry wili regret that In large a turn was

8 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

parted with. If he should have a numerool family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition.”

“ To be lure it would.’

“ Perhaps, then, it would be bener for all partie- if the
sum were diminished one half; Five hundred
would be a prodigious increale to their fortunea.’

"0h, beyond an thing great! What brother on
earth would do hill? [0 much for hil listen, even if
really his sisters! And as it it . . . only hdfbloodl
But on have such a generous apirit l ”

“ would not with to do anything mean," he replied
“ One had rather, on Inch occasions, do too much than
too little. No one, at least, can think I have not done
enough for them: even themoelvel, they can hardly
expect more.”

“There is no knowing what they may expect,” laid
the lady, “but we are not to think of their expectation-t
the ueltion in, what you can afford to do.”

“ rtainly, and I think I may afford to give them
ﬁve hundred pounds a—piece. AI it in, without any
addition of mine, they will each have above three
thousand pounds on their mother’s death: a very com-
fortable fortune for any young woman.”

“ To be lure it it: and, indeed, it etrikea me that
they can want no addition at all. They will have ten
thousand pounds divided amonglt them. If they marry,
they will he sure of doing well; and if theydo not,
they may all live very comfortably together on the
interest often thousand poundl."

“ That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know
whether, upon the whole, it would not be more adviuable
to do something for their mother while the lives rather
than for them; something of the annuity kind I mean.
My sisters would feel the good chi-cm of it on Well as
herself. A hundred a year would make them all
perfectly comfortable.”

SENSE AND SEMSIBILITY. 9

His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her
consent to this plan.

“To be sure,” said she, “it is better than parting
with ﬁfteen hundred pounds at once. But then,if Mrs
Duhwood should live ﬁfteen years, we shall be com-
pletely taken in.”

“ Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be
worth half that purchase.”

“Certainly not ; but if you observe, ple always
live for ever when there is any annuity w them;
and the in very stout and healthy, and hardly forty.
An annuity i. a very aerioue business; it comes over
and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.
You are not aware of what you are doing. 1 have
known a great deal of the trouble of annuities; for my
mother wan clogged with the payment of three to old
supemnnuated servanu by my ﬁither's will, and it is
muzng how disagreeable the found it. Twice every
year, these annuities were to he paid; and then then
was the trouble of getting it to them; and then one of
them wal said to have died, and afterwards it turned
out to be no such thing. My mother was uite sick of
it. Her income was not her own, she sai with ruch

rpetual claims on it; and it waothc more unlu'nd in my

er, because, otherwiae, the money would have been
entirely It in mother’s diapoeal, without any restriction
whatever. t hat given me such an abhon'enoe of
annuities, that I am sure I would not in myeelf down
to the payment of one for all the world.”

“ It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr
Dashwood, “ to have those kind of yearly drains on
one’s income. One’s fortune, as your mother justly
says, is no! one’s own. To be tied down to the
regular payment of such a sum, on every rent day. is by
no mean: desirable: it takes away one’e independence.”

“Undoubtedly; and, after all, you have no thanks

IO SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

for it. They think themaelvel tenure, you do no more
than what it expected, and it nines no gratitude at all.
If I were you, whatever I did should be done at my
own discretion entirely. I would not bind mylelf to
allow them anything yearly. It may be very incon-
venient some years to apart a hundred, or even ﬁfty
pounds, from our own expenses.”

“I believe you are right, my love; it will be better
that there should be no annuity in the cane; whatever
I may give them occasionally will be of far greater
nuistance than a yearly allowance, because they would
only enlarge their ater of living if they felt lure of a
larger income, and would not. be aixpence the richer for
it at the end of the year. It will certainly be much
the best way. A preterit of ﬁfty pounds, now and
then, will revent their ever being dime-red for money,
and will, lP think, he amply dircharging my pmmite to
my father.”

“To be sure it will. Indeed, to ﬂy the truth, I am
convinced within myself, that your fadrer had no idea
of your giving them any money at all. The aslimnce
he thought of, I dare say, was only such as might be
reasonably expected of you ; for inrtance, such as look-
ing out for a comfortable small house for them, helping
them to move their thingt, and lending them present:
of ﬁsh and game, and so forth, whenever they are in
season. I 'll la my life that he meant nothing further;
indeed, it woul be very strange and unreuonable if he
did. Do but conrirlcr, my dear Mr Dashwood, how
excessively comfortable your mother-in-lnw and her
daughters may live on the interest of seven thounnd
pounds, besides the thousand pounds belonging to each
of the girls, which brings them in ﬁfty pounds a-ymr
a-piece, and, of come, they will pay their mother for
their board out of it. Altogether, they will have live
hundred n-ymr amongst them, and what on earth can

SENSE AND SENSIBMJTV. I]

four women want for more than that? They will live
so cheap! Their housekeeping will be nothing at all.
They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly any
servants; they will keep no company, and can have no
expenses of any kind! Only conceive how comfortable
they will be! Five hundred 3-year! I am sure I
cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as
to your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think
of it. They will be much more able to give you
something.”

“Upon m word," said Mr Dashwood. “I believe
you are pe ctly right. My Either certainly could
mean nothing more by his request to me than what you
an . I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly
fullil my engagement by such acts of assistance and
kindness to them as you have described. When In
mother removes into another house, my services sh
be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can.
Some little present of furniture. too, may be acceptable
then. '

"Certainly," returned Mrs John Dushwood. “ But,
however, one thing must be considered. When your
father and mother moved to Norland, though the
furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother. Her
house will therefore be almost completely ﬁtted up as
soon as she takes it.”

“That is a material consideration, undoubtedly. A
valuable legacy indeed! And yet some of the plate
would have been a very pleasant addition to our own
stock here.”

“Yes; and the net of breakfast china is twice as
handsome as what belongs to this house. A gmt deal
too handsome, in my opinion, for any place [Lg can
ever afford to live in. But, however, so it is. Your
father thought only of then. And I must my this: that

12 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

you owe no Farticular gratitude to him, nor attention to
hit wither. or we very well know that if he could,
he would have left Illnm everything in the world
to 152m.”

This argument was irresistible. It gave to his inten—
tiom whatever of decision we wanting before; and he
ﬁnally resolved, that it would be aboolutely momentary,
if not highly indccoroun, to do more for the widow and
children of hie father, than such kind of neighbourly
acts at his own wife pointed out.

throm- 333.

RS DASHWOOD remained at Norland Ieveral -
months; not from any ditinclination to mine
when the sight of every well-known lpot oeued

to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a
while; for when her tpiiits began to revive, and her
mind became capable of some Other exertion than that of
heightening its afﬂiction by melanchol remembranceo,
she was impatient to be gone, and in efetigable in her
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of
Norland; for to remove far from that beloved spot was
impossible. But the could hear of no nitration that at
once answered her notions of comfort and ease, and
suited the pmdence of her eldest daughter, whoae steadier
judgment rejected several houses as too large for their
income, which her mother would have approved.

Mrs Dauhwood had been informed by her husband
of the solemn promise on the part of his son in their
favour, which gave comfort to his lost artth reﬂec-
tionu. She doubted the sincerity of this maniac no
more than he had doubted it himself, and the thought
of it for her daughters’ nke with nonﬁction, though,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 13

as for herself, she was persuaded that a much srnaller

rovision than seven thousand pounds would support her
In aﬂlnence. For their brother’s sake too, for the sake
of his own heart, she rejoiced; and she reproached her-
self for being unjust to his merit before, in believing him
incapable of generosity. His attentive behaviour to her-
self and his sisters, convinced her that their welEnc was
dear to him, and, for a long time, she ﬁrmly relied on
the liberality of his intentions.

The contempt which she had, very early in their ac-
quaintance, felt for her daughter-in-luw, was very much
increased by the further knowledge of her character,
which half-a-yenr’s residence in her family alTordd;
and, perhaps, in npite of every consideration of politeness
or maternal affection on the side of the former, the two
ladies might have found it impossible to have lived to-
gether so long, had not a particular circumstance occurred
to give still greater eligibility, according to the opinions
of Mrs Dashwoo‘d, to her daughters‘ continuance at
Norland.

This circumstance was a growing attachment between
her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs John Duhwood,
a gentleman-like and pleasing young man, who was in-
troduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister’s
establishment at Norland, and who had since spent the
greatest part of his time there.

Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy
from motives of interest, for Edward Femn was the
eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some
might have repressed it from motives of prudence, l'or,
except a triﬂin sum, the whole of his fortune depended
on the will n his mother. But Mrs Dashwood was
alike uninlluenccd by either consideration. It was
enough for her that he a ared to be amiable, that
he loved her daughter, an that Elinor returned the
partiality. It was contrary to every doctrine of hen,

I4 SENSE AID SHSYBHJTV.

that diﬂerence of fortune should keepsn couple asunder
who were attracted by resemblance of ‘ tion ; and
that Elinor‘s merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her coman
in He.

dward Ferrari was not recommended to their good
opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address. He
was not handsome, and his manners required intimacy
to make then: pleasing. He was too dillidcnt to do
justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was
overcome, his behaviour gave every indication of an
open, affectionate heart. His understanding was good,
and his education had given it solid improvement. But
he was neither ﬁtted by abilities nor disposition to answer
the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see
him distinguished—as—they hardly knew what. They
wanted him to make a ﬁne ﬁgure in the world in some
manner or other. His mother wished to interest him
in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or to
ace him connected with some of the great men of the
day. Mrs John Daehwood wished it likewise; hut in
the meanwhile, till one of these superior blessings could
be obtained, it would have quieted her ambition to see
him driving a barouche. But Edward had no turn for
great men or baronches. All his wishes centred in
domestic comfort and the quiet of private life. For-
tunately he had a younger brother who was more
promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the house
before he engaged much of Mrs Dashwood's attention ;
for she was, at that time, in such aﬂliction as rendered
her careless of surrounding objects. She saw only that
he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.
He did not disturb the wretchcdncss of her mind by
ill-timed conversation. She was ﬁrst called to observe
and approve him further, by a reﬂection which Elinor

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 15

chanced one day to make on the difference between
him and his sister. It was a contrast which recom-
mended him most forcibly to her mother.

" It is enough," said she ; " to say that he is unlike
Fanny is enough. It implies everything amiable. I
love him already.”

"I think you will like him,” said Elinor, “ when
you know more of him.”

" Like him!” replied her mother, with a smile. “ I
can feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love."

“ You may esteem him.’

“ I have never yet known what it. was to separate
esteem and love."

Mrs Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted
with him. Her manners were attaching, and soon
banished his'reserve. She speedily comprehended all
his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor
perhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt
assured of his worth: and even that uietness of
manner which militated against all her estaiilished ideas
of what a young man’s address ought to be, was no
longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be
warm and his temper affectionate.

No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in
his behaviour to Elinor, than she considered their
serious attachment ns cemin, and looked forward to
their marriage as rapidly approaching.

“ In a few months, my dear Marianne,” said she,
“ Elinor will in all probability be settled for life. We
shall miss her ; but 11:: will be happy.”

“ 0 mamma ! how shall we do without her ? ”

" My love, it will be scarcely :1 separation. We
shall live within a few miles of each other, and shall
meet every day of our lives. You will gain a brother
-—n real, affectionate brother. I have the highest
opinion in the world of Edward’s hurt. But you

l6 SENSE AND SINSIBILXTV.

look grave, Marianne; do you disapprove your sister‘s
choice ?"

“ Perhaps,” said Marianne, “ I ma consider it with
some surprise. Edward is very amiable, and I love
him tenderly. But yet, he is not the kind of young
man—~there is a something wanting, his ﬁgure Is not
striking—it has none of that grace which I should
expect in the man who could seriously attach my sister.
His eyes want all that spirit, that ﬁre, which at once
announce virtue and intelligence. And besides all this,
I am afraid, mamma, he has no real taste. Music
seems scarcely to attract him, and though he admires
Elinor’s drawings very much, it is not the admiration
of a person who can understand their worth. It is
evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her while
she draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter.
He admires as a lover, not as a connoisseur. To satisfy
me, those characters must be united. I could not be
happy with a man whose taste did not in every 'nt
coincide with my own. He must enter into al my
feelings; the same books, the same music mun charm
us both. 0 mammal how spiritless, how tame was
Edward’s manner in reading to us last. night! I felt
for my sister most severely. Yet she bore it with so
much composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it. I
could hardly keep my seat. To hear those beautiﬁsl
lines which have frequently almost driven me wild,
pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, such
dreadful indifference! "

“He would certainly have done more justice to
simple and elegant prose. I thought so at the time;
but you would give him Cowper."

“Nay, mamma, if he is not to be animated by
Cowper l—but we must allow for difference of taste.
Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore she may over-
look it, and be happy with him. But it would have

 

 

ﬂaw/ﬂimsy

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY. 1']

broken M] heart had I loved him, to hear him read with
no little mailaility. Mnmma, the more I know of the
world, the more am I convinced that I lhall never tee
a man whom I can really love. I require I0 much!
He mutt have all Edward's virulee, and hi: potent: and
manners must ornament hie goodness with every pouible
charm.”

“ Remember, my love, that you are not oeventeen.
It in yet too early in life to despair of euch an happineu.
Why should you be I!!! fortunate than your mother?
In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny bediil‘crcnt from here! ’

Cbepttr 3}}.

“ HAT a ity it in, Elinor," aid Mnrianne,
"that Edward should have no note for
drawing.”

" No taste for drawin " replied Elinor; “wh
should ou think so? e does not dnw hinud,
indeed, t he has great pleacure in ueeing the per-
fonnanceu of other people, and I assure you, he in by
no means deﬁcient in netunl taste, though he im not
had opportunities of innroving it. Had he ever been
in the way of learning, think he would have drawn
very well. He diam hil own ju t in Iuch
matters to much, thnt he in alwayu unwi ing to give hie
opinion on any picture; but he ha: an innate
and simplicity of taste, which in general direct him
perfectly right.”

Marianne was afraid of attending, and laid no more
on the tuhject; but the kind of approbation which
Elinor described an excited in him by the drawiu e of
other people, was very far from that npturoul delight,

I. u

18 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

which, in her opinion, could slone be called taste.
Yet, though smiling within herself at the mistake, the
honoured her sister for that blind partiality to Edward
which produced it.

“ I hope, Marianne,” continued Elinor, “ on do
not consider him is deﬁcient in general taste. ndeed,
I think I may say that ou cannot, for your behaviour
to him is perfectly cordi , and iii/m! were your opinion,
I am sure you could never be civil to him.”

Marianne hardly knew what to my. She would not
wound the feelings of her sister on any account, and

et to say what she did not believe ms impossible. At
ength she re lied—-

"Do not oﬂ'cnded, Elinor, if my praise of him it
not in everything equal to your sense of his merits. I
have not had so many opportunities of estimating the
minuter propensities of his mind, his inclination, and
tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion in
the world of his goodness and sense. I think him
everything that is worthy and amiable.”

“ I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, “that his
dearest friends could not be dissatisﬁed with Inch come
mendation as that. I do not perceive how you could
ex ress yourself more warmly.”

glinrianne was rejoiced to ﬁnd her sister so easily
pleased.

" Of his sense and his goodness,” continued Elinor,
“ no one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him
often enou h to engage him in unreserved conversation.
The excellince of his understanding, and his princi Ies
can be concealed onl by that shyness which too olEten
kce him silent. §ou know enough of him to do
justice to his solid worth. But of his minnter propen-
sities, as you call them, you have from peculiar cimum-
stances been kept more ignorant than myself. He and
I have been at times thrown a good deal together, while

SENSE AND SENSIBILm. 19

you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate

rineiple by my mother. I have seen a run deal of
him, have studied his sentiments, and his opinion
on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,
I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed,
his enjoyment of books exceedingly great, his imagina-
tion lively, his observation just and correct, and his taste
delicate and pure. His abilin'es in every respect improve
as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.
At first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and
his person can hardly be called handsome, till the ex-
pression of his eyes, which are uncommonly good, and
the general sweetness of his countenance is perceived.
At present, I know him so well, that I think him
really handsome; or, at least, almost so. What my
you, Marianne?”

“ I shall we soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I
do not now. hen you tell me to love him as a brother,
I shall no more see imperfection in his face, than I now
do in his heart.”

Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for

the warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of
him. She Felt that Edward stood very high in her
opinion. She believed the regard to be mutual; but
she required greater certainty of it to make Marianoe’s
conviction 0 their attachment agreeable to her. She
knew that what Marianne and her mother conjectured
one moment, they believed the next—that with them,
to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect. She
tried to explain the real state of the case to her
sister. .
“ I do not attempt to deny,” said she, “ that I
think very highly of him—that I greatly esteem, that
I like him.”

Marianne here burst forth with indignation—

“Esz him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor.

20 SENSE AND SINSIBILITV.

0h! wone than cold-hemedl Ashamed of being
otherwiee. Ure thme worde again, and Iwill lave
the room this moment."

Elinor could not help laughing. “Excuae Ine,"
laid Ihe, “and be allured that l mantnooﬁ'ume to

ou, ltin into uietawa.ofm ownfeel-
l'ngl. byIll-lite gthem toqbe atrongeyr thanyl have *-
clnml; believe them, in ahort, tobe lunch a hie merit,
and the rurpicion—the hope of hit affection for me my
warrant, without impmdence or folly. But further than
thin on mutt not believe. I am by no mean. a-nred
of hu regard for me. There are moments when the
extent of it reams doubtful; and till his sentiments ue‘
fully known, you mnnot wonder at my withing to avoid
any encouragement of my own pamality, b ' ‘
or calling it more than it is. In my heart nyeel little
-—Icarce y any doubt of his preference. But there are
other point. to be conuidcmd [maiden hie inclination. He
ll very far from being independent. What hie mother
really ll we cannot know; but, from Fanny’l occaaional
mention of her conduct and opinione, we have never
been diapered to think her amiable; and I In! very
much nuotaken, if Edward is not himaelf aware that
there would be many difﬁculties in hia wey, if he were
to with to marry a woman who had not either a gnu.
fortune or high rank."

Marianne wan astonished to ﬁnd how much the ima-
gination of her mother and hereelf hnd outatripped the
truth.

“And you really are not engaged to him!” raid
she. “Yet it cenainly soon will happen. But two
advantage: will proceed from thin delay. I ahall not
low: you In won, and Edward will have greater op-
)ommity of improving that natural mute for your
lavauriu: purruit, which mutt be '0 indiapennbly
necenary to your future felicity. Oh! if he Ihould

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. a!

be so far nimulzted by your genius as to learn to draw
himself, how delightful it would be! ”

Elinor had iven her real opinion to her sister. She
could not consider her pnrﬁality for Edward in so pros-
perous a state as Marianne had believed it. There was,
at times, a want of spirit! about him, whichI if it did
not denote indifference, spoke a something almost as
unpromiring. A doubt of her regard, tupposing him
to feel it, need not give him more than inquretude. It
would not be likely to produce that dejectron of mind
which frequent! attended him. A more reasonable
cause might be und in the de dent situation which
ﬁrmed the indulgence of his I ection. She knew that
his mother neither behaved to him so as to make his
home comfortable at present, nor to give him any as-
surance that he might form a home for himself, without
strictly attending to her views for his I mndisement.
With such a knowledge as this, it was impossible for
Elinor to feel easy on the subject. She was far from
depending on that result of his preference of her, which
her mother and sister still considered as certain. Nay,
the longer they were together, the male doubtful seemed
the nature of his regard; nnd sometimes, for a few pain-
ful minutes, she believed it to be no more than fnend-

vhi .

Illut, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneuy; and
It the same time (which was still more common), to
make her uncivil. She took the ﬁrst opportunity of
aﬂ'ronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to
her so expressively of her brother’s glut expectaoons,
of Mrs Ferrars’s resolution that both her sons should
marry well, and of the danger attending any oung
woman who attempted to draw bin in, that Mrs ash-
wood could neither pretend to he unconscious, nor
endeavour to be calm. She gave her an mwer which

12 SENSE AND SINSlBlLITY.

marked her contempt, and instantly left the room. re-
solving that, whatever might be the inconvenience or
expense of so sudden a retrieval, her beloved Elinor
should not be exposed another week to such insinu-
ations-

In this state of her spiriu, a letter was delivered to
her from the post, which contained a proposal particu-
larly well-timed. It was the offer of a small houle, on
very easy terms, belonging to a relation of her own, a
gentleman of consequence and property in Devomhire.
The letter was from this gentleman himself, and written
in the true tpirit of friendl accommodation. He under-
stood that she was in nee of a dWelling, and though the
house he now olTered her was merely a cottage, he so-
sured her that everything should be done to it which
she might think necessary, if the situation pleased her.
He earnestly pressed her, after giving the particulars of
the house and garden, to come with her daughters to
Barton Park, the lace of his own recidmce, from
whence the might Judge herself whether Barton Cot-
tage, for the houses were in the some parloh, could by
any alteration be made comfortable to her. He seemed
really anxious to accommodate them, and the whole of
his letter was written in so friendly a style at could not
fail of giving pleasure to his couein; more especially at
a moment when she was milking under the cold and
unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections. She
needed no time for delibcmtinn or im‘luiry. Her n:-
solution was formed as she read. 'lhe tituation of
Barton, in a county so far distant from Sussex n
Devonxhire, which but a few hours before would have
been a sulﬁcient objection to outweigh every 'ble
advantage belonging to the place, war now its mt re-
commendation. To uit the neighbourhood of Norland
was no longer an evi ; it was an ob'eet of desire; it
was a bleuing in comparison of the misery of eonu'nuing

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY- 23

her daughter-in—lsw’s guest: and to remove for ever
from that beloved place would be less painful than to
inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress.
She instant] wrote Sir John Middleton her acknow-
ledgment 0 his kindness, and her acceptance of his
proposal; and then hastened to nhowhoth letters to her
daughters, that she might be secure of their approbation
before her answer were sent

Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent
for them to settle at some distance from Norland than
immediately amongst their present acquaintance. On
Ibo! head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose her
mother's intention of removing into Devonshine. The
house, too, as described by Sir John, was on so simple
a scale, and the rent so uncommonly moderate, as to
leave her no right of objection on either point; and,
therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any
charm to her fancy, though it was a removal from the
vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she made no
attempt to diuuade her mother from sending her letter
of acquiescence.

than“: 17.

O sooner was her answer despatchcd, than Mrs
Dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of
announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that

she was rovided with a house, and should incommode
them no longer than till everything were read for her
inhabiting it. They heard her with s rprise. like John
Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly

that she would not be settled far from Norland. he
had great satisfaction in repl ing that she was going into
Devonshire. Edward tumed hastily towards heron hear-
ing this, and in a voice of surprise and concern, which

24 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

required no explanation to her, repeated, “ Devounhilel
Are you indeed goin there? So far from hence!
And to what part. of it ” She explained the ﬂotation.
It was within four mile. northward of Exeter.

“ It ll but a cottage,” the continued, “but I hope
to tee many of my friend: in it. A room or two can
easily be added; and if to friend: ﬁnd no difﬁculty in
travelling so far to see me, am sure I will ﬁnd none
in accommodating them."

She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr
and Mn John Daahwood to virit her at Barton; and
to Edward the gave one with still greater affection.
Though her late conversation with her dau hter-in-law
had made her resolve on remaining at orland no
longer than wan unavoidable, it had not produced the
smallest effect on her in that point to which it princi-
pally tended. To Ieparate Edward and Elinor was :-
far from being her object as ever; and Ike withed to
thaw Mu John Daahwood dill pointed invitation to
her brother, how totally the inegarded her disapproha—
tion of the match.

Mr John Dathwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingly sorry he was that the had taken an
houoe at web I distance from Norland as to prevent hit
being of an aervice to her in removing her furniture.
He really fe t conscientioust vexed on the occalion ; for
the very exertion to which he had limited the perfor-
mance of his romise to his father was by thin arrange-
ment rendered impracticable.—-The furniture wan all
lent round by water. It chieﬂy consisted of houlehold
linen, plate, china, and books, with an handwme
forte of Marianne’t. Mr: John Dashwood saw the
package: depart with a sigh; the could not he! ﬁacling
it hard that an M11 Daphwood'a income would be Do
tn'ﬂing in comparison with their own, the thould have
any handme nnicle of furniture.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 25

Mrs Duhwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it
was ready furnished, and she might have immediate
possession. No dilliculty arose on either side in the
agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of her
effects at Norland, and to determine her future house-
hold, before she set all for the west; and this, as she
was exceedingly rapid in the porfomrance of everything
that interested her, was soon done.—The horses which
were left her by her husband had been sold soon after
his duth, and an opportunity now offering of disposing
of her carriage, she agreed to sell that likewise at the
earnest advice of her eldest daughter. For the com‘
fort of her children, had she consulted only her own
wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of
Elinor prevailed. Her wisdom, too, limited the number
of their servants to three—two maids and a man, with
whom th were speedily rovided from amongst those
who hsdznned their esta lishment st Norland.

The man and one of the maids were sent of im-
mediately into Devonshire, to prepare the house for
their mistress’l arrival ; for, as Lady Middleton was en-
tirely unknown to Mrs Dashwood, she prefen'ed going
directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park;
and she relied so undouhtingly on Sir John’s descrip—
tion of the house, as to feel no curiosity to examine it
herself till she entered it as her own. Her ea erness
to be gone from Norland was preserved from dimrnution
by the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the
rro ct of her removal; a satisfaction which was but
lee y attempted to be concealed under a cold invitation
to her to defer her departure. Now was the time when
her son-in-law’s promise to his father might with par-
ticular propriety be fulﬁlled. Since he had mglectcd
to do it on ﬁrst coming to the estate, their quitting his
house might be looked on as the most suitable period
for its accomplishan But Mrs Dashwood began

26 sues: AND SENSIIILITV.

Ihortlyto give over everyho oftheltind,mdtobe
convinced, from the general rift of hit dincourle, that
his auimmce extended no further than their mainten-
ance for rix months at Norland. He I0 frequently
talked of the increaeing expeneel of houeekeepring. and
of the perpetual demand: upon hil puree which a Inn
of any consequence in the world war beyond calculation
expoted to, that he seemed rather to «and in need of
more money himself than to have any deeign of giving
money away.

In a very few week: from the day which brought Sir
John Middleton’e ﬁrst letter to Norland, eve hing
was to far settled in their future nbodeme to end: e Mu
Daahwood and her daughterl to begin their journey.

Many were the tears shed by them in their Ian adieu:
to a ﬂame to much beloved. “ Dear, dear Norlandl "
said urinnnc, as Ihe wandered alone before the house,
on the laet evening of their being there; " when shall I
cease to re ret you .’—-when learn to feel a home clue-
where? happy home! could you know what I
mﬁer in now viewing you from thin t, from whence
perhaps I may view you no more 1— nd you, ye well-
known treeel—but you will continue the tame.—-No
leaf will decay because we are removed, nor any branch
become motionless although we can oheerve you no
longer !-—No; you will continue theume; unconrcioul
of the pleature or the regret you occaeion, and ineenuible
of any change in those who walk under your shade!—
But who will remain to enjoy you?”

SENSE AND SENSIBILXTY. 21

chapter 19‘].

BE ﬁrst part of their journey was performed in too
melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than
- tedious and unpleasant. But as they drew to-
wards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejec-
tion, and a View of Barton Valley as they entered it
gave them cheerfulness. It was a pleasant, feru'le spot,
well wooded, and rich in pasture. After winding along
it for more than a mile, they reached their own house.
A small green court was the whole of its demesne in
front; and I neat wicket gate admitted them into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was com-
fortable and compact; but as a cottage it was defective.
for the building was regular, the roof was tiled, the
window-shutters were not painted green, nor were the
walls covered with honeysuckles. A narrow ge
led directly through the house into the garden md.
On each side of the entrance was a sitting-room. about
sixteen feet. square; and beyond them were the oﬂicu
and the stairs. Four bedrooms and two garmts formed
the rest of the house. It had not been built many
ears, and was in good repair. In comparison of Nor-
and, it was poor and small indeedl—but the tear:
which recollection called forth as they entered the
houec were soon dried away. They were cheered by
the joy of the servants on their arrival, and each for
the sake of the others resolved to appear happy. It
was very early in September; the season was line, and -
from ﬁrst seeing the place under the advantage of good
weather, they received an impression in its favour which
was of material service in recommending it to their
lasting approbation.
The situation of the houoe was good. High hills

:8 mans-sunny.

rue immedinely behind. and I: no yet he: on
each-‘de; miwﬁchvueapndovntheodeu
eulrintadondwoody. Thevﬂlagenflhnonv-
chieﬁyuooeofthaehillgandﬁinedapleut
View from the cottage window; The III ﬁlm:
“Imoreemnive; itemmdedﬂtevbleoflhe
valley,me intothe oomyheyond. 'ﬂaehilll
which mnwodeddmmgemldnamdtheulkyinthot
direction; under anaher name, and in mothswuneﬁt
branched out again hetweentwonfthe lupenofrhun.

Withthen'zelod ﬁunimreofthehnmeMraDadI-
wood wu upon the whole well uniﬁed; rum
her former style of life rendered nuny addition: to the
latter indiqtemable, yet to add and improve van a
delight to her; and the had at thin timeleadylnoney
enough to supply all that was wanted of gratereleglnee
to the apartments “A: for the hornitxlf,» he
lure." laid she, “it it too small for our Emily; but we
will make cunt-Iva mlenbly comfortable for the t,
aaitiatoolateinthe yearforim vernenn erhpt
in the rpring, if I have plenty a money. a I the my
I shall, we may think about uilding. These parlour:
are bothtoonnall for such ofourfrieodsul
hope to nee often collected here; and I have amne
thoughts of throwing the pastage into one of them,
with perhan a part of the other, and to leave the
remainder of that other for an entrance; thin, with a
new drawing-room, which may he (2in added, and a
bed-chamber and garret above, will make it a re mug
little cottage. I could wish the atain were me.
But one mutt not expect everything; Ihough I mppone
it would be no difﬁcult matter to widen them. I shall
see how much I am beforehand with the world in the
spring, and we will plan our improvements accordingly."

In the meantime, till all theme alterations could be
made from the savings of an income of ﬁve hundred

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY. 29

a-year by a woman who never saved in her life,
were wise enough to be contented with the house as it
was; and each of them was busy in amnging their
particular concerns, and endeavouring, by placing
around them their books and other to form
themselves a home. Marianne-’1: pinnofortc was un-

cked and ro rl disposed of; and Elinor's draw-
i’:gs were afﬁx; toythe walls of their sitting-mom

In such emplo ments as these they were interniped
soon after break art the next day by the entrance of
their landlord, who called to welcome them to Barton,
and to offer them every accommodation from his own
house and rden in which theirs might at present be
deﬁcient. it John Middleton was a goodJookio
man about forty. He had formerly visited at Stanh' ,
but it was too long ago for his young cousins to re-
member him. His countenance was thoroughly good-
humoured; and his manners were u friendl as the
style of his letter. Their anival seemed to a ord him
real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an object of
real solicitude to him. He said much of his meet
desire of their living on the most sociable terms with his
family. and ressed them so cordially to dine at Burton
Park every y till they were better settled at home, that,
though his entreaties were carried to a point of persever-
ance beyond civility, they could not give offence. His
kindness was not conﬁned to words; for within an hour
sfter he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff
and fruit arrived from the Park, which was followed
before the end of the day by a present of game. He
insisted, moreover, [on] conveying all their letters to
and from the t for them, and would not be denied the
satisfaction 0 sending them his newspaper every day.

Lady Middleton had sent a very civil by
him, denoting her intention of waiting on m
wood as soon as she could be assured that her visit

30 SENSE AND SINSlBle.

would be no inconvenience; and at thi- nreunge van
anlwered by an invitation equally polite, her
was introduced to them the next day.

They were of cow» very anxioun to tee a perIon on
whom no much of their comfort at Barton mult de-
pend; and the elegance of her a annce wan favour-
able to their wither. Lady Mid lewn we: not. more
than six or seven and twenty ; her face was lumdlolne,
her ﬁgure tall and striking, and her adore. graceful.
Her manner: had all the elegance which her huhnd’l
wanted. But they would have been improved by name
share of hit frankneu and warmth: and her visit wu
long enough to detract something from their lint ad-
miration, by ahowin I that, though perfectly Well-bred,
the was reserved, co d, and had nothing to any for her-
self beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.

Convermtion, however, war not wanted, for Sir John
was very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the
wine precaution of bringing with her their eldest child,
a line little boy about nix years old, by which mean!
there wan one rubject always to be recurred to by the
ladies in can of extremity; for they had to inquire hi.
name and age, admire his beauty, and ask him questions,
which his mother answered for him, while he hung
about her and held down hil head, to the great Iuvprine
Of her ladythip, who wondered at his being to shy bee
fore company, as he could make noise enough at home.
On every formal visit a child ought to be of the party,
by way of provision for diocouree. In the pm! cue
it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were
most like his father or mother, and in what particular he
resembled either; for of course everybody differed, and
everybody was astonished at the opinion of the othcru.

An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dash-
woodt of debating on the rent of the children, as Sir
John would not have the home without securing their
promioe of dining at the park the next day.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 3!

chum 1713.

ARTON PARK was about half a mile from the
cottage. The ladies had passed near it on their
way along the valley, but It was screened from

their view at home by the projection of :m hill. The
house was large and handsome; and the Middletons lived
in a style of equal hospitality and elegance. The former
was for Sir John’s gratiﬁcation, the latter for that of his
lady. They were scarcely ever without some friends
staying with them in the house, and they kept more com-

ny of every kind than any other family in the neigh-
Eurhood. It was necessary to the happiness of both;
for, however dissimilar in temper and outward behaviour,
they strongly resembled each other in that total want
of talent and taste which conﬁned ther employments,
unconnected with such as society produced, within a
very narrow compass. Sir John was a sportsman,
Lady Middleton a mother. He hunted and shot, and
she humourcd her children; and these were their only
resources. Lady Middleton had the advantage of
being able to spoil her children all the year round,
while Sir John’s independent employments were in
existence only half the time. Continual enga ements
at home and abroad, however, supplied all the eﬁcien-
cies of nature and education ; supported the good Ipirits
of Sir John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of
his wife.

Lady Middleton iqued herself upon the elegance of
her table, and of all her domestic amngementn; and
from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in
any of their parties. But Sir John’s satisfaction in
society was much more real ; he delighted in collecting
about him more young people than his house would
hold, and the noisier they were the better was he

31 SENSE AND SINSIBILI'I'V.

pleased. He was a blessing so all the juvenile part of
the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for ever
forming parties to out cold ham and chicken out of
doors, and in winter his private balls were numerous
enough for any young lady who was not mﬂ'ering under
the insatiable appetite of ﬁfteen.

The arrival of a new family in the country was
always a matter of joy to him, and in every point of
view he was charmed with the inhabitant. he had now
procured for his cottage at Barton. The Miss Daub-
woods were young. pretty, and unaffected. It was
enough to secure his good 0 inion, for to be unaﬂ'eued
was all that a pretty girl cou d want to make her mind
as captivating as her person. The friendliness of his
disposition made him happy in accommodating tllole
whose situation might be considered, in comparison
with the past, an unfortunate. In showing kindness to
his cousins, therefore. he had the real satisfaction of a
good heart; and in Settling a farnil of females only in
his cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman;
for a sportsman, though he esteem: on! those of his
sex who are sportsmen likewise, is not o co desirous of
encouraging their taste by admitting them to a residence
within his own manor.

Mrs Dashwood and her daughters were met at the
door of the house by Sir John, who welcomed them to
Barton Park with unaﬂected sincerity; and as he
attended them to the drawing-room, repented to the
young ladies the concern which the am subject had
drawn from him the day before, at being unable to get
any smart young men to meet them. They would lee,
he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the Park, but who
was neither very young nor very gay. He hoped they
would all excuse the smallness of the party, and could
assure them it should never happen so again. He had

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 33

been to several families that morning, in of pro-
curin some addition to their number; t it was
moon ight, and eve body wan full of engagements.
Luckily, Lady Mi dleton’s mother had arr-ind at
Barton within the last hour, and as she we a very
cheerful, agreeable woman, he hoped the young ladies
would not ﬁnd it so very dull as they might imagine.
The Iyoung ladies, as well as their mother, were
perfec y eatisﬁed with having two entire strangers of
the party, and wished for no more.

Mrs Jennings, Lady Middleton’s mother, was a
good-humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked
a great deal, seemed very haypy, and rather vulgar.
She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty thing- on the subject of
lovers and husbands; hoped they had not left their
hearts behind them in Sussex, and pretended to see
them blush whether they did or not. Marianne was
vexed at it for her sister’s sake, and turned her eyes
towards Elinor, to see how she bore these attacks, with
an earnestneus which gave Elinor far more pain than
could arise from such common-place millery at Mrs
Jennings’s.

Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no
more adayted by resemblance of manner to be his friend
than Lady Middleton was to be his wife, or Mn
Jennings to be Lady Middleton’s mother. He was
silent and grave. His 2 arance, however, was not
unpleasing, in spite of llll being in the opinion of
Marianne and Margaret, an aboolnte old bachelor, for
he was on the wrong side of ﬁve-and-thirty; but thou h
his face was not handsome, his countenance was neon]: e,
and his address was particularly gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any of the party which could
recommend them a companions to the Dashwoods;
but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so par-

1. C '

34 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y.

ticularly repuiaive that in comparison of it the gravity
of Colonel Brandon, and even the boiaoemua nurth of
Sir John and hit mother-in-law, was interening. Lady
Middleton aeemed to be routed to enjoyment only by
the enhance of her four noiay children after dinner, who
pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every
kind of diacourae except what related to themaelvea.

In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be
musical, she was invited to play. The instrument was
unlocked, everybody prepared to be charmed, and
Marianne, who nan very well, at their re neat went
through the chief of the son I which Lady iddleton
had brought into the fami on her marriage, and
which perhaps had lain ever trnce in the name poaio'on
on the pianoforte; for her lad ship had celebrated that
event by giving up music, athough by her mother's -
account the had pla ed extremely well, and by her
own waa very fond o it.

Marianne’s performance waa highly applauded. Sir
John was loud in his admiration at the end of every
Ion , and as loud in his conversation with the other:
whie every tong latted. Lady Middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one'a attention
could be diverted from music for a moment, and naked
Marianne to lift a particular song which Marianne had
jun ﬁnilhcd. olonel Brandon alone, of all the party,
heard her without being in raptures. He paid her on y
the compliment of attention; and the felt a magnet for
him on the occaaion which the other: had reasonably
forfeited by their shameleu want of taste. His pleaaure
in music, though it amounted not to that ecstatic de-
light which alone could aympathise with her own, wan
estimable when contraated against the horrible insensi-
hility of the others; and the was reasonable enough to
allow that a man of ﬁve-and-thirty might well have
outlived all acuteneu of feeling and every exquisite

suns: AND senstnrm'v. 35

power of en'oyment. She wa- perfectly diapoetd to
make every lowance for the colonel’s advanced otate
of life which humanity required.

than": 1713].

RS JENNINGS wan a widow, with an ample
jointure. She had only two daughters, both of
whom the had lived to ace respectath married,

and the had now therefore nothing to do but to marry
all the rest of the world. In the promotion of this
object, she wan zealously active, as far an her ability
reached, and missed no opportunity of yrojecting wed-
ding: among all the young peo e of her acquaintance.
She was remarkably quick in diacove of attach-
menu, and had enjoyed the advantage 0 raining the
bluahel and the vanity of many a young lady by incinua-
tions of her power over ouch a young man; and this
kind of discernment enabled her soon after her arrival
at Burton, decisively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon
was very much in love with Mnrinune Dashwood. She
rather suspected it to be no, on the very ﬁrst evening of
their being together, from his listening to attentively
while she tang to them; and when the virit wan re-
turned by the Middletons dining at the cottage, the
fact was ascertained by his listening to her again. It
mun. be so. She was perfectly convinced of it. It
would be an excellent match, for b: was rich and :5:
wan handsome. Mrs Jennings had been anxious to see
Colonel Brandon well married ever since her connection
with Sir John ﬁrst brought him to her know! e; and
she was always anxious to get a good husband r every
pretty girl.

The immediate advantage to herself wan by no means

36 SENSE AND smsrnru'rv.

inoonsidmble, for it mpplied her with endless jokes
against them both. At the Park she laughed at the
colonel, and in the cotta e at Marianne. To the
former her raille was p bly, as far as it

only himself, ectly indifferent ; but to the latter it
was at ﬁrst incomprehensible; and when its object wu
understood, the hardly knew whether most to laugh
at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence, for the
considered it as an unfeeling reﬂection on the colonel’s
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old
bachelor.

Mrs Dashwood, who could not think a man ﬁve
years younger than herself so exceedingly ancient as he
appeared to the youthful fancy of her daughter, ventured
to clear Mrs Jennings from the probability of wishing
to throw ridicule on his age.

“ But at least, momma, you cannot deny the absurdity
of the accusation, though you may not think it inten-
tionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon is certainly

ounger than Mrs Jennings, but he is old enough to
my father ; and if he were ever animated enough to
be in love, must have long outlived every sensation of the
kind. It is too ridiculous! When is a man to be safe
from euch wit, if age and inﬁrmity will not protect him 3”

“Inﬁrmit l" said Elinor; “do you call Colonel
Brandon in run? I can easily suppose that his age
may appear much greater to you than to my mother;
but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the
use of his limbo! "

“ Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism?
and in not that the commonest inﬁrmity of declining
life 2 "

“ My dearest child,” said her mother, laughing, “at
thin rate, you must be in continual terror of in] decay;
and it must seem to you a miracle that my life has been
extended to the advanced age of forty.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 37

“Momma, you are not doing me justice. I know
very well that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to
' make his friends yet. a rehensive of losing him in
the coune of Nature. e may live twenty years
longer. But thirty-live has nothing to do with
matrimony.”

"Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-live and seventeen
had better not have anything to do with matrimony
together. But if there should by any chance happen
to be a woman who is in le at seven-and-twenty, I
should not think Colonel randon’s being thirty-live
any objection to his marrying her."

“A woman of seven-and-twenty,” said Marianne,
aﬂer pausing a moment, “can never hope to feel or
inepire affection again; and if her home be uncomfom
able, or her fortune small, I can mppose that she might
bring herself to submit to the oﬁices of a nuree, for the
sake of the provision and oecurity of a wife. In hie
marrying such a woman, therefore, there would be no-
thing unsuitable. It would be a compact of con-
venience, and the world would be satisﬁed. In my
eyes it would be no marriage at all, but that would be
nothing. To me it would seem onl a commercial
exchange, in which each wished to be eﬁted at the
expense of the other.”

“It would be impossible, I know,” replied Elinor,
“to convince you that a woman of seven-and—twent
could feel for a man of thirty-live anything near enoug
to love to make him a desirable com ion to her.
But I much object to your dooming Co onel Brandon
and his wife to the conotant conﬁnement of a nick
chamber, merel because he chanced to complain yester-
day (a very col, , damp day) of a alight rheumatic feel
in one of his shoulders."

“ But he talked of ﬂannel Waistcoats,” said Marianne;
“ and with me a ﬂannel waistcoat is invariably connected

s

38 SENSE AND SENSIBILH'Y.

with aches, cramps, rheumatisms, and eve of
ailment that can alﬂict the old and the f e." I

“ Had he been only in a violent fever, in would
not have despised him half so much. Con Mari-
anne, is not there something interesting to on in the
ﬂushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick Pulse 0 a fever?”

Soon after this, upon Elinor's leavnng the room,

“Mamma,” said Marianne, “I have an alarm on
the subject of illness, which I cannot conceal from
you. 1 am sure Edward Ferrars is not well. We
have now been here almost a fortnight. and yet he
does not come. Nothing but real indi 'tion could
occasion this extraordinary delay. hat else can
detain him at Norlandi” '

“ Had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said
Mn Dashwood. “I had none. On the contrary, if
I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject. it has been
in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
leasnre and readiness in accepting my invitation, when
i talked of his coming to Barton. Does Elinor expect
him already .’ "

“I have never mentioned it to her; but of wane
she must."

“ I rather think you are mistaken, for, when I was
talking to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the
spare bed-chamber, she observed that there was no
immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that the
room would he wanted for some time.”

“ How strange this is! What can be the meaning of
it? But the whole of their behaviour to each other
has been unaccountable! How cold, how composed
were their last adieus! How languid their conversa-
tion the last evening of their being together! In
Edward’s farewell there was no distinction between
Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an aﬁ‘cc-
tionate brother to both. Twice did I leave them

SENSE AND SlNSIDlLITV. 39

pu ly together in the course of the last morning,
an each time did he most unaccountany followme
out of the room. And Elinor, in quitting Norland
and Edward, cn'ed not as I did. Even now her self-
command is invariable. When is she dejected or
melancholy? When does she try to avoid society, or
appear restless and dissatisﬁed in it?”

cbsput ‘15.

HE Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with
tolerable comfort to themselns. The house
and the garden, with all the objects surrounding

them, were now become familiar; and the ordinary pur-‘
suits which had given to Norland half its charms, were

engaged in again with far greater enjoyment than Nor-

land had been able to afford since the loss of their father.

Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for

the ﬁrst fortnight, and who was not in the habit of
seeing much occu 1tion at home, could not conceal

his amazement on mding them always employed.

Their visitors, except those from Barton ark, were
not many; for, in spite of Sir John's u t entreaties
that they would mix more in the neig urhood, and
repeated assurances of his carriage being always at their
service, the independan of Mrs Dashwood’s spirit
overcame the wish of society for her children ; and she
was resolute in declining to visit any family beyond the
distance of n walk. There were but few who could be
so classed ; and it was not all of them that were attain-
able. About a mile and a half from the cottage, along
the narrow winding valley of Allenham, which issued
from that of Barton, as formerly described, the gid-
hnd, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an anctent,

40 SENSE AND swsmru'n'.

respectable-looking mansion. which, by reminding them
a little of Norland, interested their imgination, and
made them wish to be better acquainted with it. But
they learnt, on in uiry, that in possessor, an elderly
lady of very g character, was unfortunately too
inﬁrm to mix with the world, and never mined from
home.

The whole country about them abounded in heautiﬁil
walks. The high downs, which invited them from
almost every window of the cottage to seelt the
exquisite enjoyment of air on their commits, were a
happy alternative when the dirt of the valleys he-
neath shut up their superior beauties; and towards
one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one
memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by
the partial sunshine of a showe sky, and unable
longer to bear the conﬁnement which the settled rain
of the two preceding days had occasioned. The
weather was not tempting enough to draw the two
others from their pencil and their book, in spite of
Marianne's declaration that the day would be lastineg
fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn
of? from their hills; and the two girls set all together.

They gain ascended the downa, rejoicing in their
own penetration at every glimpse of blue sky: and
when they caught in their faces the animating gala of
a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fear: which
had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing
such delightful sensations.

“ Is there a felicit in the world," said Marianne,
“superior to this? argaret, we will walk here at
least two hours.”

Margaret agreed. and they pursued their wafy against
the wind, misting it with laughing delight or about
twenty minutes longer, when suddenly the clouds united
over their heads, and a driving rain set full in their faces.

SENSE AND SENSXHILITV. 41

Chagrined and su rised, they were obliged, though
unwtllingly, to turn ck, for no shelter was nearer than
their own house. One consolation, however, remained
for them, to which the exigence of the moment gave
more than usual propriety; it was that of running
with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill
which led immediately to their garden gate.

They set off. Marianne had at ﬁrst the advantage,
but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground, and
Margaret, unable to stop herself to assist her, was in-
vofluntarily hurried along, and reached the bottom in
sa .

? gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers play-
ing round him, was passing up the hill and within a few
yards of Marianne, when her accident happened. He
put down his un and ran to her assistance. She had
raised herself rorn the ground, but her foot had been
twisted in the fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.
The gentleman offered his services, and perceiving that
her modesty declined what her situation rendered neces—
sary, took her up in his arms without farther delay, and
carried her down the hill. Then passing through the
garden, the gate of which had been left open by Margaret,
he bore her directly into the house, whither Margaret

as just arrived, and quitted not his hold till he had
seated her in a chair in the parlour.

Elinor and her mother rose u in amazement at their
entrance, and while the eyes of th were ﬁxed on him
with an evident wonder and a secret admiration, which
equally sprang from his appearance, he apologised for
his intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank
and so graceful, that his person, which was uncommonly
handsome, received additional charms from his voice and
expression. Had he been even old, ugly, and vulgar,
the gratitude and kindness of Mrs Daahwood would
have been secured by any act of attention to her child ;

42 SENSE AND SRKSIIILI'IT.

but the inﬂuence ofynuth,henuty,and degamgave
an inreruttothescﬁonvhichamelnmelohs
feeling;

She dunkedhimagainandagain,andwithaeweet—
nest of addre- which always attended her, invited him
tobeaeated. Butthiehedeclined,ahewadirtyand
wet. MnDathwood then begged to knovtowhom
she wan obliged. Hi! name, he mylied, m Willonghby,
and his present home was at Allenham, from whenoehe
hoped the would allow him the honour of calling to-
morrow to inquire after Miss Daahwood. The honour
wan readily granted. and he then deported, to nuke him-
self still more interesting. in the midst of an heavy rain.

Hit manly beauty and. more than common graceful-
neu were instantly the theme of general admiration and
the laugh which his gallantry railed again-t Marianne
received particular spirit from his exterior attraction
Marianne herself had seen lens of hit pemn than the
rest, for the confusion which crimeoned over her face,
on his lifting her up, had robbed her of the power of
regarding him after their entering the house. But the
had seen enough of him to join in all the admiration of
the others, and with an energy which always adorned
her praise. Hit person and air were equal to what her
fancy had ever drawn for the hero of a favourite Itory;
and in his carrying her into the house with so little
previous formality, there was a rapidity of thou ht which
particularly recommended the action to her. ‘ very cir-
cumetance belonging to him wan interetting. His name
war good, llll residence was in their favourite village,
and she won found out that of all manl dresses 3
shooting-jacket was the most becoming. er imagina-
tion was buy, her reﬂections were plasant, and the
pain of a spurned ankle wan disregarded.

Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval
of fair weather that morning allowed him to get out of

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 43

doors; and Marianne’a accident being related to him,
he was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentlean
of the name of Willoughby at Allenham.

“Willoughbyl " cried Sir John; "wint, is be in
the country? That is good news, however; I un'll
ride over w-mormw, and ask him to dinner on
Thursday.”

“ You know him then?” said Mn Duhwood.

“ Know him! to be sure I do. Why heic down
here every year.”

“ And what sort ofa oung man is he?”

“ As good a kind olyfcllow as ever lived, I astute
you. A very decent shot, and there is not a holder
rider in England.”

“And is 11m! all you can so for him!” cried
Marianne indignantly. “But w at are his manner:
on more intimate acquaintance? what his pursuits, his
talents, and genius ? "

Sir John was rather puzzled.

“Upon my soul," said he, "I do not know much
about him as to all [bah But he is a pleasant, good-
humoured fellow, and has got the nicest little black
bitch of a pointer I ever saw. Was she out with him
to-dny ? "

But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the
colour of Mr Willoughby’s inter than he could
describe to her the shades of is mind.

" But who is he ? ” said Elinor. “ Where does he
come from? Has he a house at Allenham? ”

On this point Sir John could give more certain in-
telligence; and he told them that Mr Willoughby had
no property of his own in the country ; that he resided
there only while he was visitin the old lady at Allen-
ham Court, to whom he was «fated, and whose
sions he was to inherit; adding, “ Yes, yes, he Is very
well worth catching, I can tell you, Miss Dachwood;

44 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

he has a pretty little eitane of hi. own in Somenenhire
besides; and if I were you, I would not give him up to
m youn r Illtel‘ in spite of all thin tumbling down
hil Mi; Marianne mull not expect to have all the
men to hereelf. Brandon will be jealoun, if the does
not rake care."

“ I do not believe,” aaid Mm Dathwood, with a good-
humoured smile, “ that Mr Willoughlry will be incom-
moded by the attempts of either of my daughter: toward:
what you call calcbing bim. It is not an employment to
which they have been brought up. Men are very Iafe
with us, let them be ever In rich. I am glad to 6nd,
however. from what you say, that he in a relpecuble
young man, and one whose acquaintance will not be
ineligible."

“ He is at good a can. of fellow, I believe, as ever
lived," repented Sir John. "I remember Int Chrin-
nm, at a little he) at the Park, he danced from eight
o’clock till four, wtthout once lining down.”

“ Did he, indeed?" cried Marianne, with Iparkling
eyes, “ and with elegance, with spirit ?"

“Yen; and he was up again at eight to ride to
covert.”

“ That is what I like; that ll what a young nun
ought to be. Whatever be his pumiu, his eagerneu
in then) should know no moderation, and leave him no
sense of fatigue."

“Ay, ay, I see how it will be,” mid Sir John, " I
lee how it will be. You will be netting your cap at him
now, and never think of poor Brandon. '

“That is an expreuion, Sir John,” said Marianne
warmly, “ which I particularly dislike. I abhor every
common-place phrase by which wit it intended; and
‘setting one’a cap at a man,’ or ‘making a conquest]
are the man: odious of all. Their tendency is groan
and illibeml; and if their commotion could ever be

SINSE AND SENSIBILITY. 45

deemed clever, time hat long ago destroyed all it:
ingenuit .”

Sir ohn did not much under-rand thin roof;
but he laughed a hearu'ly as if he did, an then
replied,—

" Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare ﬂy,
one way or other. Poor Brandon! he in quite smitten
already, and he is very well worth netting your cap at, I
can tell you, in ite of all this tumbling about and
apraining of ankles. '

Chapter i,

ARIANNE’S pneerver, at Margaret. with more
ele nce than precilion, Itiled Willoughby,
cal at the cottage early the next mornin to

make hie reonal inquiries. He vial received by n
Dairy/bod,e with more than litenete—with a'kindneu
which Sir John’l account 0 him and her own gratitude
prompted; and everything that passed during the visit
tended to unsure him of the acme, elegance, mutual aﬂ'cc-
tion, and domestic comfort of the family to whom acci-
dent had now introduced him. 01' their pemnal chamu
he had not required a second interview to be convinced.

Mina Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular
features, and a remarkably pretty ﬁgure. Marianne was
still handwmer. Her form, though not I0 correct ll
her sister’s, in having the advantage of height, was more
ttriking ; and her face war .0 lovely, that when, in the
common cant of praiee, the wan called a beautiful girl,
truth was less violently outraged than ueually happen;
Her akin wan very brown, but, from it: transparency,
her complexion wan uncommonly brilliant; her features
were all good ; her smile wan sweet and attractive; and

'f\

46 sultan-om.

inhaeyegvhiehvere dnrhmuevaaﬁfqa
Ipil'iganagu-nngvhich lurdlybem'ilhmt
delight. Fm W' theire ' "at
ﬁmhddhaehbytheednnm'hichtheranem-

branceofhia Wasted. Butvhmdis

away, when hr qirita beanie collected—when die .-
thattntheperfect good~breeding ofthe gtndummhe
united ﬁ-anknen and vivacity, and, above all, when die
heardhimdeclarethatofmun’canddandnghem
panionately fond,thegave him such a look ofappm-
bationasoecuredthelargeamareofhiadiatoum to
herself for the rest of his any.

It was only to mention any favourite
amulﬂnenttoengagehermtalk. Shecouldnothe
tilent when such point- were intmdueed, and the lad
neither Ihyneat not reserve in their (limitation.
tpeedily discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and
music was mutual, and that it arm: from a ml con-
formity of judgment in all that related to either. En-
couraged by this to a further examination of hi. opinion,
the proceeded to question him on the lubject of boob;
her favourite authors were brought forward and dwelt
upon with .0 rapturous a delight, that any young man
of five-and-twenty must have been intenaible indeed, not
to become an immediate convert to the excellence of
such workt, however disregarded before. Their mte
wan strikingly alike. The name books, the ante pae- ‘

' age] were idolized by each—or, if any diﬂ'clence

arcd, any objection arose, it lasted ('0 longer than
mine force of her argument: and the brightneu of her
eye. could he di layed. He acquiesced in all her
decitiom, caught alTher enthusiasm, and long before hie
visit concluded, they convened with the familiarity of I
lung-embliuhcd acquaintance.
“Well, Marianne,” said Elinor, as soon at he had
left them, “for on: morning I Lhan you have done

SIIISE AND SINSIBILITY. 47

retty well. You have already ascertained Mr Wil-
oughby's opinion in almost. eveéy matter of importance.
You know what he thinks of o r and Scott; you
are certain of his estimating their uties as he ought,
and you have received every assurance of his admiring
Pope no more than is proper. But how it your acquaint-
ance to be long surported, under such extraordinary
despahch of every nu ject for discourse! You will soon
have exhausted each favourite topic. Another meeting
will sufﬁce to explain his sentiments on picturuque
beauty and second running“, and then you can have
nothing farther to ask-—— ’

“ Elinor,” cried Marianne, “ is this fair? is this just?
are my ideas so scanty? But I see what you mean.
I have been too much at my ease, too ha py, too frank.
I have erred agaimt every common-p ace notion of
decorum! I have been open and sincere where I on ht
to have been reserved, spiritlcss, dull, and deceit? .
Had I milked only of the weather and the roads, and
had I spoken only once in ten minutes, this reproach
would have been spared.”

“My love,” said her mother, “you mutt not be
offended with Elinor—aha wns only in I should
scold her myself, if she were capable of wishing to check
the delight of your conversation with our new friend.”
Marianne was softened in a moment.

Willoughlry, on his side, gave every roof of his

leisure in their acquaintance which an ev' ent wich of
Improving it could offer. He came to them every day.
To inquire after Marianne was at ﬁrst his excuse;
but the encouragement of his reception, to which every
day gave greater kindness, made such an excuse un-
necessary before it had ceased to be posllble by
Marianne'u perfect recovery. She was conﬁned for
some days to the house: but never had any conﬁne-
ment been less irksome. Willoughby was a young man

48 saws: AND sensram-rv.

of good abilities, quick imagination, lively spirits, and
open, affectionate manners. He was exactly formed to
engage Marianne’s heart; for, with all this, he joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of
mind, which was now roused and increased by the
exam le of her own, and which recommended him to
her aﬂoﬁon beyond everything else.

His society became gradually her most exquisite
enjoyment, They read, they talked, they sang to-
gether; his musical talents were considerable; and he
read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward
had unfortunately wanted.

In Mrs Dashwood’s estimation, he was as faultless
as in Marianne’s; and Elinor saw nothing to censure
in him but a propensity, in which he strongly resembled
and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying too much
what he thought on every occasion, without attention
to persons or circumstances. In hastily forming and
giving his opinion of other people, in sacriﬁcing general
politeness to the enjoyment of undivided attention
where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily
the forms of worldly pro riety, he displayed a want of
caution which Elinor con d not approve, in spite of all
that he and Marianne could say in its sup rt.

Marianne began now to perCeive that Ll: desperation
which had seized her at sixteen and a half, of ever see-
ing a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection,
had been rash and unjustiﬁable. Willoughby was all
that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour, and
in every brighter period, as capable of attaching her;
and his behaviour declared his wishes to be in that
res ct as amen as his abilities were strong.

er nrothcr, too, in whose mind not one speculative
thought of their marriage had been raised by his pros-
pect of riches, was led before the end of a week to
hope and expect it, and secretly to congratulate herself

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 49

on having gained two such sons-in-lnw as Edward and
Willoughby.

Colonel Brandon’s partinlity for Marianne, which
had so early been discovered by his friends, now ﬁrst
became perceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be
noticed by them. Their attention and wit were drawn
oﬂ' to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which
the other had incurred before any partinlity arose, was
removed when his feelings began really to call for the
ridicule so justly anneXed to sensibility. Elinor was
obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the semi.
menu: which Mrs Jennings had assigned him for her
own satisfaction, were now actually excited by her
sister; and that however n geneml resemblance of dis-
position between the parties might forward the affection
of Mr Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of
character was no hindrance to the re rd of Colonel
Brandon. She saw it with concern; or what could a
silent man of ﬁve-und-thirty hope, when oyposed by a
very lively one of ﬁve-and-twenty? and as she could
not even wish him successful, she hurtin wished him
indiﬂ'erent. She liked him—in spite of his gravity and
reserve, she beheld in him an object of interest. His
manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserve
appeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits,
than of any natural gloonriness of Lem . Sir John
had dropped hints of past in‘uries and 'nppointments,
which justiﬁed her belief 0 his being an unfortunate
man, and she regarded him with respect and compassion.

Perhaps she itied and esteemed him the more be-
cause he was sighted by Willoughby and Marianne,
who, prejudiced against him for being neither lively
nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits.

“ Brandon is just the kind of man,” said Willoughby
one day, when they were talking of him together,
“whom everybody speaks well of, and nobody cares

I. D

50 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I’Y.

about; whom all are delighted to see, and nobody
remembera to talk to.”

“That it exactly what I think ofhim,”cried Marianne.

“Do not boat of it, however,” laid Elinor, “for it
ie injustice in both of you. He in highly muted
all the family at the Park, and I never nee him rn
without taking paint to convene with him."

“ That he in patroniaed by Jim," lied Willoughhy,
“la certainly in l1ll favour; but a- or the esteem of
the others, it in a reproach in itaelf. Who would aub-
mit to the indignity of being approved by auch women
as Lady Middleton and Mn Jenningt, that could
command the indiﬂ‘etence of anybody ell: 2 ”

“But perhapl the nbuae of such ‘people as yourself
and Marianne will make amend: or the regard of
Lady Middleton and her mother. If their ia
censure, your censure may be praise; for they are
not more undiaccrning than you ate prejudiced and
unjust."

“In defence of your protegé, you can even be
saucy."

“ My protegé, a: you call him, in a Ienaible man;
and same will alwayt have attractiom for me. Yea,
Marianne, even in a man betwoen thi and forty.
He has teen 3 great deal of 'the worl ; he been
abroad; has read, and has a thinking mind. I have
found him capable of giving me much information on
various subjects, and he hal alwaya anawered my in-
quiries with the readiness of good-breeding and good-
nature.”

“That is to say,” cried Marianne contemptmaly,
“he haa told you that in the Em Indie: the climate in
hot, and the mosquitoes are troubleaome."

“ He would have told me lo, I doubt not, had I
made an inch in uiriet; but theyha penedtobe iota
on which, I had blen previouely inforrliied.” Po

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 5 I

“ Perhaps,” said Willoughby, “ his observation: may
have extended to the existence of nabobe, gold mohn,
and anquins.”

“ may venture to say that bit obeerrau'one have
stretched much farther than your caudour. But why
should you dislike him?"

“ I do not dislike him. I consider him, on the con-
trary, as a very respectable man, who ha: everybody“;
good word and nobody'l notice; who has more in
than he can spend, more time than he know: how to
emplg, and two new cost: eve year.”

" dd to which,” cried arianne, "that he has
neither genius, taste, nor spirit. That his understanding
ha: no brillianey, hia feeling! no ardour, and hit voice
no expreodon.’

“ You decide on hie im rfections In much in the
man,” replied Elinor, “an no much on the men
of your own imagination, that the commendation I am
able to give of him in comparatively cold and inui 'd. I
can on] pronounce him to be a oemible man, we -hred,
well-ingmned, of gentle address, and, I believe, pone»-
ing an amiable heart.”

“ Mina Daahwood,” cried Willoughby, “ you are now
using me unkindly. You are endeavouring to dinrm
me realon, and to convince me against my will. But
it wil not do. You shall ﬁnd me an stubborn at you
can be artful. I have three unmewerable reason for
dialiking Colonel Brandon: he has threatened me with
rain when I wanted it us be line; he he found fault
with the hanging of my curricle, end I cannot pemude
him to buy my brown mare. If it will be any cade-
faction to you, however, to be told that I believe his
character to be in other rupeet: irreproachable, I am
ready to confess it. And in return for an acknowledg-
ment which must 'vc me Iome pain, you cannot deny
me the privilege o dieliking him a much u ever.”

52 SENSE AND SBNSIBILI’I’V.

Chapter ’3.

I’I‘TLE had Mn Dahwood or her daughter:
imagined, when they came lint into Devonahire,
that so many engagement: would arise to oc ‘

their time as Ihottly presented thcmnelvet, or that they
should have such frequent invitations and such comm
visitors an to leave them little leisure for serious employ-
ment. Yet such was the case. When Marianne wu re-
covered, the schemes of amunemenu at home and abroad
which Sir John had been reviously forming were put in
execution. The private Ila at the Park then began;
and artict on the water were made and accomplished
as o ten at a thowery October would allow. In every
meeting of the kind, Willoughby want included; and the
case and familiarity which naturally attended these
parties Were exactly calculated to give incrmu'ng in-
timacy to his acquaintance with the Daehwoodt, to
afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellence. of
Marianne, of marking his animated admiration of her,
and of receiving, in her behaviour to himself, the most
pointed assurance of her affection.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
She only wished that it were less openly shown, and
once or twice did venture to suggest the priety of
come self-command to Marianne. But arianne ab-
horred all concealment where no real di-gmce could
attend unreserve; and to aim at the reetraint of lenti-
menta which were not in rhemeelvee illaudible, appeared
to her not merely an unnecessary effort, but a ditgrace-
ful subjection of reason to common-place and minaken
notions. Willoughby thought the same; and their
behaviour, at all times, was an illustration of dxeir
opinions.

When he wu present, the had no eye: for any one

SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I’V. 53

else. Everything he did was right. Everything he
id was clever. If their evenings at the park were
concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the
rest of the party to get her a good hand. If dancing
formed the amusement of the night, they were partners
for half the time; and when obliged to separate fora
couple of dances, were careful to stand together, and
scarcely spoke in word to anybody else. Such conduct
made them of course most exceedingly lau hed at; but
ridicule could not shame, and seemed har y to provoke
them.

Mrs Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a
warmth which left [her] no inclination for checking
this excessive display of them. To her it was but the
natural consequence of a strong aﬂ'ection in a young and
ardent mind.

This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Her
heart was devoted to Willoughby, and the fond attach-
ment to Norland which she brought with her from
Sussex, was more likely to he softened than she had
thought it possible bofore, by the charms which his
society bestowed on her present home.

‘ Elmor’s happiness was not so great. Her heart was
not so much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their amuse-
mentssopure. Th alforded her no com nion that
could make amends or what she had left hind, nor
that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret
than ever. Neither Lady Middleton nor Mu Jennings
could sup ly to her the conversation she missed;
although e latter was an everlasdng talker, and from
the ﬁrst had regarded her with a kindness which insured
her a large share of her discourse. She had already

ted her owu history to Elinor three or four times;
and had Elinor’s memory been equal to her means of
improvement, she might have known very early in her
acquaintance all the particulars of Mr Jennings’s last

54 SENSE AND SINSlBlLﬂ'V.

illneu, and what he laid to hit wife a few minutee before
he died. Lady Middleton was more agreeable than her
mother only in being more silent. Elinor needed little
observation to perceive that her reeerve wan a mere
calmness of manner with which acme had nothing to
do. Towards her husband and mother the wan the
same as to them; and intimacy was therefore neither to
be looked for nor desired. She had nothing to lay one
day that she had not said the day before. Her inipid—
ity was invariable, for even her spirit: were alwayl the
same; and though she did not oppose the parties
arranged by her husband, provided everything were
conducted in eter and her two eldest children attended
her, she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from
them, than she might have experienced in ﬁtting at
home ;——-and so little did her presence add to the
plenum: of the others, by any nhnn: in their cmch-
tion, that they were uometimcu only reminded of her
being amongst them by her solicitude about her trouble-
some boys.

In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaint-
ance, did Elinor ﬁnd a erIon who could in any degree
claim the respect of :- ilitien, excite the interest of
friendnhip, or give pleawre an a companion. Willough
waa out of the question. Her admiration and reg:
even her aiuerly regard, wan all his own: but he won
a lover; his attention: were wholly Marianne“, and a
far less agreeable man might have been more genera“
pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for himnel ,
had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne,
and in convening with Elinor, he found the greatest
consolation for the total indifference of her liner.

Elinm’a companion for him increased, as Ihe had
renaon to lurpect that the misery of dilappointed love
had already been known by him. This lurpicion was
given by some word: which accidentally dropt from him

SENSE AK!) SENSIBILITV.

one evening at the Park, when they were sitting down
together b mutual consent, whi e the others were
dancing. ' eyes were ﬁxed on Marianne, and, after
a silence of some minutes, he said with a faint smile,
“ Your sister, I understand, does not approve of second
attachments.”

“ No," replied Elinor; “ her opinions are all
romantic.”

“ Or rather, as i belieVe, she considers them impot-
sible to exist.”

“ I believe she does. But how she contrives it with-
out rcllectin on the character of her own father, who
had himne two wives, I know not. A few years,
however, will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis
of common sense and observation; and then they may
be more easy to deﬁne and to than they now are,
by an y but herself.”

“ 'hil will probably be the case," he replied; “and
yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a
young mind, that one is sorry to see them give way to
the reception of more general opinions."

“ I cannot ngrec with you there,” said Elinor.
“There are inconveniences attending such feelings as
Marianne’s, which all the charms of enthusiasm and
ignorance of the world cannot atone for. Her eystems
have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety
at nought; and a better acquaintance with the world
is whnt I look forward to as her greatest possible
advantage.”

After a short pause, he relumed the conversation, by
saying—

“ Does your sister make no distinction in her objec-
tions a inst a second attachment? or is it equally
crimin in everybody? Are those who have been dis-
appointed in their ﬁrst choice, whether from the incon-
stancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances,
to be equally indifferent during the rest of their lives 2 ”

56 SIRS! AND SENSIIIILITV.

“Upon my word. I am not acquainted with the
minntia of her principles. I only know tint I never
yetheordher ldmit any imnoe of: mood anach-
ment ’I being pordonable."

“Thin,” said he, “ cannot. hold; but I change. a total
change of momenta—No. no, do not deﬁne ir,—for
when the romantic reﬁnement: of a young mind are
obliged to give way, how frequently are they unneeded
by ouch opinion: as are but too common, and too dan-
gerourl I speak from experience. I once knew a
lady who in temper and mind greatly noctuch r
sitter, who thought and judged like her, but who mm
an enforced change—from a cerieo of unfortunate cir-
cumltancec "—Here he uopped suddenly; appealed
to think that he had said too much, and by his coun-
tenance gave rise to conjecture. which might not other-
wise have entered Elinor'l haul. The lad would
probably have [mat-d without luqricion, hn he not
convinced Miu Duhwood that what concerned her
ought not to encape his lips. Ar it was, it required
but a alight effort of fancy to connect hit emotion with
the tender recollection of past regard. Elinor a
no more. But Marianne, in her place, would not hove
done so little. The whole story would have been
apeedily formed under her active imagination, and
[everything] emblilhed in the most melancholy order
of dimatrour love.

¢hnptrr ’3].

S Elinor and Marianne were walking together the
next morning, the latter communicated a piece
of new to her ristcr, which, in spite of all that

lhe knew before of Marianne'r imprudence and want of
thought, surprised her by it: extravagant antimony of

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

both. Marianne told her, with the greatest delight, that
Willoughby had given her a horse, one that he Ind bred
himself on his estate in Somersetthire, and which was
exactly calculated to any a woman. Without cou-
Iidering that it was not in her mother's plan to keep any
hone—that if the were to alter her resolution in favour
of this gift, she must buy another for the servant, and
keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable to
receive them—the had accepted the present without
heeitation, and told her sitter of it in raptureo.

" He intends to send his groom into Somene’tshire
immediately for it," she added, “and when it arrives,
we will ride every day. You shall share its use with
me. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight
of a allop on some of these downs."

ost unwilling was she to awaken from such a
dream of felicity, to com rehend all the unhappy truths
which attended the a ir, and for some time she
reﬁned to submit to them. As to an additional
servant, the expense would be a triﬂe; momma, the
was sure, would never object to it; and any horse
would do for In’m ; he might always get one at the
Park; as to a smblc, the mereet shed would be suf-
ﬁcient. Elinor then ventured to doubt the pro riety
of her reCeiving such a preterit from a man so lit e, or
at least so lately known to her. This was too much.

“You are mistaken, Elinor,” aid the warm] , " in
supposing I know very little of. Willoughby. have
not known him long indeed, but I am much better
acquainted with him than I am with any other creature
in the world, except yourself and momma. It is not
time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy :-——it
il disposition alone. Seven years would be inwﬂicient
to make some people acquainted with each other, and
seven days are more than enough for others. I should
hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a

58 SENSE AND SINSIBILITV.

home from my brother than from Willoughhy. Of
John I know very little, though we have lived together
for years; but of Willoughhy, my judgment has long
been formed.”

Elinor thought it. wisest to touch that point no more.
She knew her sister’s temper. Opposition on so tender
2 subject would only attach her the more to her own
opinion. But by an appeal to her affection for her
mother, by representing the inconvenience: which that
indulgent mother must draw on herself, if (as would
probably be the case) she contented to this increue
of establishment, Marianne was shortly mbdued; and
she promised not to tern t her mother to such
imprudent kindness by mentioning the oﬂ‘cr, and to tell
Willoughby when the saw him next, that it must he
declined.

She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby
called at the cottage, the tame day, Elinor heard her
express her disappointment to him in a low voice, on
being obliged to forego the acceptance of his present.
The reasons for this alteration were at the same time
related, and they were such as to make further enceaty
on his side impossible. His concern, however, was
very apparent; and after ex resting it with earned-
ness, he added in the same ow voice—“ But, Mari-
anne, the horse ll still yours, though you cannot uae
it now. I shall keep it onl till you can claim it.
When you leave Barton to £er your own establish-
ment in a more lasting. home, Queen Mal) shall receive

on."

y This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in
the whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing
it, and in his addressing her sister by her christian name
alone, she instantly saw an intimacy l0 decided, a
meaning so direct, at marked a perfect agreement
between them. From that moment she doubted not

sense AND smxruurv. 59

of their being engaged to ach other; and the belief of
it created no other rise, than that the, or any of
their frienda, should be eft by tempera no frank to die-
cover it by accident.

Margaret related something to her the next day,
which placed this matter in a still clearer light.
Willonghby had spent the preceding evening with
them, and Margaret, by bein left come time in the
parlour with only him and arianne, had had oppor-
tunity for observations, which, with a most important
face, the communicated to her eldest liner, when they
were next by themnelveu.

"Ohl Elinor,” she cried. “I have such a eecret
to tell you about Marianne. I am cure the will be
married to Mr Willoughby very soon."

“You have laid to,” replied Elinor, “almost every
day eince they ﬁrst met on High-church Downs and
the had not known each other a week, I believe,
heiiire you were certain that Maritime wore his 'cture
round her neck; but it turned out to be any the
miniature of our glut-uncle."

“ But indeed thin in quite another thing. I am nun:
they will he married very soon, for he has got a lock oi
her hair.”

“Take care, Margaret. It may be only the hair of
some great-uncle of bit."

“ But indeed, Elinor, it in Marianne's. I am almoet
sure it is, for I saw him out it 06. Laet night after
tea, when you and mamma went out of the room,
were whispering and talking together u {an as could
be, and he seemed to be begging somethin of her, and
presently he took up her scissors and cut 0 a long lock
of her hair, for it was all tumbled down her back; and
he kisaed it, and folded it up in a piece of white paper,
and put it into his pocket-book.”

From such pnrticulan, stated on such authority,

60 SINSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Elinor could not withhold her credit: nor was
she disposed to it, for the eircumetancc was in
perfect unison with what she had heard and seen
herself.

Margaret’s sagacity was not always ' Iayed in a
way so satisfactory to her sister. When rs Jennings
attacked her one evening at the Park, to give the name
of the young man who was Elinor's particular favourite,
which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying,
“I must not tell, may I, Elinor?"

This, of course, made everybody laugh; and Elinor
tried to laugh too. But the effort was painful. She
was convinced that Margaret had ﬁxed on a person
whose name she could not bear with composure to
become a standing joke with Mrs Jennings.

Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did
more harm than good to the cause, by turning very red,
and saying in an angry manner to Margaret,—

“ Remember, that whatever your conjectures may be,
you have no right to repeat them.”

“I never had any conjectures about it," replied
Margaret; “it was you who told me of it yourself."

This increased the mirth of the company, and
Margaret was eagerly pressed to say something more.

“Oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about
it," said Mrs Jennings. “What is the gentleman's
name.”

“I must not tell, ma’am. But I know very well
what it is ; and I know where he is too."

“ Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own
house at Norland, to be sure. He is the curate of the
parish, I dare say.”

“No, 11m! he is not. He is of no profession at
all.”

" Margaret,” said Marianne, with great warmth,

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y. 6!

“you know that all this is an invention of your own,
and that there is no such person in existence."

“Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am
sure there was such a man once, and his name begins
with an F.”

Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for
observing at this moment, “ that it rained very hard,”
though she believed the interruption to proceed less
from an attention to her, than from her lad ship’s
great di ike of all such inelegant subjects of rai cry as
delighted her husband and mother. The idea, how-
ever, started by her, was immediately pursued by
Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion mindful
of the feelings of others; and much was said on the
subject of rain by both of them. Willoughby opened
the pianoforte, and asked Marianne to sit down to it;
and thus, amidst the various endeavours of different
people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground. But not
so easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which
it had thrown her.

A party was formed this evening for going on the
followrng day to see a very line place about twelve
miles from Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of
Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it. could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had
left strict orders on that head. The grounds were
declared to be highly beautiful, and Sir John, who was

‘cularly warm in their praise, might be allowed to

a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to virit
them, at least, twice every summer for the last ten
years. They contained a noble piece of water; a sail
on which wan to form a great part of the morning‘s
amusement; cold rovieions were to be taken, open
carriage: only to Ee employed, and everything con-
ducted in the usual style of a complete party of
pleasure.

62 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.

To some few of the company it appeared rather a
bold undemking. conlidering the time of year, and
that it had rained every day for the lan fortnight ;—
and Mn Danhwood, who had already a cold, was
permaded by Elinor to stay at home.

then”: 333].

HEIR intended excunion to Whitwell turned out

very diﬁ‘erently from what Elinor had expected.

She was prepared to be wet through, fatigued,

and fri htened; but the event was still more unfor-
tunate, or they did not go at all.

By ten o’clock the whole party were ambled at
the park, where th were to breakfast. The morning
was rather favourab e, though it had mined all night, I!
the clouds were then dispersing acrou the tlty, and the
Inn frequently appeared. They were all in high spirit-
and good humour, eager to be happy, and determined
to aubmit to the greater! inconveniencel and hardlhipn
rather than be otherwise.

While they were at breakfalt, the letter: were brought
in. Among the rent there wan one for Colonel
Brandon ;-—-he took it, looked at the direction, changed
colour, and immediately left the room.

“ What in the matter with Brandon .’" laid Sir John.

Nobody could telL

“I hope he has had no bad newt," laid Lady
Middleton. “ It mutt be something extraordinary that
could make Colonel Brandon leave my breakfau-table
to suddenly.”

In about ﬁve minute: he returned.

“ No bad news, Colonel, I hope 3 " said Mn Jenningl,
as noon at he entered the room.

SENSE Ann sensmu'rv. 63

“ None at all, ma’am, I thank you."

“Wu it from Avignon? I hope it in notto any
that your sister in worse ?"

“ No, ma’ain. It came from town, and in merely a
letter of business." , - V

“But how came the hand to' diwompooe you In
much, if it was only a letter ‘of business? Come,
come, this won't do, Colonel; so let us hear the truth
of it.” n L ' ’

“ My dear madam,” said Lady Middleton, “ recollect
what you are no ing.”

“ Pei-ha it u to tell you that your cousin Fanny in
married 2 ’ said Mrs Jennings, without attending to
her daughter‘l re roof.

“ No, indeed, It in not.’ ’

“ Well, then, I know who it in from, Colonel.
And I hope she in well."

“ Whom do you mean, ma’am 2” mid he, colouring
a little.

“Oh! you know who I mean.”

" I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, address-
ing Lad Middleton, “ that I ahauld receive thin letter
today, r it in on husineel which requires my imme-
diate attendance in town."

“In town I " cried Mn Jennings. “What can you
have to do in town at thin time of year?”

“My own lose in great,” he continued, “ in being
obliged to leave so agreeable a party; but I am the
more concerned, as I fear my yreeence in necemry to
gain our admittance at Whitwell."

hat a blow upon them all was thin!

“But if you write a note to the houoekeeper, Mr
Brandon," laid Marianne, eagerly, “ will it not be
ouﬂicient ? ”

He shook his head.

“We mutt go," laid Sir John. “It ehall not be

64 SENSE AND SENSINLITV.

nut oil" when we are so near it. You cannot go to
town till to—morrow, Brandon, that in all.”

“I wish it could be no :35in Iettled. But it in not
in my power to delay my journey ﬁtr one day! ”

“If you would but let u- know what your bulinen
is," said Mr: Jennings, “ we might nee whether it could
be put of or not.”

“ You would not be six hours later," laid Willoughby,
“ if you were to defer your journey till our return.”

“I cannot afford to lose an: hour.”—

Elinor then heard Willoughby say in a low voice to
Marianne, “ There are some plc who moot. bear a
party of pleasure. Bundon is one of them. He wan
afraid of catching cold, I dare say, nnd invented thin
trick for getting out of it. I would lay ﬁfty guinea.
the letter was of his own writing.”

“ I have no doubt of it,” replied Marianne.

"There it no persuading you to change your mind,
Brandon, I know of old,” said Sir John. “ when once
you are determined on anything. But, however, I hope

on will think better of it. Con-ider, here are the two
lain Carey: come over from Newton, the three Mia
Dnahwoods walked up from the cottage, and Mr
Willoughby got VINO hours before his usual time, on
pu ac to a to hitwell.”
olonel mndon again repeated his sorrow at being
the cause of diaap inning the pany, but at the nine
time declared it to Le unavoidable.

“ Well then, when will you come back againl"

“I hope we shall see you at Barton," added her
lad ship, “ at noon at you can conveniently leave town;
an we must put oilr the party to Whitwell till you
return.”

“ You are very obliging. But it in no uncertain
when I may have it in my power to return, that I dare
not engage for it at all.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 65

“ Ohl he rnult and thall come back,” cried Sir
John. “ If he in not here by the end of the week, I
shall go after him.”

"Ay, I0 do, Sir John," cried Mn Jennings, "and
then rhapt you may ﬁnd out what hil budnen in."

“ do not want to pry into other men’- concern, I
up 3e it it something he in ashamed of.”

olonel Brandon’a honel were announced.’

“ You do not go to town on horseback, do you i "
added Sir John!

“No—only to Honimn. I shall then go poet."

“ Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good
journey. But you had berm- change your mind."

“I nature you it in not in my power."

He then took leave of the whole Party.

“ In there no chance of my seeing you and your
liner: in town thin winter, Mia! Dashwood i"

“I am afraid, none at all."

“Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time
than I nhould with to do.”

To Marianne he merely bowed and said nothing.

“Come, Colonel," raid Mr! Jennings, “before you
go, do let us know what you are going about."

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by
Sir John, leﬁ the room.

The complaints and lumentau'ons which Politeneu
had hitheno restrained, now burst forth universally ;
and theyeall agreed again and again how provoking it
war to lo disappointed.

“I can guess what hi: business in, however,” laid
Mn Jennings, exultingly. -

“Can you, ma’am ? " said almost everybody.

“ Yet; it is about Min Willianu, I am m."

“ And who in Miss Williams? " asked Marianne.

“What! do you not know who Miss William in?
I am sure you must have heard of her before. She is

I. E

66 SENSE AND smsrnru'rv. '

a relation of the Colonel’s, my dear—a near
relation. We will not say how near, for r of
shocking the young ladies.” Then lowering her voice
a little, she said to Elinor, “She in his natural
daughter." -

“ Indeed ! "

“Oh! yes; and as like him as she can stare. I
dare any the Colonel will leave her all his fortune.”

When Sir John returned, he joined most heartily in
the general regret on so unfortunate an event; conclud-
ing, however, by observing, that as they were all got
together, they must do something by way of being
happy; and after tome consultation it was agreed, that
although happiness could onl he enjoyed at Whitwell.
they might procure a tolerabe composure of mind by
driving about the country. The carriages were then
ordered; Willoughby’n wae lint, and Marianne never
looked ha pier than when the ot into it. He drove
through tile parlt very fast, an they were soon out of
sight 5 and nothing more of them we seen till their
return, which did not happen till after the return of all
the rent. They both seemed delighted with their drive,
but said only in general terms that they had kept in the
lanes, while the others went on the downs.

It was settled that there should be a dance in the
evening, and that everybody should be extremely merry
all day long. Some more of the Camys came to
dinner, and they had the pleaaure of sitting down
nearly twenty to table, which Sir John oheerved with
great contentment. Willoughby took his mural place
between the two elder Miss Dashwooda. Mn Jennings
rat on Elinor‘a right hand ; and they had not been long
seated, before the leant behind her and Willoughby, and
said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear,
“I have found you out, in spite of all your tricks. I
know where you spent the morning."

sense All) anagram". 67

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, “ Where,
in l ’—
P ‘zDid not you know,” aid Willoughby, “that we
had been out in my curriclel"

“ Yes, yes, Mr Impudenoe, I know that very well,
and l wan determined to ﬁnd out where on had been
to. I hare you like your home, Min rianne. It
in a very arge one, I know, and when I come to see
you, I hope you will have new-fumiuhed it, for it
wanted it very much when I was there six year:
a o.
gMarianne turned away in great confusion. Mn
Jennings laughed heartily; and Elinor found that in
her resolution to know where they had been, ohe
had actually made her own woman inquire of Mr
Willaughhy’r groom, and that the had by that method
been informed that they had gone to Allenham, and
Ipent a conuiderable time there in walking about the
garden, and going all over the houoe.

Elinor could hardly bel‘i‘e’ve this to be true, a it
nemed unlikel that illou hb should m ,
or Maxim conaenyt, to enter the home whilem
Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the
malleu acquaintance.

A; soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor in-
quired of her about it; and great vm her ourprine
when the found that every cirounutance related by
Mn Jennings was perfectly true. Marianne wan quite
an ry with her for doubting it.

“Why Ihould you imagine, Elinor, that we did not
go there, or that we did not nee the house? II not it
what on have often withed to do yourself ?"

“ es, Marianne, but I would not go while Mr-
Smith wu there, and with no other companion than
Mr Willoughby."

“Mr Willoughhy, howeVer, in the only perlon who

68 sense AND sunsrolu'rv.

can have a right to draw that home; and'ao heweot
in an open oln'iage, it we: impomible to have any other
com nion. I never spent a pleasanter morning in my
life.

“I am afraid,” replied Elinor, “that the plenum-
neea of an employment doe! not alwayl evince its
propriety.”

" On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof
of it, Elinor; for if there had been anyreal impro-
priety in what I did, I ahould have been sensible of it
at the time, for we nlwnya know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no
pleasure.”

“ But, my dear Marianne, a: it has already expand

on to tome very impertinent remarks, do you not now
begin to doubt the discretion of your owu conduct ? "

“If the impenincnt remarks of Mrs Jennings are to
be the proof of impropriety in conduct, we are all
offending every moment of all our liven. I value not
her censure any more than I nhould do her commend:-
tion. I am not senlible of having done anything wrong
in walking over Mr! Smith’s groundo, or in Ieeing her
home. They will one day be Mr Willoughby'u,
and "—-

“ If they ware one do to be your own, Marianne,
you would not be justili in what you have done."

She blushed at thin hint ; but it wu even vitiny
gratifying to her; and after a ten minutes' interval of
earnest thought, she came to her inner again, and laid
with great good humour, “Perhapl, Elinor, it war
rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenhnm; but Mr
Willoughby wanted particularly to allow me the place ;
and it is a charming home, I assure you. There in
one remarkably pretty sitting-room upstairs, of a nice
comfortable aize for comtant nae, and with modern
fumiture it would be delightful. It is a corner room,

suns: AND snusrnxurv. 69

and has windows on two sides. On one side you look
scroll the bowling-green, behind the house, to a beauti-
ful hanging wood; and on the other have a View
of the church and village, and, on them, of those
ﬁne hold hills that we have so 0 nadmired. I did
not see it so advanmge, for nothing could be more
forlorn than the furniture,—but if it were newly ﬁtted
up—o couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says,
would make it one of the pleasantest summer-rooms
in England.”

Could Elinor have listened to her without interrup-
tion from the others, she would have described every
room in the house with equal delight.

chum £317.

HE sudden termination of Colonel andon’s
visit at the park, with his steadiness in con-
cealing its cause, ﬁlled the mind and raised

the wonder of Mrs Jennings for two or three days:
she was a great wanderer, as ever one must be who
takes a very lively interest in the comings and
goings of all their acquaintance. She wondered with
little intermission what could he the reason of it;
was sure there must be some bad news, and thou ht
over every kind of distress that could have bele en
him, with a ﬁxed determination that he should not
escape them all.

“Something very melancholy must be the matter, I
am sure,” said she. " I could see it in his face. Poor
man ! I am afraid his circumstances may he had. The
esme at Delal‘ord was never reckoned more than two
thousand a year, and his brother left everything sadly
involved. I do think he must have been sent for about

7O SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'V.

money matte", for what elle can it be? I wonder
whether it is no. I would give anythiu to know the
truth of it. Perhapt it is about Mia illiaand,
by the bye, I dare say it it, became he looked In con-
scious when I mentioned her. Maybe she it ill in
town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a
notion the is alwa a rather sickly. I would lay any
wager it is about in Williams. It is not so very
likely he should be distressed in hit circumstancel em,
for he is a very prudent man, and to be cure mu: have
cleared the mate b thll time. I wonder what it can
be! Maybe his sister is woroe at Avignon, sod ha
cent for him over. Hit setting off in ouch ahurry Ieems
very like it. Well, I wish him out of all hit trouble
with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain.”
So wondered, so talked Mrs Jennings; her opinion
varying with every fresh conjecture, and all seeming
equally probable as they arose. Elinor, though she felt
really interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon,
could not bestow all the wonder on his going to end-
denly away which Mn Jenningt was deeirous of her
feeling ; for besides that the circumstance did not in her
opinion justify such lasting amazement or variety of
speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed of. It
was engrossed by the extraordinary eilence of her sister
and Willoughby on the subject. which they must know
to be peculiarly interacting to them all. An this :ilence
continued, every day made it appear more strange and
more incompatible with the di 'tion of both. Why
they should not 0 nly acknow edge to her mother and
herself, what their constant behaviour to each other
declared to have taken place, Elinor could not imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be
immediame in their power; for though Willoughby was
independent, there wal no reason to believe him rich.
His estate had been rated by Sir John at about ﬁx or

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7 I

seven hundred a year; hut he lived at an ex to
which that incorne could hardly be equal, a he had
himself often complained of hi! poverty. But for thin
strange kind of secrecy maintained by them relative to
their en gement, which in fact concealed nothing at all,
the co d not account; and it was no wholly contra-
dictory [0 their general opinions and practice, that a
doubt oometimee entered her mind of their being really
engaged, and this doubt wan enough to prevent her
making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to
them all then Willoughhy’n behaviour. To Marianne
it had all the distinguishing tenderneu which a lover'n
heart could give, and In the mat of the family it wan
the affectionate attention of a m and a brother. The
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as
his home; many more of hi! hourl were spent there
than at Allenham; and if no general engagement col-
lected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning wan almoat cemin of ending there,
where the rest of the day was Ipent by himself :‘L the
tide of Marianne, and by his favourite pointer at her
feet.

One evenin in particular, about a week aﬂerColonel
Brandon had felt the country, hie heart leemed more
than uaually open to ever feeling of attachment to the
objects around him; an on Mn Duhwood’e happen-
ing to mention her design of improving the cottage in
the opting, he warmly hﬂamed every alteration of a
place which aﬁ'ection enahliehed as perfect with
him.

" What! ” he 'exclaimed—“ Improve this dear cot-
tage. No—Ilmt I will never consent to. Not a none
must be added to its walla, not an inch to in rite, if my
feelings are regarded.”

“Do not be alarmed," raid Min Daahwood,

72 SENSE AND SENSIUILITV.

“ nothing of the kind will he done ; for my mother will
never have mo enough to attempt it."

“I am he: ‘y glad of it,” he cried. “Mayshe
alwa s be poor if the can employ her riches no better.”

“a‘hank you, Willoughby. But you ma be assured
that I would not sacriﬁce one sentiment of coal attach-
ment of yours, or of anyone whom I loved, for all the
improvements in the world. Depend upon it, that
whatever unemployed sum may remain when I make u
my accounts in the spring, I would even rather la it
useless! by than dispute of it in a manner so inl'u to
you. lint are you really so attached to this ace as to
see no defect in it i "

“I am,” said he. “To me it is limitless. Nay,
more, I consider it as the only form of building to
which happiness is attainable; and were I rich enough,
I would instantly pull Cornbe down, and build it up
again in the exact plan of this cottage."

“ With dark narrow stairs, and a kitchen that stricken,
I suppose," said Elinor.

“ Yes," cn'ed he in the same eager tone, “ with all
and everything belonging to it;—in no one convenience
or inconvenience about it, should the least variation be
perceptible. Then, and then onl , under such a mof,

might perhaps be as happy at tube as I have been
at Barton."

“ I ﬂatter myself,” replied Elinor, " that even under
the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase,
you will hereafter ﬁnd your own house as faultless as
you now do this."

“ There ceminly are circumstances," said Wil-
longhby, “which might greatly endear it to me; but
this place will always have one claim on my aﬂection
which no other can iny share."

Mrs Dashwood ooked with plasure at Marianne,
whose ﬁne eyes were ﬁxed so expressively on

SENSE AND smsimurv. 73

Willoughby, u plainly denoted how well she understood
him.

“How often did I wiah," added he, " when I was
at Allenham this ﬁme twelvemonth, that Barton
cottage were inhabited! I never passed within View
of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no
one ahould live in it. How little did I then think that
the very first newe I should hear from Mn Smith, when
I next came into the country, would be that Barton
cottage was taken ! and I felt an immediate atiafaction
and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of
prescience of what happineas I should experience from
it can account for. Must it not have been so,
Marianne i " speaking to her in a lowered voice. Then
continuing his former tone, he mid, “And yet this
home you would spoil, Mrs Dalhwood! You would
rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement! and
this dmr parlour, in which our acquaintance iint began,
and in which so many hapi) hours have been since

nt i? us together, you we d degrade to the condi-
tion 0 a common entrance, and everybody would be
eager to pass throu h the room which has hitherto
contained within itaef more real accommodation and
comfort than any other apartment of the handsomeat
dimensions in the world could poniny afford.

Mn Dashwood again natured him that no alteration
of the kind should be attempted.

" You are a good woman,” he warmly replied.
“Your promite makes me easy. Extend it a little
farther, and it will make me happy. Tell me that not
only our house will remain the same, but that I Ihall
ever [ind you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling;
and that you will always conlider me with the kindness
which has made everything belonging to you so dear
to me."

The pmmioe was readily given, and Willoughby’u

74 snusr-z AND snusrnru'rv.

behaviour during the whole of the evening declared at
once his affection and happineu.

“ Shall we see you to-rnorrow to dinner 2 ” mid Mn
Dashwood, when he was leaving them. “ I do not ask
you to come in the morning, for we mutt walk to the
park, to call on Lady Middleton.”

He engaged to he with them by four o’clock.

chum: "9‘.

RS DASHWOOD’S visit to Lady Middleton
took place the next day, and two of her
daughtere went with her; but Marianne

excuned herself from being of the party, under name
triﬂing pretext of em loyment; and her mother, who
concluded that a promrne had been made in Willoughhy
the night before, of calling on her whie they were
aboent. wa- perfecd tatieﬁed with her remaining at home.

On their return mm the park they found Willoughby’l
curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mn
Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been
just. So far it wan all as she had foreseen; but on
entering the houee, she beheld what no foresight had
taught her to expect. They were no nooner in the
passage than Marianne came hastily out of the parlour,
apparently in violent aﬂiiction, with her handkerchief at
her eyes, and without noticing them run upetaira. Sur-
prised and alarmed, they proceeded directly into the
room she had just quitted, where they found only
Willoughby, who was leaning againrt the mantel-piece
with his back towards them. He turned round on
their coming in, and his countenance showed that he
strongly panook of the emotion which overpowered
Marianne.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 15

" Is anything the matter with her i" cried Mn
Dashwood as she entered—“ is Ihe ill ? "

“I hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful;
and with a forced smile, preeently added, “ It is I who
may lather expect to be ill—for I am now Iuﬂ'ering
under a very heavy disappointment! "

" Disap intment! ”

“ Yes, or I am unable to keep my engagement with

Mrs Smith 'has this morning exercised the
privilege of riches upon a poor d ent cousin, by
sending me on busineuto London. have just received
my deapatches, and taken my farewel of Allenham;
and by way of exhilaration, I am now come to take my
furcwcl of you. ‘

“ To London l—nnd are you going this morning i”

“ Almost this moment."

“This is very unfortunate. But Mr: Smith must
be obliged ;And her busineus will not detain you from
us long, I hope."

He coloured as he replied, “ you are very kind, but
I have no idea of returning into Devonlhire immedi-
ately. My visits to Mrs Smith are never repeated within
the twelvemonth."

“ And is Mrs Smith your only friend? Is Allen-
ham the only house in the neighbourhood to which you
will be welcome? For shame, Willoughby. Can you
wait for an invitation here 2 ”

His colour increased; and with his eyes ﬁxed on the
ground, he only replied, “ You are too good."

Mn Danhwood looked at Elinor with surpriee. Eli-
nor fclt equal amazemenn For a few moments every
one was silan Mrs Daahwood ﬁrst kc.

“I have only to add, my dear Wi oughby, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome; for I will
not press you to return here immediatel , because you
only can judge how far that might be p casing to Mn

76 SENSE AND SENSIBILII'Y.

Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed
to question your judgment than to doubt your inclina-
tron."

“ My engagements at present,” replied Willoughby,
confusedly. “are of such a nature—that—I dare not
ﬂatter myself "—

He stopt. Mrs Dashwood was too much aston-
ished to speak, and another pause succeeded. This
was broken by Willnughby. who said with a faint
smile, “ It is folly to linger in this manner. I will not
tomient myself any longer by remaining among friends
whose society it is impossible for me now to enjoy.”

He then hastily took leave of them all and left the
room. They saw him step into his carriage, and in a
minute it was out of sight.

Mrs Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly
quitted the parlour, to give way in solitude to the con-
cern and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned.

Elinor’s uneasiness was at least equal to her mother’s.
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and
distmst. Willoughby’s behavrour in taking leave of
them, his embarrassment, and aﬂectation of cheerfulneu,
and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother’s
invitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover—so unlike
himself, greatly dimrbed her. One moment she feared
that no serious design had ever been formed on his
side; and the next, that some unfortunate quarrel had
taken place between him and her sister; the distress in
which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a
serious quarrel could most reasonably account for;
though when she considered what Marianne’s love for
him was, a quarrel seemed almost im ible.

But whatever might be the particu ars of their separa-
tion, her sister’s aﬂliction was indubitable; and she
thought with the tenderest com ssion of that violent
sorrow which Marianne was in all probability not merely

suns: AND SENSIBILITY. 77

givin way to as: relief, but feeding and encouraging
as a u .

In atlysout half an hour her mother returned, and
though her eyes were red, her countenance was not
uncheerful.

“ Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Bar-
ton, Elinor," said she, as she sat down in work, “and
with how heavy a heart does he travel l ”

" It is all very strunge. So suddenly to be gone!
It seems butthe work of a moment. And last nighthe
was with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate!
And now after only ten minutes' notice-Gone mo
without intending to remrn ?.Something more than
what he owned to us must have happened. He did
not speak, he did not behave like himself. Tau must
have seen the difference as well u I. What can it
be? Can they have uarrelledi Why else should he
have shown such unwillingness to accept your invitation
here ? "—

“ It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor! I
could plainly see Ibat. He had not the power of
accepting it. I have thought it all over, I assure you,
and I can perfectly account for everything that at ﬁrst
seemed strange to me as well as to you.”

“ Can you indeed i "

“Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most
satisfactory way ;——hut you, Elinor, who love to doubt
where you cam—It will not satisfy you, I know; but
you shall not talk in: out of my trust in it. I am per-
suaded that Mrs Smith suspects his regard for Marianne,
diupproves of it 353mm because she has other views
for him ), and on t account is eager to get him away;
—a.nd that the business which she sends him off to
transact, is invented as an excuse to dismiss him. This
is what I believe to have happened. He is moreover
aware that she doe: disapprove the connexion, he dares

78 sense AND snusmu'rv.

not therefore at preeent confeae to her hip engagement
with Marianne, and he feel: him-elf obliged, from hie
dependent rituation, to give into her Ichemen, and absent
himself from Devonahire for a while. You will tell
me, I know, that thin may or may not have happened;
but I will lieten to no cavil unleeeyou can point outnny
other method of understanding the afFair as aatiafactnry
as this. And now, Elinor, what have you to any ?”

" Nothing, for you have anticipated my only/er.”

“ Then you would have told me, that it might or
might not have happened. 0h! Elinor, how incom-
prehemibk are your feelingt! You had rather take
evil upon credit than good. You had rather look out
for muery for Marianne and guilt for poor Willoughlry,
than an apology for the latter. You are renolved to
think him blameable, became he took leave of us with
lens aﬁ'ection than hie usual behaviour ha- ehown. And
is no allowance to be made for inndvertence. or far
epirite depreued by recent din-appointment? Are no
probabilities to be accepted, merely became they are
not certaintiel? In nothing due to the man whom we
have all I!) much reason to love, and no mean in the
world to think ill of? to the poetibility of motive.
unamwemble in themaelvee, though unavoidably aecret
for a while? And, after all, what in it you rupee:
him of? "

“I can hardly tell you myrelf. But lulpicion of
Iomcthing unpleasant is the inevitable con uence of
such an alteration an we have jut wit in him.
There it great truth, however, in what you have now
urged of the allowance. which ought to be made for
him, and it it my wirh to be candid in my judgment of
everybody. thloughby may undoubtedly have very
Iuﬁicient muons for hie conduct, and I VII" hope that
he hat. But it would have been more like Willoughby
to acknowledge them at once. Secrecy my be advie-

SENSE AND SENSlBlLlTY. 79

able; but still I cannot help wondering at its being
practised by him.”

“ Do not blame him, however, for departing from
his character, when the deviation is necessary. But
you really do admit the julice of what I have said in
his defence ?—I am happy—4nd he is acquitted.”

“ Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their
engagement (if they are engaged) from Mrs Smith—
and if that is the case, it must be highly expedient for
Willoughhy to be but little in Devomhire at present
But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us.”

"Concealing it from ull my dear child, do you
accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment!
This is strange indeed, when your eyes have been
reproaching them every day for incautiousnem."

“I want no proof of their affection,” said Elinor;
“ but of their engagement I do.”

“ I am perfectly satisﬁed of both.”

“Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the
subject, by either of them."

“I have not wanted syllables where actions have
spoken so plainly. Has not his behaviour to Marianne
and to all of us, for at least the last fortnight, declared
that he loved and considered her as his future wife, and
that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest rela-
tion? Have we not perfectly understood each other?
Has not my consent been daily asked by his looks, his
manner, his attentive and affectionate respect? My
Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement? How
could such a thought occur to you? How is it to he
supposed that Willoughh , persuaded as he must he of
your sister‘s love, shou d leave her, and leave her
perhaps for months, without telling her of his all'ecu'on ;
——that they should part without a mumal exchange of
conﬁdence.” .

“I confess,” replied Elinor, “that every circum-

80 SENSE AND SENSIIIILI‘I'V.

ﬁance except one it in favour of an engagement, but
that an: is the total silence of both on the object, and
with me it almost outweigh- every other.”

“ How strange this is! You mun think wretchedly
indeed of Willoughby, if, after Ill that ha openly

between them, you can doubt the nature ofthe
tenna on which they are together. Hal he been acting
a part in his behaviour to your sister all thin time? Do
you In pane him really indiﬁmnt to her?”

“ Ni), I cannot think that. He must and doc! love
her, I am lure.”

“But with u mange kind of tendemen, if he can
leave her with such indifference, tuch careleuneu of the
future, as you attribute to him."

“ You must remember, my dear mother, that I have
never considered thin matter as certain. I have had my
doubts, I confess; but they are fainter than they were,
and they may noon be entire! done away. If we find
they correspond, every fear 0 mine will be removed."

“ A mighty conceuion indeed! If you were to nee
them at the altar, you would auppose that they were
going to be married. Ungracimu girl i But I require
no luCl‘l roof. Nothing, in my opinion, ha ever
paused to Justify doubt; no aecrecy ha. been attempted 5
all has been uniformly open and unnerved. You
cannot doubt your sister’s wishes. It mutt be Wil-
loughby therefore whom you Impect. But why? Is
he not a man of honour and feeling? Han there been
any inconsistency on his side to create alum? can he
be deceitful?"

“ I he not, I believe not," cried Elinor. “ I love
Willough y, sincerely love him; and on 'cion of hit
integrity cannot be more painful to yournel than to me.
It has been involuntary, and I will not encourage it. I
wan startled, I confeu by the alteration in his mannerl
this morning; he did not speak like himeelf, and did

sense AND snitsrsan-v. 81

not return your kindness and with cordialit . But all this
may be explained by such a situation a his affairs as
you have supposed. He had just parted from my Jim,
had seen her leave him in the greatest afﬂiction; and
if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs Smith,
to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet
aware that by declining your invitation, by saying that
he was going away for some time, he should seem to
act an ungcnerous, a suspicious, part by our family, he
might well be embarrassed and disturbed. In arch a
case, a plain and open avowal of his difﬁculties would
have been more to his honour, I think, as well as rmre
consistent with his general character z—Imt I will not
raise objections against any one’s conduct on so illihcral
in foundation, :u a differenCe in judgment from myself,
or a deviation from what I may think right and con-
sistent."

“ You k ver ro I . Willoughb certainl
does not ﬁne toyb: siifpeyeted. Thougli we mi
not known him long. he is no stranger in this part of
the world; and who has ever ken to his disadvan-
tage? Had he been in a situation to act independently
and marry immediately, it might have been odd that he
should leave us without acknowledging everything to
me at once: but this is not the case. It is an engage-
ment in some respects not prosperoust begun, for their
marriage must be at a very uncertain distance; and
even secrecy, as far as it can be observed, may now be
very advisable." .

They were interru by the entrance of Margaret;
and Elinor was then at li to think over the re-
sentatioos of her mother, to acknowled e the probability
of many, and hope for the 'ustice ofal .

They saw nothing of arianne till dinner time, when
she entered the room and took her place at the table
without saying a word. Her eyes were red and swollen ;

I. I

82 SENSE AND srmsmu'rv.

and it leemed u if her tear- were even then restrained
with dilliculty. She avoided the looks of them all,
could neither eat nor rpeak, and after came time, on
her mother’s Iilently preraing her hand with tender
companion, her Imall degree of fortitude wu quit:
overcome—the burst into tearl and left the room. '
This violent oppreuion of Ipirite continued the whole
evening. She wan without any power, became the was
without any desire of command over herself. The
tlightert mention of anything relative to Willoughby over-
powered her in an instant; and though her family were
moat anxiously attentive to her comfort, it um Impb‘o
rible for them, if they ke at all, to keep clear of
every subject which her eelingr connected With him.

 

cblvm £171

ARIANNE would have thought hereelf ve
inexcuaable had she been able to rleep at l
the ﬁrst night after parting from Willoughby.

She would have been ashamed to look her family in the
face the next morning, had she not rioen from her bed
in more need of repose than when the lay down in it.
But the feelings which made Iuch compo-Inc a disgrace.
left her in no danger of incurring it. She wan awoke
the whole night, and the wept the greatest part of it.
She or up with a headache, wan unable to talk, and
unwil ing to take any nourishment; giving pain e
moment to her mother and sitters, and forbidding
attempt at conrolation from either. Her ten-ibility woe
potent enough!

When breakfast was over, she walked out by henelf,
and wandered about the village of Allenham, indulging
the recollection of part enjoyment and crying over the
present reverse for the chief of the morning.

 

(July/E

 

rsznse AND ansmu-rv. 83

The evenin of in the ual indul cc of
feeling. Sﬁlmver favzqurite mggtel‘iatehe
had been to play to illoughhy, every air in
which their voiceu had been oftenert joined, and at n
the imminent gazing on every line of muaic that he
had written out for her, till her heart wan I) havy that
no farther eadneol could be gained; and thin nouriuh-
ment of grief was every dny applied. She spent whole
houn at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying,
her voice often totally «upended by her team. In
books, too, as well at in mimic, the courted the
which a contract between the put and preeent was
certain of giving. She read nothing but what they had
been used to read together.

Such violence of aﬂiiction indeed could not be eup-
ported for ever; it sunk within a few day: into a calmer
melancholy; but these employmente, to which «he dail
recun’ed, her eolitary walla and nilent meditations, ' I
produced occasional elfulionl of sorrow a lively an ever.

No letter from Willoughby came, and none leemed
ex ted by Marianne. Her mother wan riled,
an Elinor again became uneaay. But Mn D wood
could ﬁnd explanation: whenever the wanted them,
which at lean natiaﬁed hemlf. -

“ Remember, Elinor," laid the, “how very often
Sir John fetchea our letter- hinuelf from the poet, and
carrier them to it. We have already agreed that
secrecy may be necessary, and we muet acknowledge
that it could not be maintained if their correlyondence
were to pan through Sir John’l hands.”

Elinor could not deny the truth of thin, and Ike tried
to ﬁnd in it a motive mﬂicient for their Iilence. But
there was one method to direct, to imple, and in her
a inion no eligible of knowing the reel late of the
a 'r, and of instantly removing all mynery, tlnt Ihe
could not help suggesting it to her mother.

84 SENS! AND SENSIBILITV.

“Why do you not ask Marianne at once,” aid she,
“ whether the in or in not engaged to Willonghbyl
From you, her mother, and to kind, to indulgent a
mother, the question could not give offence. It would
be the natural relult of your aﬁ'ection for her. She
need to be all nnreaerve, and to you more especially."

“I would not aek Inch 3 quenion for the world.

Suppoaing it ble that they are not engaged, what
distress would ot such an inquiry inﬂictl At any

rate, it would be mott ungeneroue. I should never
deeerve her conﬁdence again, after forcing from her a
confession of what in mean: at preuent to be unacknow-
ledged to any one. I know Marianne’e heart: I know
that she dearly love: me, and that I shall not be the
last to whom the affair is made known, when circum-
mncea make the revenlment of it eligible. I would
not attempt to force the conﬁdence of any one, of a
child much leu, became a Jen-e of duty would prevent
the denial which her wishes might direct.”

Elinor thought thin generosity overltnined, coneider-
ing her sister’r youth, and urged the matter farther, but in
vain ; common tense, common care, common enee,
were all aunlt in Mn Dashwood’u romntic de icacy.

It was several day. before Willoughby’e name wal
mentioned before Marianne b any of her family; Sir
John and Mn Jenningn, in eed, were not to nice;
their witticilrne added pain to many a painful honr ;—
but one evenin , Mn Daehwood, accidentally taking
up a volume of hake are, exclaimed,

“We have never niahed Hamlet, Marianne; our
dear Willoughby went away before we could get
through it. We will put it by, that when he come:
again. . . . But it may be montht, perhape, before Ibo!
haPMl‘ll

“Monthel ” cried Marianne, with pong Intprioe.
“ No—nor many weeIu." ~

sense AND sensrnru'rr. r 85

Mrs Dathwood was sorry for what she had said;
but it gave Elinor pleasure, as it mduced a Ty from
Marianne so expresaive of confidence in W' oughby
and knowledge of his intentions.

One morning, about a week after his leaving the
country, Marianne was prevailed on to join her sitters
in their usual walk, instead of wandering away by her-
self. Hitherto she had carefully avoided every com-
panion in her rambles. If her sisters intended to walk
on the downs, she directly stole away towards the
lanes: if th talked of the valley, the was as speedy
in climbing e hills. and could never be found when
the others set off. But at length she was secured by
the exertions of Elinor, who great] disapproved ouch
continual seclusion. They walke along the road
through the valley, and chieﬂy in silence, for Mari-
anne’s mind could not be controuled, and Elinor, stin-
lied with gaining one point, would not then attempt
more. Beyond the entrance of the valley, where the
country, though still rich, was less wild and more e«yen,
a long stretch of the rend which they had travel] on
ﬁrst coming to Berton lay before them; and on reach-
ing that point, they stopped to look around them, and
examine a prospect which formed the dietance of their
view from the cottage, from a mat which they had
never happened to reach in any of their walks before.

Amongst the ob'ects in the scene, they soon dis-
covered In anirm one; it was a man on horseback,
riding towards them. In a few minutes they could
distinguish him to be a gentleman; and in a moment
afterwards Marianne rapturoualy exclaimed,

“It is he; it is indeed ;—I know it is!”—aud
W hastening to meet him, when Elinor cried out,

“ Indeed, Marianne,l think you are mistaken. It
is not Willoughby. The person is not tall enough for
him, and has not his stir."

36 mm.

'Hchshh'uﬂm‘I-I-ek
bl—Birﬂimﬁhlr. [Irvin-cu.
bur-Hm”

Shﬂdagulyuadrqﬂudﬁﬁc,»
mmﬁm ' ‘ ,asllﬁk-l-n‘
curinofhnotheing ,qudnd‘ In
nqunupvkhhcr.
yudld'thegudm mmﬁgh
mmwmnm:mmmmu
wahnnyinghack,vh:n[a]lhevoieud'huhha
immniadmdchinhualrlﬁilhln-vdl
knownuWillwghby’sjoinedthaninheuhghab
mdkuwmdmnd'iﬂlm. intend

EdnrdFeI-nn.

Hewthemlypemninthewodd'homldn
thawm:heforgimfornoth¢ingwmoughbysdle
onlyonewhooouldhavegainedalm'lcﬁnnhenhn
Ihcdiqandhamntonileonh'sudinhuim’o

'neufmgotfornimeheron ' ‘

cﬁmﬁmdgivinghilholumh'uml
valkedhckwiththemmﬂamqvhirhahc'u
v mum“... m,

ewu'cco than with ' ,
bulapecially by Marianne, who Ihowemrenrmh
ofregardinlwrmcepdonofhhnlhmmElinor
hmelf. To Marianne, indeed, the minghetm
Edwardand her ismrwu but: continuadon ofllm
uncountable coldneu which Ihe had oﬁtn obtrnd at
Norlznd in their mutual behaviour. 0n Edward’u tide.
more particularly, than was a deﬁciency of Ill an: a
lovzroughtmlook and y on Inch an occasion. He
wu conﬁned. leaned narcer uenaihle of pleasure in
lacing them, looked neither rapturouu not gay, nid little
but what wu forced from him by question. anddip
dnguhhed Elinor by no mark of alfecn'on. Marianne
raw and limned with increaling nurpriae. She began

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 87

nlmon to feel a dislike of Edward; anditended. II
every feeling mutt end with her, by carrying back her
thoughts to Willnnghb , whoee manner: formed I
contract ruliiciently etrihiog to those of his brother
elect.

After a short silence which Iucceeded the ﬁrst eur-
Prll: and inquiries of nwcting, Marianne asked Edward
If he came directly from London. No, he had been in
Devonshire a fortnight.

“ A fortnightl ” she repeated, turprieed at hie being
to long in the name county with Elinor without leeing
her before.

Helookednﬂrerdiureueduheadded,thathehad
been staying with some friend: near Plymouth.

“ Have you been lately in Suuex ?’ aid Elinor.

“I was at Norland about a month ago."

“And how does dear, dear Norland look?" cried
Marianne-

“ Dear, dear Nor-land,” laid Elinor, “ probably look:
much as it nlwa a does at thin line of yeah—the wood!
and walla thick y covered with dead leaves.”

“Oh! ” cried Marianne, “with what tranIporu'ng
uneationo have I formerly oeen them fall! How have
I delighted, at I walked, to lee them driven in shower:
about me by the wind! What feelin I have they, the
season, the air altogether inepiredl l§ow there in no
one to regard them. They are seen only a a nuiaance,
twept hutily off, and driven as much at possible from
the light.” ’

“ It in not every one,” said Elinor, “who ha your

‘on for dead leaves."

“ No; my feelings are not often shared, not often
underetood. But ram/inner they are."—AI the aid
thin, the sunk into n reverie for a few momenta; but
routing henelf again, “ Now, Edward,” aid the, calling
hll attention to the prospect, “ here in Barton valley.

88 sens: AND smrnru'nr.

Look upatieand be mnquil ifyou can. Lookatthooe
hillll Didyooeverleethdroquala? Tothe left in
Barton Park, among: those wood- and luntatinne.
You may lee one end of the home. A there, be-
neath that fanheot hill which tiles with ouch grandeur,
in our cottage."

“ It in a beautiful country,” he replied; “but these
bottom: mun be dirty in winter.”

“ How can you think of din, with ouch objects before

on 2 "
y “ Became,” replied he, smiling, “amongst the mat of
the check. befole me, I see a very dirty lane."

“ ow strange! ” laid Marianne to herself a the
walked on.

“ Have you an agremble neighbouth here? Are
the Middleton: pleasant people 2 ”

“ No, not at all,” answered Marianne; “we could
not be male unfortunately situated."

“ Marianne,” cried her inner, “how can you ﬂy on?
How can you be no unjust? They are a very reepect-
ahle family, Mr Femn, and towards us have behaved
in the friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne,
how man pleanant dayn we have owed to them 2"

“ No,’ laid Marianne, in a low voice, “nor how
many painful moments."

Elinor took no notice of this, and directing her atten-
tion to their viuitor, endeavoured to In oomething
like diocouroe with him by talking 0 their preterit
residence, its conveniences, &c., extoning from him
occalional question: and remark; Hie coldneu and
reserve mortiﬁed her aeverely: the was vexed and half
angry; but reoolving to regulate her behaviour to him
by the past mther than the pretent, ehe avoided every
appearance of resentment or diwlcmmrc, and treated
him as she thought he ought to be treated from the
family connection.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 39

Chsptte £1733.

V RS DASHWOOD was surprised only for a

moment at seeing him; for his conning to

Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the
most natural. Her jo and expressions of regard long
outlived her wonder. e received the kindest welcome
from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve. could not
stand against such a reception. They had begun to fail
him before he entered the house, and they were quite
overcome by the ca ivating manners of Mn Dashwood.
Indeed a man coul not very well be in love with either
of her daughters, without extending the passion to her;
and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him won
become more like himself. His sﬁ'ectiom seemed to
resnimate towards them all, and his interest in their
welfare again became perceptible. He was not in
spirits however; he praised their house, admired its
Prospect, was attentive and kind; but still he was not
in spirits. The whole family perceived it, and Mrs
Dashwood, attributing it to some want of libenlit in
his mother, sat down to table indignant against all fish
parents.

“tht are Mn Ferrar’s views for you at present,
Edward i" said she, when dinner was over, and they
had drawn round the ﬁre; “are you still to be a great
orator in spite of yourself?”

“No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I
have no more talents than inclination for a public life.”

“ But how is your fame to be established? for famous

ou must be to satisfy all your family; and with no

Inclination for expense, no affection for strangers, no
profession, and no assurance, you may ﬁnd it a diiiicult
matter.”

“I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be dis-

90 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

tin ithed; and I have every tea-on to hopeluever
Iha l. Thank Heaven! I cannot he forced Into geniue
and eloquence."

“ You have no ambition, I well know. Your wiahel,
are all moderate."

“AI moderate at those of the rut of the world, I
believe. I with, as well an everybody elee, to be per-
fectly happy; but, like everybody clue, it must be in my
own way. Greatness will not make me lo."

“ Strange if it would!” cried Marianne. “What
have wealth or grandeur to do with happineu l ”

“ Grandeur haa but little,” eaid Elinor, “but wealth
has much to do with it."

“ Elinor, for Iharnel ” said Marianne; “money can
only ive happinele where there ll nothing elee to give
it. eyond a competence, it can afford no real util-
faction, at far as mere self in concerned.”

“Perhaps,” said Elinor, lmiling, “ we may come to
the same point. Tour competence and my wealth are
very much alike, I dare say; and without them, an the
world goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of
external comfort muet be wanting. Your ideal are
only more noble than mine. Come, what in your
competence 2 ”

“About eighteen hundred or two thouund a year;
not more than that."

“ Elinor laughed. Two thousand a year! On: in
my wealth! I guessed how it would end."

“And yet two thounand a year in a very moderate
income," mid Marianne. “A famil cannot well be
maintained on a smaller. I am sure am not extrava-
gant in my demands. A proper cmbliahmcnt of aer-
vuma, zi carriage, purlqu two, and hunk-m, cannot be
supported on luau."

Elinor smiled again, to hear her liner detailing to
accurately their future expense. at Comhe Magna.

SENSE AND msrnrnm. 9!

"Hunter-II” repeated Edward—“ But why muat
you have humeral Everybody doe: not hunt."

Marianne coloured an the replied, “But moot people
doil)

“I wilh,” laid Margaret, wilting out a novel
thought1 “that wmcbody would give on all a large
fortune apiece! "

“0 that they would!" cried Marianne, her eye:
Taming with animation, and her cheeh glowing with
t e delight of ouch imaginary happinen.

“We are all unanimous in that with, I III 0e,”
laid Elinor, “in trite of the inmﬂiciency of w th."

“Oh dear,” cned Margaret, “ how hapgy I Ihould
be. I wonder what I thould do with it!

Marianne looked at if the had no doubt on that point.

“ I Ihould be puzzled to IFDd a large fortune my-
Iell',” laid Mr: DIIlIWOOt‘l, “ If my children were all to
be rich without my help.”

" You mutt begin your improvementl on this house,"
observed Elinor, “and your diﬂicultiee will noon
vanieh.”

“What magniﬁcent order: would travel from thin
family to London,” laid Edward, “in Inch an event!
What a happy day for book-ellen, made—allele, and
print-ahopel You, Miu Dalhwood, would give a
general commi-iun for every new print of merit to be cent
you—and al for Marianne,I know her greatneu of
tool, there would not be mulic enough in Motion to A
content her. And bookt!—Thomlon, Cowper, Scott
——ehe would buy them all over and over again; the
would buy up every copy, I believe, to ment their
falling into unworthy hands; and the w d have every
book that telll her how to admire an old twisted tree.
Should not you, Marianne? Forgive me, if I am
Iaucy. But I won willing to Ihow you that I

not forgot our old dispute-J

92 SENSE AND SIIISI'BILITY.

“ I love to be reminded of the put, Edward—
whether it be melancholy or gay, I love to recall it
—-and you will never offend me by talking of former
times. You are very right in lupponing how my money
would be t—eome of it, at [eat my loooe cult,
would certainly be employed in improving my collection
of music and boo ”

“ And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in
annuities on the author: or their heirl.”

“No, Edward, I ahould have something clue to do
with it.”

“ Perhapl, then, you would bestow it u a reward on
that person who wrote the ablen defence of your
favourite maxim, that no one can ever be in love more
than once in their life—for your opinion on that point
ll unchanged, I pretume ? "

“ Undoubtedly. At or time of life, inionl are
tolerany ﬁxed. It is not ikely that I thou d now tee
or hear anything to change them."

“ Marianne II n steadfalt an ever, you ate,” laid
Elinor, “ the ll not at all altered."

“ She hat only grown a little more grave than the
was.”

“Nay, Edwar " laid Marianne, “you need not re-
proach me. You are not very gay y0urself.”

“Why should you think to l " re )licd he, with a
sigh. “ But aiety never was a part 0 my character.”

“ Nor do think it a part of Marianne’l,” laid
Elinor. “ I should hardly call her a lively girl; the in
very earnest, very eager in all she doet— Iometimel
tallu a great deal, and always with animation—but Ihc
in not often really merry."

“I believe you are right,” he replied, “and yet I
have always Jet her down an a lively virl.”

“ I have frequently detected myoel in ouch kind of
mistakes,” said Elinor, “ in a total minpprehemion of

sense AND SENSIBILITV. 93

character in tome point or od'rer—fnncying le- no
much more gay or grave, or ingenioue or mpi than
they really are, and I can hardly tell why, or in what
the deception originated. Sometime: one in guided by
what they lay of themeelvel, and very frequently by what
other Eople say of them, within giving oneee f lime
to deli rate and judge."

“ But I thought it wan right, Elinor,’’ said Marianne,
“to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people.
I thought ourjudgmenta were .ven us merely to be lub-
Iervient m thou of our neigh urn. This In: alwaye
been your doctrine, I am eure."

“ No, Marianne, never. My doctrine ha. never
aimed at the Iubjection of the undentanding. All I
have ever attempted to inﬂuence ha been the behaviour.
You mutt not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I
confeu, of having often wilhed you to treat our ac-
quaintance in geneml with greater attention; but when
have I advieed you to adopt their sentiment. or conform
to their judgment in eerioul matters ? "

“ You have not been able then to brin ur liner
over to your plan of general civility,” eai Edward to
Elinor. “ Do you gain no ground i”

“Quite the contrary,” replied Elinor, looking ex-
pressively at Marianne.

" My judgment,” he returned, " I! all on your tide
ofthe quenion ; but I am afraid my practice ll much
more on our sister’s. I never with to offend, but I
no no foo ilhly Ihy, that I often teem negligent, when
I am only kept back by my natural awkwardness. I
have frequently thought that I must have been intended
by nature to be fond of low company, I am no little at
my case among stranger: of gentility! "

“ Marianne has not uhyneu to excuee any inattention
of hen," aid Elinor.

“ She know: her own worth too well for fair: slum,"

94 SIMS! All) SENSINLITY.

’ Edward. “Shynel in onlytheelfectofaaenae
o inferiorityin lune vayorother. Iflomddperlnade
I'll adfdntmylnannu'lwereperfeetlyeuyand grace-
ful, I thould not be thy.”

“But you would null be reserved," aid Marianne,
“and that in worse."

Edward nared—“ Reserved? Am I reserved,
Marianne ?"

“ Yes. very.”

“ I do not undemod you,” replied he, colouring.
“ Raervedl—how, in what manner? What am I to
tell you.’ What can on mppoae ? ”

Elinor looked turpan at his emotion, but trying to
laugh of? the tubject, the laid to him, “ Do not you
know my liner well enough to undemand what the
meana? Do not you know the call: every one re-
served, who does not talk at fast, and admire what ohc
admires at rapturoualy u henelf?"

Edward made no amwer. Hi: gravity and thought-
fulneu returned on him in their fuller: extent. and he
sat for tome time silent and dull.

Chm“ $11333.

LINOR saw with rent unearinen the low spirit:

of her friend. I‘fis Vilil afordcd her but a very
partial satisfaction, while his own enjoyment in

it appeared to imperfect. It wan evident that he wan
unhappy; the wiahed it were equally evident that he
ttill distinguished her by the name aﬂcetion which once
the had felt no doubt of inspiring; but hithem the
continuance of hit prcfcmnoc seemed very uncertain,
and the retervedneu of his manner toward: her .contn-
dicred one moment what a more animated look had

intimated the preceding one.

SENSE AND smsrniu'rv. 95

He joined her and Marianne in the breath-mom
the next morning before the other: were down; and
Marianne, whowae alw I eager to romote their
ha pineu a far as Ihe could, noon left to them-
aelgu. But, before Ihe wan half way up Iain, ehe
heard the parlour door open, and, turning round, was
mnilhed to ace Edward himselfcomc out.

“ I am going into the village to lee my horses,” laid
he, “an you are not. yet ready for breakfaet; I shall be
back again presently."

 

Edward returned to them with ﬁ'eah admiration of
the anrrounding country; in hit walk to the village, he
had seen many parts of the valley to advantage; and
the village inelf, in a much higher eituation than the
cottage, afforded a general View of the whole, which
had exceedingly Pleased him. Thin wu a abject
which inlured Mananne'l attention, and she wan begin-
ning to describe her own admiration of these eceneu, and
to ueetion him more minutely on the objects that had

rtlcularly uruck him, when Edward interrupted her

laying, " You mutt. not inquire too far, Marianne—
remember, I have no knowledge in the pictureeque, and
I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of tame, if
we come to aniculart. shall call hill: ateep, which
ought to be ld; ourfacce nraleige and uncouth, which
ought to be irregular and m ; and dimnt object:
out of light, which ought on?)9 to be indietinct through
the soft medium of a hazy atmo here. You must be
ntiaﬁed with Inch adlnintion as can honestly give. I
call it a very ﬁne country—the hill: are ueep, the wood.
leem full of line timber, and the valley looks comfort-
able and snug—with rich meadow: and meral neat
fnrm-houlel scattered here and there. It exactly
mar/era my idea of a ﬁne country, became it unites
beauty with utility~and I dare lay it in a picturesque

96 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

one too,because you admireit; I can only believe it
to be full of rocks and promontoriel, grey mo- and
brushwood, buttheseareallloetonme. Iknow
nothing of the icturesque.”

“I am afraid it is but too true," said Marianne;
" but why should you boast of it?"

“ I Inspect,” said Elinor, “that to avoid one kind of
nﬂ'cctntion, Edward here fullt into another. Because hr.-
believes many people pretend to more admiration of the
beauties of nature than they really feel, and it disgusted
with euch pretensions, he affects greater indifference and
lens discrimination in viewing them himself than Che

He ll fastidious and will have an aﬁ'ectau'on
of his own."

“ It is very true," laid Marianne, “ that admiration of
landacnpe uenery it become a mere 'urgon. Every-
body retendl to feel and triea to descrl with the mate
and e egunce of him who lint deﬁned what picturesque
beauty was. I detect 'ar n of every kind, and tome-
timet I have kept my eelrngl to myself, because I could
ﬁnd no language to describe them in but what we worn
and hackneyed out of all seme and meaning.”

“ I am convinced," said Edward, “ that you really
feel all the delight in a ﬁne protpect which on profeu
to feel. But, in return, your Inter must aﬁow me to
feel no more than I profess. I like a ﬁne prospect,
but not on picturesque principles. I do not like
crooked, twisted, hlaeted trees. I admire them much
more if they are tall, maight, and ﬂourishing. I donut
like ruined, tattered cottages. I am not fond of
nettles, or thistles, or heath blouoms. I have more
pleasure in a snug farm-house than a watchtower—end
a two ) of tidy, happy villagers please me better than the
ﬁnest nditti in the world."

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with
compassion at her ﬁnger. Elinor only laughed.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 97

The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne
remained thoughd‘ully silent, ﬁll a new object mddenl
enga ed her attention. She was sitting Edwn ,
and In taking his tea from Mrs Dash , his hand
passed so directly before her as to make a ring, with a
plait of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of
his ﬁngers.

“ I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward,” she
cried. “Is that Fanny’s hair? I remember her
promising to give you some. But I should have
thought her hair had been darker.”

Marianne spoke inconsiderater what she really felt
—but when she saw how much she had 'ned Edward,
her own vexation at her want of thong r. could not be
surpassed by his. He coloured ve deeply, and giving
a momentary glance at Elinor, rep ied, “ es, it Is my
sister's hair. he setting always casts a different shade
on it, you know.”

Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious
likewise. That the hair was her own, she instan-
taneously felt as well satisﬁed as Marianne; the only
diﬁ'erence in their conclusions was, that what Marianne

. considered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was
conscious must have been procured by some theﬁ or
contrivance unknown to herself. She was not in s
humour, however, to regard it as an aflront, and
affecting to take no notice of what had passed, by
instantly talkin of something else, she internally
resolved henc orward to catch every ofpommity
of eyeing the hair, and satisfying bersel, beyond
all doubt, that it was exactly the shade of her
own.

Edward’s embarrassment lasted some time, and it
ended in an absence of mind still more settled. He was
particularly grave the whole momin . Marianne severely
censured herself for what sh has said; but her own

I. G

98 sense AND srmsrnm-rv.

forgiveness might have been more eyeedy, had the known
how little oﬂience it had given her sister.

Before the middle of the day, they were vilihed by
Sir John and Mn Jenning, who, having heard of the
arrival of n gentleman at the cottage, came to take a
Iurvey of the gum With the auintance of hit
mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in discovering
that the name of Ferraro began with an F, and thin

repaired a future mine of raillery againu the devoted
Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their acquain-
tance with Edward could have prevented from being
immediately sprung. But, an it was, the only learned
from some very signiﬁcant looks, how for their

tration, founded on Mnrgalet’l imtructionl, extenm

Sir John never came to the Dashwood: without
either inviting them to dine at the park the next day,
or to drink tea with them that evening. On the
prelent occasion, for the better entertainment of their
visitor, towards whose amusement he felt him-elf
bound to contribute, he wilhed to engage them for
both.

“You mm drink tea with in to-night," laid he,
“for we chall be quite alone—and to-morrow you ‘
mutt nboolurely dine with us, for we nhall be a large

n .7,

Pain Jennings enforced the neoestity. “And who
know but you may raise in dance?" laid the. “And
that will tempt you,Miu Marianne.” .'

“A dance! ” cried Marianne. “Impossible! ”
Who in to dance ? ”

“Who! Why yourselves, and the Careys, and
Whitnkerr, to he sure. What! you thought
nobody could dance because :I cumin person that nhall
be namech in gone! "

“ I Willl with all my aoul," cried Sir John, “that
Wilioughby were among us again."

SENSE AND SINSIBILITY. 99

This, and Marianne’s blushin gave new
to Edward. “ And who is Wi oughby ? ” said he, in
a low voice to Miss Duhwood, by whom he was
sitting.

She gave him a brief reply. Marianne’l countenance
was more communicative. Edward saw enough to
comprehend not only the meaning of others, but nuch
of Mariannc’s expressions as had puzzled him before;
and when their minors left them, he went immediately
round her, and laid, in a whisper, “I have been
guessin . Shall I tell you my guess ? "

“ hat do ou mean?"

“ Shall I tel you ?"

“Certainly.”

“ Well, then, I guess that Mr Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could
not help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner, and,
after a moment's silence, said,

“Ohl Edward! How can you P—But the time
will come, I hope . . . I am sure you will like him."

“I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonished
at her earnestness and warmth; for had he not imagined
it to he s joke for the good of her acquaintance in

eneral, founded only on a something or a nothing
tween Mr Willonghby and herself, he would not lave
ventured to mention it.

chum: 53%.

DWARD remained a week at the cottage; he
was earnestly pressed by Mrs Dashwood to stay
longer; but as if he were bent only on self-mor-

tiﬁcation, he seemed resolved to be gone when his
enjoyment among his friends was at the height. His

loo SINSI AND SBNSIBIUTY.

Qiria, durin the In two or three days, though still
very unequa , were greatly improved—~he grew more
and more partial to the house and environs—never spoke
of going away without a ti h—declared his time to be
wholly disengaged—even ubted to what place he
should go when he left them—but still go he must.
Never had any week passed so quickly—he could hardly
believe it to be gone. He said so repeatedly; other
things he said too, which marked the turn of his feelings
and gave the lie to his actions. He had no pleasure at
Norland; be detected being in town; but either to
Norland or London he must go. He valued their
kindness beyond anything, and his greatest happine-
was in being with them. Yet he must leave them at
the end of a week, in spite of their wishes and his own,
and without any restraint on his time.

Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of
acting to his mother’s account; and it was happy for
her that he had a mother whose character was so im-
perfectly known m her, as to he the general excuse for
everything strange on the part of her son. Dita pointed,
howeVer, and vexed as she was, and sometimes 'spleased
with his uncertain behaviour to herself; she wasvery well
disposed on the whole to regard his actions with all the
candid allowances and generous qualiﬁcations, which had
been rather more painfully exmrted from her, for Wil-
loughby's service, by her mother. His want of spirits,
of openness, and of consistency, were most usually attri-
buted to his want of independence, and his better know-
ledge of Mrs Femrs’s dispositions and designs. The
shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose in
leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination,
the same inevitable necessity of temporising with his
mother. The old well-cmblished grievance of dut
against will, parent against child, was the cause of al .
She would have been glad to know when these dilﬁcul-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. « [OI

ties were to ceale, this opposition was to yield,—when
Mrs Ferran would be reformed, and her con be at
l. to be happy. But from Inch vain wiahec. the
was orced to turn for comfort to the renewal of her
conﬁdence in Edward'l alfection, to the remembrance
of every mark of regard in look or word which
fell from hiln while at Barton, and above all to that
ﬂattering proof of it which he constantly wore round
hil ﬁnger.

“I think, Edward,” said Mn Dashwood, as they
were at breakfast the last morning, “you would be a
happier man if you had any profession to engage your
time and give an intereut to your plan: and actions.
Some inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might
result from it—you would not be able to give them so
much of your time. But (with a smile) you would be
materially beneﬁth in one particular at least—~you
would know where to go when you left them.”

“I do assure you," he replied, “that I have long
thought on this point as you think now. It has been,
and Is, and probably will alwayu be a heavy misfortuneto
me, that I have had no necessary burinese to engage me,
no profession to give me em iloyment or afford me any-
thing like independence. llut unfortunately in own
nicety and the nicety of my friends, have made me
what I am, an idle, helpless being. We never could
agree in our choice of a profession. I alwaya preferred
the church, an I still do. But that was not mart
enough for my family. They recommended the army.
That was a great deal too smart for me. The law wan
allowed to be genteel enough; many young men, who
had chambers in the Temple, made a very good appear-
ance in the ﬁrst circles, and drove about town in very
knowing gigs. But I had no inclination for the law,
even in this less abstruse study of it, which my family
approved. A: for the navy, it had fashion on its side,

'02 SENSE AND SKNSIBILITV.

but I wan too old when the subject rm first named to
enter ig—and, at length, at then: wan no neecuit for
my having any profession at all, as I might be an ash-
ing and expemnve without a. red coat on my back a
With one, idleneu wan pronounced on the whole to be
the moat adnntageoue and honourable, and a young
man of eighteen in not in general I0 eameuly bent on
being buy no to resist the solicitation. of hit friend: to
do nothing. I was therefore entered at Oxford, and
have been properly idle ever since."

“The comequence of which“! Iuppooe, will be,”
laid Mn Dashwood, “since leinure lﬂl not promoted
your own happiness, that your 00m will be brought up
to at many pursuiu, employmente, profeeaionl, and
trades on Collumella’a."

“They will be brought up,” said he, in a oer-ions
accent, “to be as unlike myeelf as in pom'ble,—in
feelin , in action, in condition, in eve ' "

” me, come; thilia all an elfueion o immediate
want of spirits, Edward. You are in n mdancholy
humour, and fancy that any one unlike yourself mut be
happy. But remember that the pain of parting from
friend: will be felt by eve body at times, whatever be
their education or state. now your own happineu.
You want nothing but patience—or give it a more
fascinating name, call it hope. Your mother will
secure to you, in time, that independence you are no
anxious for; it in her duty, and it will, it mun ere long
become her happiness to prevent your whole youth from
being wasted in discontent. How much my not a few
months do! ”

“ I think,” replied Edward, “that I may defy many
month m pmrlucu any good to me."

This deeponding turn of mind, though it could not
be communicated to Mrs Duhwood, gave additional
pain to them all in the parting, which shortly tool: place,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. [03

and left an uncomfomble imprelaion on Elinor’a feelings

' ly, which required name trouble and ﬁrm to

ue. But an it wae her determination to subdue it,
and to prevent herself from a ring to lulfer more
than what all her family ruﬂ'erecinf: his oing away, she
did not adopt the method no judiciou y employed by
Marianne, on a similar occaeion, to augment and ﬁx
her eon-ow, by aeeking silence, aolitude, and idleness.
Their meant were as different an their objects, and
equally united to the advancement of each.

Elinor sat down to her drawing-table a. tool: a he
was out of the home, busily em loyed herself the whole
day, neither sought nor avoi the mention of hi:
name, appeared to intereet heraelf almost as much as
ever in the general ccncemt of the family, and if, by
thin conduct, she did net lessen her own grief, it was at
least prevented from unneceuary increaae, and her
mother and eietere were spared much aolicitude on her
account.

Such behaviour an this, so exactly the reverie of her
own, appeared no more meritorious to Marianne than
her own had seemed faulty to her. The huainmof
self-command the settled very c:lsily;—-with atron
affections it was impouible, with calm once it coul
have no merit. That her aimr’l aﬂectione were calm,
the dared not deny, though she blushed to acknowledge
it; and of the nrength of her own, the gave a very
atriking proof, by still loving and respecting that sister
in ite of thin mortifying conviction.

ithout shutting herself up from her family, or
leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them,
or laying awake the whole night to indulge meditation,
Elinor found every day afforded her leieure enough to
think of Edward, and of Edward’e behaviour, in every
pouible variety which the diﬂewnt Rate of her Ipririu
at different time: could produce ;—with tendernen,

104 SBNSR AND SENSIBILITV.

pity, approbation, censure, and doubt. There were
moments in abundance, when, if not by the abeence of
her mother and listen, at least I) the nature of their
e loymenu, convemtion was forbidden among them,

every effect of solitude wus produced. Her mind
was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could not be
chained elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a
subject so interesting, must be before her, must force
her attention, and engrosu hcr memo-y, her reﬂection,
and her fancy.

From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her
drawing-table, the was mused one morning, soon after
Edward's leaving them, by the arrival of company.
She happened to be quite alone. The closing of the
little gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of
the house, drew her eyes to the window, and she saw a
large part walking up to the door. Amongst them
were Sir John and Lady Middleton, and Mrs Jennings;
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who
were quite unknown to her. She was sitting near the
window, and as soon as Sir John perceived her, he left
the rest of the party to the ceremony of knocking at the
door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open
the casement to speak to him, though the space was so
short between the door and the window as to make it
hardly possible to speak at one without being heard at
the other.

“Well,” said he, “we have brought you some
strangers. How do you like them ? ”

“Hush! they will hear you."

“ Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmerl.
Charlotte is very pretty, I can tell you. You may see
her if you look this way.”

As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of
minutes, without taking that liberty, she begged to be
excused.

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY. 105

“ Where is Marianne? Has she run away because
we are come? I see her instrument is open.’

“ She is walking, I believe.”

They were now joined by Mrs Jennings, who had
not patience enough to wait till the door was open
before she told bar story. She came hallooing to the
window, “ How do you do, my dear? How does
Mrs Dashwood do? And where are your sisters!
What! all alone! you will be glad of a little company
to sit with you. I have brought my other son and
dau hter tosee you. 011] think of their coming so
su enly! I thought I rd n carriage last night,
while we were drinking our tea, but it never entered my
had that it could be them. I thought of nothing but
whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back
again; so I aid to Sir John, ‘I do think I hear a
carris ”; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come back
a sun
8 Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle
of her story, to receive the rest of the party; Lady
Middleton introduced the two strangers; Mrs Duh-
wood and Margaret came downstairs at the same time,
and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mn
Jennings continued her story as she walked through the
passage into the parlour, attended by Sir John.

Mrs Palmer was several years younger than Lady
Middleton, and totally unlike her in every respect. She
was short and plump, had a very pretty face, and the
ﬁnest expression of good humour in It that could possibly
be. Her manners were by no means so elegant as her
rister's, but they were much more prepoasessing. She
came in with .1 smile—smiled all the time of her visit,
except when she laughed, and smiled when she went
awn . Her husband was a grave looking youn man
of ve or six and twenty, with an air of more 'on
and sense than his wife, but of less willingness to please

 

I 06 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

or to be placed. He entered the room with a look of
self—consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies without
:pzaking a word, and, after brieﬂy surveying them and

ir apartments, took up a newspaper from the table
and continued to read it as long as he mid.

Mrs Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly en-
dowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil
and happy, was hardly seated before her admiration of
the parlour and everything in it burst forth.

“ Well ! what a delightful room this is! I never
w anything so charming ! Only think, mamma, how
it is improved since I was here last! I alwa I thought
it such a sweet place, ma’am (turning to rs Dash-
wood), but you have made it so charming ! Onl
look, sister, how delightful everything is ! How
should like such a house for myself. Should not you,
Mr Palmer? ”

Mr Palmer made her no answer, and did not even
raise his eyes from the newspaper.

“ Mr Palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing.
“ He never does, sometimes. It is so ridiculous ! ”

This was quite a new idea to Mrs Dashwood; she
had never been used to ﬁnd wit in the inattention of any
one, and could not help looking with surprise at them
both.

Mrs Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as
she could, and continued her account of their surprise the
evening before, on seeing their friends, without ceasing
till everything was told. Mrs Palmer laughed heartily
at the recollection of their astonishment, and everybody
agreed two or three times over, that it had been quite
an agremble surprise.

“ You may believe how glad we all were to see
them,” added Mrs Jennings, leaning forward towards
Elinor, and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to
be heard b no one else, though they were seated on
diﬂ'erent ' of ‘ M t “but, however, I can’t

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 107

help withing they had not travelled quite so fu, nor
made such a long journey of it, for th came all round
by London upon account of some linens, for you
know (nodding tigniﬁcantly and pointing to her daugh-
ter) it was wrong in her situation. I wanted her to
stay at home and rest this morning, but she would come
with us; she longed so much to see you all ! ”

Mrs Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her
any harm.

“ She expects to be conﬁned in February," continued
Mrs Jennings.

Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a con-
versation, and therefore exerted hemlf to ask Mr
Palmer if there was any news in the paper.

“ No, none at all,” he replied, and read on.

“ Here comes Marianne,’ cried Sir John. “ Now
Palmer, you shall see a monstrous pretty girl.”

He immediately went into the passage, opened
the front door, and ushered her in himself. Mu
Jennings asked her, as soon as she a ared, if she
had not been to Allenham; and Mrs almer laughed
so heanil at the question as to show she understood
it. Mr Palmer looked up on her entering the room,
stared at. her some minutes, and then returned to hit
newspaper. Mn Palmei’s eye was now caught by the
drawings which hung round the room. She got up to
examine them.

“Oh! dear, how beautiful these are! Well, how
delightful! Do but look, momma, how sweet! I
declare they are quite charming; I could look at them
for ever.” And then sitting down again, she very
soon forgot that there were any such things in the
room.

When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr Palmer
rooe also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himself,
and looked at them all round.

:08 sense sun SENSIBILITY.
“ll/[y love, have you been asleep?” said his wife,

lauﬁllnng.

e made her no answer, and only observed, after
again examining the room, that it was very low-pitched,
and that the ceiling was crooked. He then made his
bow and departed with the rest.

Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend
the next day at the park. Mrs Daishwood, who did
not chuse to dine with them oftener than they dined
at the cottage, absoluter refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased. But they had
no curiosity to see how Mr and Mrs Palmer ate their
dinner, and no expectation of pleasure from them in
any other way. They attem ted, therefore, likewise to
excuse themselves; the west er was uncertain and not
likely to be good. But Sir John would not be satisﬁed
——the carriage should be sent for them, and they must
come. Lady Middleton too, though she did not press
their mother, pressed them. Mrs Jennings and Mrs
Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed ually
anxious to avoid a family party, and the younge‘ladies
were obliged to yield.

“ Why should they ask us i” said Marianne, as soon
as th were gone. “ The rent of this cottage is said
to he ow; but we have it on very hard terms, if we
areto dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them or with us."

“ They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now,”
said Elinor, “ by these frequent invitations than by those
which we received from them a few weeks ago. The
alteration is not in them, if their parties are grown
tedious and dull. We must look for the change else-

where. "

SENSE AND SINSIBILITV. 109

Cheater ﬂﬁ.

S the Mine Daahwoode entered the drawing-room
of the park the next day, at one door, Mn
Palmer came running in at the other, looking a

good-humouml and merry as before. She took them
all most aﬂ'eetionntely hy the hand, and exprened great
delight in Ieeing them again.

" I am so glad to see youl " aid she, renting hereelf
between Elinor and Marianne, “for it in no bad a day
Iwae afraid you might not come, which would be a
Ihocking thing, at we go away again to—momow. We
mun go, for the Weston. come to u. next week, you
know. It was uite a eudden thing our coming at all,
and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was coming
to the door, and then Mr Palmer naked me if I would
go with him to Barton. He in to dmlll He never
tell: me anything! I am no Inrry we cannot otay
longer; however, we shall meet again in town very
noon, I hope."

They were obliged to put an end to Iuch an expec-
ution.

“ Not 0 to town!” cried Mn Palmer, with a
laugh; “ fulﬁll be quite dim inted if on do not.
I could get the nicest houae in world or you next
door to ours, in Hanover Square. You must come,
indeed. I am cure I ohall be very hap to chaperon
you at any time till I am conﬁned, if re Duhwood
ehould not like to go into public.”

They thanked her, but were obliged to resin all her
cntrcaticn.

“ Oh! my love,” cried Mrs Palmer to her Int-hand,
who just then entered the room; “ you mutt help me
to penuade the Min Duhwooda to go to town this
wrnler.’

no SENS! AND SENSIBILI‘K'Y.

Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing
to the ladies, began complaining of the weather.

“ How horrid all this is l " said he. “Such
weather makel everything and everybody diegunting.
Dulneu in as much produced within door: a: without
b rain. It maker one detest all one’e acquaintance.
\llhat the devil doe: Sir John mean by not having a
billiard-room in his house? How few people know
what comfort in! Sir John in u nupid at the weather.”

The rest of the com ny won draft in.

u I am afraid, Min arianne,” eald Sir John, “ you
have not been able to take your usual walk to Alleoharn
to-day."

Marianne looked ve grave, and said nothin .

“ Oh! don’t be on y before us,” mid Mn almer:
“for we know all about it, I ensure you; and I admire
your mate very much, for I think he is extremely hand-
some. We do not live a great way from him in the
countr , you know,-—-not above ten milee, I dare my.”

“ Nzieh nearer thirty,” laid her husband.

“Ah! well! there is not much difference. I never
was at his house; but they Jay it in a tweet, pretty
place."

“ A: vile a upot u ever I saw in my life,” said Mr
Palmer.

Marianne remained perfectly eilent, though her coun-
tenance betrayed her interest in what was laid.

“ Is it very ugly ? ” continued Mn Palmer—“ then
it must be some other place that is to pretty, I
sup one.”

hen they were seated in the dining-room, Sir John
observed with regret that they were only eight all
together.

“ My dear,” said he to his lad , “ it ll very provok-
ing that we should be to few. hy did not you at]:
the Gilberto: to come to us to-day ? "

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. I"

“ Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you Ipoke to
meabout it before, lhat it could not be done? They
dined with In lab"

“ You and I, Sir John,” uaid Mn Jennings, "ahould
no: nand upon ouch ceremony."

“Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr
l’almer.

"M love, u contradict cv bod ," aid his wife,
with th umalyolaugh. “Do ya knizw that you are
quihe rude? "

“I did not. know I conmdicted anybody in calling
your mother ill-bred."

“Ay, you may abuee me as you please," 3an the
good-natured old lady. “ You have taken Charlotte 06'
my handl, and cannot give her back again. So there I
have the whi hand of you."

Charlene nughed heartily to think that her hulbnnd
could not get rid of her, and exultingly laid, Ihe did
not care how cross be was on her, a: they must live to.
gether. I: was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured or more determined to be
happy than Mr: Palmer. The studied indifference,
insole-rice, :Iml discontent of her husband gave her no
pain; and when he scolded or abused her, the was
highl diverted.

“ r Palmer in no droll l ” said the, in a whieper, to
Elinor. “ He is always out of humour."

Elinor was not inclined, after a little oboervation, to
give him credit for being so genuinel and unafl'ecudly
illonatured or ill-bred as he wish to up ar. His
temper might perhaps be a little soured by riding, like
many othcrn of bin aux, that through some unaccount-
able him in Elvour of beauty, he wan the husband of a
very Iilly woman—4m she knew that this kind of
blunder was too common for any sensible man to be
Instineg hurt by it. It was rather a wiuh of dininction,

"I ms: AND msmurv.

rhe believed, which uced hi- eonrunpunn treat-
ment of everybody, all-lid» general ahuc of everything
before him. It war the denim of appearing mperior to
otherpeople. ’I‘hemotivewutoocommontohe
wondered at; but the mean, however they might euc-
oeed by enablilhing his Npe'riority in ill-breeding, were
not likely to attach any one to him except hie wife.

“ Oh! my dear Min Daahwood," said Mn Palmer
noon aftenvardl, "I have got ouch a favour to ask of
you and your liner. Will you come and lpend name
time at Cleveland this Chmtmai.’ Now, ray do—
and come while the Weston: are with In. on cannot
think how happy I thall be! It will be quite delight-
full—My love,” applying to her huhnd, “don't
ltau long to have the Miss Daahwooda come to Cleve-

nd 2 "

“Certainly,” he replied with a loser—4‘ I came into
Devonahire with no other view."

“There now,"———uid his lad , “ you see Mr Palmer
ex cu you; no you cannot re uae to come.”

hey both eagerly and reenlutcly declined her invita<
tron.

“ But indeed, you must and thall come. I am sure
you will like it of all things. The Wenona will be
with us, and it will be quite delightful. You cannot
think what a tweet lace Cleveland in; and we are to
gay now, for Mr galrner is always going about the
country canvauing again. the election; and I0 many

ple come to dine with us that I never saw before,
It in quite charming! But, poor fellow! it is very
fatiguing to him! for he in forced to make everybody
like him.”

Elinor could hardly keep her countenance an lhc
aim-med t0 the hardship of such an obligation.

“ How channing it will be,” raid Charlotte, “ when
he in in Parlinnrentl—won’t it? How I shall laugh!

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 113

Itwillbeeoridiculouatoaeeall hie lettera direcde
him with an MJ’. But do you know, he lay: he will
never frank for me. He declares he won’t. Don't
you, Mr Palmer?”

Mr Palmer took no notice of her.

" He cannot bear writing, you know," the continued
-——" he guys it in quite shocking.”

“ No,” aaid he, “ I never said anything to irrational.
Don't palm all your abuaee of language upon me."

“There now; you see how droll he in. Thin is
alwayl the way with himl Sometime: he won't apeak
to me for half a day together, and then he cornea out
with something to droll—all about anything in the
world."

She aurpriued Elinor very much, a they returned
into the drawing-room, by asking her whether she did
not like MrlPalmer exlceuively.

“ Certain ,’ said E inor, “he teem" agreeable.”

“Well— am so glad u do. I“" thought you
would, he is so pleasant; an Mr Palmer il exoceu'vely
pleased with you and your sitters, I can tell you, and
you can’t think how disappointed he will be if you
don’t come to Cleveland. I can’t imagine why you
ahould object to it.”

Elinor was again ohli ed to decline her invitation;
and by changing the nu jcct, put a stop to her en-
treatiee. She thought it probable that, a they lived in
the tame county, re Palmer mi ht be able to give
me more particular account of illoughby‘a enl
character than could be gathered from the M' etona’
partial acquaintance with him, and the was eager to
gain from any one such a conﬁrmation of llll merita an
might remove the Possibility of fear for Marianne.
She began by in ulring if they aw much of Mr
Willoughby at éleveland, and whether they were
intimately acquainted with him.

I. H

"4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“Ohl dear, yet; I know him extremely well,”
replied Mn Palmer—~“ Not that I ever epoke to him,
indeed; but I have men him for ever in town. Som-
how or other, I never happened to be mying It Baton
while he was at Allenham. Momma law him here
once before ;—but I wan with my uncle It Weymouth.
However, I dare nay we should have seen a great deal
of him in Somercetuhire, if it had not happened very
unluckin that we should never have been in the
country together. He ll very little at Comhe, I be-
lieve; but if he were ever to much there, I do not
think Mr Palmer would visit him, for he in in the
oppolition, you know, and beddes it ll Inch 8 way of.
I know why you inquire about him, very well; your
tinker in to marry him. I am monitroul glld of it, for
then I shall have her for I neighbour, you know."

“Upon m word,” replied Elinor, “you know
much more the matter than I do, if you have my
reason to expect such a match."

"Don’t pretend to deny it, became you know it is
what everybody talk: of. I more you I heard of it
in myﬂwag through town.”

“ y ear Mn Palmer!”

“Upon my honour l did—J met Colonel Brandon,
Monday morning in Bond Street, just before we left
town, and he told me of it directly.”

“ You aurpn'ae me very much. Colonel Brandon
tell you of It! Surely you mutt be mimlten. To
give such intelligence to a person who could not be in-
tereated in it, even if it were true, in not what I would
expect Colonel Brandon to do.”

“ But I do nature you it was ID, for all that, end I
will tell you how it happened. When we met him, he
turned back and mlkcd with no; and no we began
talking of my brother and Jitter, and one thing and
another, and I laid to him, ‘So, Colonel, there it I

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. Us

new family come to Barton cottage, I hear, and

mamma send: me word they are very new and that

one of them in going to he married to r illoughby,

of Combe Magna. In it true, pray? for of coune

y‘oul know, as you have been in Devonlhire no
tc .

“Z’Xnd what did the Colonel any .9”

“Oh !—he did not say much; but he looked a. if
he knew it to be true, so from that moment 1 set it
down on certain. It will be quite delightful, I declare!
When in it to take place i "

“Mr Brandon was very well. I he ?”

“Ohl en, uite well; and so ful of your praiaei,
he did In in; ut any ﬁne thing: 0 ."

“I am ﬂattered by his common ‘on. He seem:
an excellent man; and I think him uncommonly
pleasing.”

“So do L—He is such a charming man, that it in

uite a pity he should he to grave and lo dull.
cPlllnmrmr my: be waa in love with your sister I00. I
assure you it was a great compliment if he wan, for he
hardl ever falls in love with an body."

“ a Mr Willoug much Known in your part of
Somereetshirei" lard linor.

“Oh! yet, extremely well ;—-that is, I do not
believe many people are ac uainted with him, because
Combe Magna ll so far 0 ; but they all think him
extremely a reeable, I assure you. Nobody in more
liked than r Willoughby wherever he goes, and DO
you may tell your sister. She is a monstrous lucky
girl to get him, upon my honour; not but that he is
much more lucky In getting her, because the is to very
handsome and agreeable that nothing can be good enough
for her. However, I don’t think her hudly at all
handsomer than you, I assure wu; for I drink you
both exceuively pretty, and m doe- Mr Palmer too, I

r16 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

am sure, though we could not get him no own it In
night."

Mrs Palmer’l information rapecring Willaoghby wan
not very material; but. any alimony in his favour,
however mail, was pleating in her.

“I am so glad we are got acquainted or Ian," eon-
rjnued Clwrlotw. “And now I hope we ahall alwaye
be great friends. You can’t think how much I longed
on see youl It in no delightful that you Ihould live at
the cottage] Nothing can be like it, to be are! And
I am so glad our litter ll going to be well nun-led!
I hope you wil be a great deal at Comhe Mogul. It
in a sweet place, by al accounts."

“ You have been long acquainted with Colond
Brandon, have no: you i"

“Yes, a great while; ever since my aim married.
He was a particular friend of Sir John's. I believe,”
the added in I low voice, “he would have been very
glad to have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady
Middleton wished it very much. But mamm did not
think the match good enough for me, otherwic Sir
John would have mentioned it to the colonel, and we
Ihuuld have been married immediately.”

“ Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John'r ro-
poaal to your mother before it won made? H he
never owned hie affection to yournelf?”

“Oh! no; but if momma had not objected (nit, I
dare nay he would have liked it of all thing; He had
not seen me then above twice, for it washefoxe I left
school. However, I am much happier a I am. Mr
Palmer is just the kind of man I like.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. I I1

Chapter 5!].

HE Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day,
and the two families at Barton were again left
to entertain each other. But this did not lam

long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of
her head—had hardly done wondering at Charlotte’s
being so happy without a cause, at Mr Palmer’s acting
so simply with good abilities, and at the strange unsuit-
ableness which often existed between husband and wife,
before Sir John’s and Mrs Jennings’ active zeal in the
cause of socier procured her some other new acquaint»
once to see and observe.

In a moming’s excursion to Exeter, they had met
with two young ladies whom Mrs Jennings had the
satisfaction of discovering to be her relations, and this
was enough for Sir John to invite them directly to the
park, as soon as their present en gements at Exeter
were over. Their engagements at xeter instantly gave
way before such an invitation, and Lady Middleton
was thrown into no little alarm on the return of Sir
John, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her
life, and of whose elegance—whose tolerable gentility
even, she could have no proof; for the assurances of
her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all. They being her relations too, trade it
so much the worse; and Mrs Jennings’ attemyu at
consolation were therefore unfortunate] founded, when
she advised her daughter not to care about their being
so fashionable, because they were all cousins and must
put up with one another.

As it was im 'hle however now to prevent their
coming, Lndy Middleton resigned herself to the idea of
it with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, con-

l 18 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

tenting hemlf with merely giving her hutband a gentle
reprimand on the Iuhjcct live or six times every day.

The young ladies arrived, their appearance wan by
no mean- ungenteel or unfashionablc. Their dress wu
very smart, their manners very civil, they were delighted
with the home and in rapture: with the Where, and
they happened to be no doan'ngly fond of children that
Lady Mlddlcton’l good opinion wan engaged in their
favour before they had been an hour at the park. She
declared them to be very agreeable girl. indeed, which
for her ladythip was enthusiastic admiration. Sir John’-
conﬁdence in hit own ‘ndgment role with thin animated
Elaine, and he net of directly for the cottage to tell the

its Dashwooda of the Min Suelct’ an'ival,and to
nature them of their being the nweetett girl: in the world.
From such commendation as this, however, there wan
not much to be learned; Elinor well know that the
sweetest girls in the world were to be met with in
every part of England, under every possible variation of
fomi, face, temper, and undenianding. Sir John
wanted the whole family to walk to the park directly
and look at hil gucntu. Benevolent, philanthropic
man! It was ainful to him even to keep a third
coutin to himself?

“ Do come now,” said he—“pmy come—- mutt
come—I declare you shall come.-—You can’t ink how
you will like them. Lucy it monument pretty, and so
good-humoured and agreeable! The children are all
hanging about her already, an if the wan an old acquaint»
ance. And they both long to see you of all things, for
they have heard At Exeter that you are the moat beauti-
ful crcnturcl in the world; and I have told them it it
all very true, and a great deal more. You will be
delighted with them,l um cure. 'l‘hcy luch brought
the whole conch full of playthingu for the children.
How can you be to crou at not to come! Why, they

SENSE AND SENSXBILITY. “9

are your mail: you know, after fen, fashion. Tu a:
cousins, th are m wi s, so must
no.» r Y Y“

But Sir John could not prevail. He could only
obtain I promise of their calling at the Park within a
day or two, and then left them in amazement at their
indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their at-
tractions to the Miss Stcclcs, as he had been already
boasﬁng of the Miss Steeles to them.

When their promised visit to the Park and conse-
glueot introduction to these young ladies took place,

ey found in the appearance of the eldest, who was
nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible face,
nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more
than two or three and twenty, they acknowledged con-
siderable beauty; her featum were pretty, and she had
a slurp, quick eye, and s umartneu of air, which, though
it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinction
to her person. Their manners were particularly civil,
and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of
sense, when she saw with what constant and judicious
attentions they were making themselves agreeable to
Lady Middleton. With her children they were in
continual ruptures, extolling their beauty, courting their
notice, and humouring all their whims; and such of
their time as could be spared from the importunate
demand: which this politeness made on it, was lpent
in admiration of whatever her ladyship was doing, if
she happened to be doing anything, or in taking patterns
of some elegant new dress, in which her appearance the
day before had thrown them into unceaaing delight.
Fortunately for those who pay their court through such
foibles, a and mother, though, in pursuit of noise for
her children, the most npacious of human "age, is
likewise the most credulous; her demands are ex-
orbitant; but she will swallow anything; and the

[20 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

excessive affection and endurance of the Min Steelel
towards her olﬁpring, were viewed therefore by Lady
Middlmn without the malleut cu rioe or dim-rm.
She saw with maternal complacency al the impeninent
ineronehmenn and miochievoua tricks to which her
cousin tuhmitted. She saw their sashes untied, their
hair pulled about their can, their work-bag- searched,
and their knives and aciuarl stolen away, and felt no
doubt of in being a reciprocal enjoyment. It tuggetted
no other turprioe than that Elinor and Marianne should
sit I0 compotedly by without claiming a there in what
wan ’ng.

" ohn it in nuch Ipirita to—day!” laid the,“ hit
taking Min Steele’t pocket handkerchief, and throwing
it out of window—" He ll full of monkey tricks.”

And won afterwards, on the accond boy’l violently
pinching one of the name lady’t lingers, she fondly
oblerved, “ How playful William in! '

“And here in m tweet little Annamaria,” ll}:
added, tenderly carenrng a little girl of three year! old,
who had not made a noite for the last two minutes;
“ And the in alwa I I0 gentle and quiet-—Never wan
there each a quiet ittle thing I ”

But unfortunately, in beatowir'rf there ernhraoee, a in
in her ladyship’l head-diets Iligh y ocratchin the chilld’t
neck, produced from this pattern of gent ouch
violent acreamt as could hardly be outdone by any
creature pmfeuedly noisy. The mother’s count-"ration
was excessive; but it could not a the alarm of the
Mist Steelel, and everything wal e by all three, in
so critical an emergency, which affection could on
as likely to assuage die agoniet of the little nu ref.
She wan seated in her mother'l lap, covered with kiuea,
her wound bathed with lavender-water by one of the
Min Steelet, who wae on her kneel to attend her. and
her mouth stuffed with sugar-plums by the other. With

SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'V. 12!

each a reward for her teen, the child wu too wise to
cease crying. She still screamed and subbed lunily,
kicked her two brothers for offering to touch her, end
all their united mthin were ineffectual till Lady
Middleton luckily remem ring that in a neene of Iirnilnr
distress, Lm week, some apricot marmalade hnd been
succeufully applied for a bruised temple, the same
remedy wan eagerly proposed for this unfortunate
Icmtch, and a slight intermission of scream: in the
young lady on hearing it, gave them reason to hope
that it would not be rejected. She was carried out of
the mom therefore in her mother’s arms, in quest of
this medicine, and as the two boys chose to follow,
though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay
behind, the four young Indie: were left in a quietness
which the room had not known for many hours.

" Poor little creature ! ” raid Miu Steele,” noon as
they were gone. “ It might have been a very and
accrdent.”

“Yet I hardly know how.” cried Marianne, "unlen
it had been under totally diﬂ'erent circumstances. But
thin is the usual way of heightening alarm, where there
is nothing to be nlamnxl at in reality."

‘4 What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is," laid
Luc Steele.

arianne was silent ; it was impossible for her to say
what she did not feel, however trivial the occasion; and
upon Elinor. therefore, the whole tank of telling lien
when politeness required it always fell. She did her
best, when thus called on, by speaking of Lady
Middleton with more warmth than she felt, though
with far less than Miss Lucy.

“ And Sir John, too,” cried the elder sister, “ what
a charming man he is! ”

Here, too, Miss Duhwood’s commendation being
only simple and just, came in without any éclat. She

I 2! SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

merely observed that he wan perfectly good-humoured
and friendly.

“ And what it charming little lhmil have! I
never law such line children in my lie. declare I

uite doat u them already, and indeed I am alwayl
ittractedly and of children.”

“ I should guess so,” said Elinor with a amile,
“ from what I have witneued this morning.”

“I have a notion,” raid Lucy, “ you think the little
Middletona rather too much indulged; perhaps they
may be the outeide of enough; but it i! no natural in
Lad Middleton ; and for my part, I love to lee
chil ren full of life and U‘Pll'lll; I cannot hear them if
they are tame and quiet.’

“ I confeu." replied Elinor, “that while I am at
Barton Park, I never think of tame and quiet children
with any nbhorrcnce.”

A short aute tucceeded thin rpcech, which vat lint
broken by in Steele, who seemed very much di
for conversation, and who now raid rather abrupt] ,
“And how do you like Devonohire, Min Duhw P
I suppose you were very lorry to leave Sunex.”

In some Iurprire at the familiarity of thin question. or
at lea-t at the manner in which it war apolten, Elinor
replied that the war.

“ Norland i; a prodigious beautiful place, it not it 2"
added Mist Steele.

“ We have heard Sir John admire it exceuively,”
raid Lucy, who seemed to think some apology neceenry
for the freedom of her sister.

“ I think every one 1mm admire it,” lied Elinor,
“ who ever raw the place; though It is not to
be auppoml that any one can estimate it: beauties an
we do.”

“And had you :i great many smart beaux there!
I mppooc you have not to many in this part of the

SENSE AND SENSIBI MTV. l 23

world; for my part, I think they are a vast addition
‘1“ n .

" ut why should you think,” said Lucy, looking
ashamed of her sister, “that there are not as many
genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex 2"

“ Nay, rn dear, I’m sure I don't pretend to say that
there an’t. ’m sure there’s a met many smart been): in
Exeter; but you know, how could I tell what smart
beaux there might be about Norland? and I was only
afraid the Miss Dashwoods might ﬁnd it dull at Barton,
if they had not so many as they used to have. But
perhaps you young ladies may not care about the beaux,
and had aslief be without them as with them. For my
part, I think they are vastly a reeable, Provided they
dress smart and behave civil. ut I can’t hear to see
them dirty and nasty. Now, there's Mr Rose at
Exeter, a prodigious smut young man, nice a ban,
clerk to Mr Simpson, you know, and yet i you do but
meethim ofa morning, he is not lit to be seen. I sup-
:se your brother was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood,

fore he married, as he was so rich i”

“Upon my word," replied Elinor, “I cannot tell
you, for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of
the word. But this I can say, that if he ever was as
been before he man-ied, he is one kill, for there is not
the smallest alteration in him.”

“Oh! dear! one never thinks of married men’s
being beam—they have something else to do."

“ Lord! Anne,” cried her sister, “ you can talk of
nothing but beaux ;—-you \m'll make Miss Dashwood
believe you think of nothing else.” And then, to turn
the discourse, she began admiring the house and
furniture.

This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. The
vulgar freedom and fall of the eldest left her no re-
commendation, and as Bilinor was not blinded by the

124 SENSE AND SENSIIHJTVV

beauty or the threwd look of the youngett1 to her want
of ml elegance and anlettnett, the left the home with-
out any with of knowing them better.

, Not to theMitt Steelet. They mine from Exeter,
well rovided with admiration for the ute of Sir John
Midd eton, hit family, and all hit relutiont, and no
niggardly proportion was now dealt out to hit fair canine,
whom they declared to be the moot bmutiﬁll, elegant,
tccomplithed and agreeable girlt they had ever beheld,
and with whom they were rticulnrly anxiont to be
better acquainted. And to better a minted there-
fore, Elinor toon found wan their inevi le lot; for to
Sir John will entirely on the tide of the Mitt Smleo,
their puny would be too mung for oppotition, and that
kind of intimacy mutt be tubnutted to, which contittl of
titling an hour or two together in the tame mom nhnott
every day. Sir John could do no more; but he did not
know that any more wns required; to be together wat,
in hit opinion, to beintimate, and while hit continual
tchemes for their meeting were effectual, he had not a
doubt of their being establithed friends.

To do him juttice, he did eve thing in hit war,
to promote their unreterve, by ma ing the Mitt teelet
acquainted with whatever he knew or to of his
coutins’ situations in the man delicate pammlnm—and
Elinor had not teen them more than twice, before the
eldest of them wished her joy on her titter’t having
been so lucky an to make a conquctt of :I very tman
beau since the came to Barton.

" ’Twill be a ﬁne thingto have her married toyoung,
to be sure,” aid the, “and I hear he it quite a beau,
and prodigiout handsome. And I hope you may have
at good luck yourself toon,-—-but pcrhnpt you may have
a friend in the corner already.”

Elinor could not ruppoae that Sir John would be
more nice in proclaiming hit mpiciont of her regard for

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. [15

Edward, than, he had been with respect to Malianne;
indeed it was rather his favourite jo e of the two, as
being somewhat newer and more con' tural : and since
Edward’s visit, they had never dinedletogether, without
his drinking to her best affections with so much signi-
ﬁeancy, and so man nods and winks, as to excite
general attention. Tie letter F— had been likewise
invariably brought forward, and found productive of
ouch countless jokes, that its character as the wittiest
letter in the alphabet had been long established with
Elinor. '

The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the
beneﬁt of these jokes, and in the eldest of them they
raised a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman
alluded to, which, though often impertinently expressed,
was perfectly of a iece with her general inquiutiveness
into the concernso their family. But Sir John did not

rt long with the curiosity which he deli hted to raise,
or he had at least as much pleasure in tel ing the name,
as Miss Steele had in hearin it.

"His name is Ferrars,’ aid he, in a very audible
whisper; “but pray do not tell it, for it‘s a great
Rem"

“ Fermrsl " Iepeated Miss Steele; “Mr Fermi-s is
the happ man, is he? What! your sister-imlsw’s
brother, ﬁrst Dashwoodi a very agreeable young man,
to be sure; I know him very well. ’

' “ How can you say so, Anne ?” cried Lucy, who
generally made an amendment to all her sister‘s aler-
tions. “Though we have seen him once or twice at
my uncle’s, it is rather too much in pretendto know him
vc well."

linor hrd all this with attention and surprise.
“And who was this uncle? where did he live? how
came they acquainted!" She wished very much to
have the subject continued, though she did not chose

li6 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

to bin in it herself; but nothing more oi it was said,
an , for the ﬁrst time in her life, she thought Mrs
Jennings deﬁcient either in curiosity, After petty infor-
mation, or in a dis sition to communicate it. The
manner in which in Steele had spoken of Edward
increased her curiosity; for it struck her,ss being rather
ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of that lady’s
knowing, or fanc 'ng herself to know, something to his
disadvantage. ut her curiosity wan unveiling, for no
farther notice was taken of Mr Ferrari’s name by Miss
Steele when alluded to or even openly mentioned by

Sir John.

Chm" ﬁll}-

ARIANNE, who had never much toleration for

ing like impeninence, vulgari , inferiorit
of parts, or even difference of taste mm hersel ,

was at this time particularly ill-disposed. from the state
of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to ‘
encourage their advances; and to the invariable cold-
ness of her behaviour towards them, which checked
ever endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor prin-
cipaily attributed that preference of herself which soon
became evident in the manners of both, but especially
of Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in
conversation, or of striving to improve their acquaintance
by an easy and frank communication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often
just and amusin ; and as a companion for half an hour
Elinor frequent y found her agreeable; but her powers
had received no aid from education, she was ignorant
and illiterate, and her deﬁciency of all mental improve-
ment, her want of infon'nation in the most common

 

 

SENSE AND SENSIBI LITY. l 17

particularo, could not be concealed from Min Duh-
wood, in spite of her conetant endeavour to appear to
advantage. Elinor uw, and pitied her for the neglect
of abilities which education might have rendered no

cable; but she saw, with less tendemeea of feel-
ing, the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitude, and
integrity of mind, which her attentionl. her aniduitiee,
her ﬂatterieo at the Park betrayed; and due could have
no laeting satisfaction in the company of a person who
joined insincerity with ignorance, whose want of innmc-
tion revented their meeting in conversation on terms of
cqua ity, and whom conduct towards other: made every
Ihow of attention and deference toward: heraelf perfectly
valueleoa.

“ You will think my quettion an odd one, I dare
lay," laid Lucy in her one day as they were walking
together from the Park to the cottage—“ but, play, are
you personally acquainted with your litter-in-law’l
mother, Mn Fen-are I ”

Elinor (Ed think the question a very odd one, and her
countenance expreued it, an the anlwered that. she had
never teen Mr: F erraru.

“Indccdl” replied Lucy; “I wonder at that, for
I thought you must have seen her at Norland nome-
timeo. Then, perhapl you cannot tell me what non of
a woman she is?”

“No,” returned Elinor, caution: of giving her real

opinion of Edward’e mother, and not very deairoue of
latiafying what aeemed impertinent curiosity—“ I know
nothing of her.”
' “I am lure you think me very strange, for inquiring
about her in such a way,” said Lucy, eyeing Elinor
attentively as she spoke; “but perhaps there may be
reasono—I wish I might venture; hut however I hope
you will do me the juaticc of believing that I do not
mean to be impertinent.”

128 SENSE AND SENSIIIILITY.

Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on
for a few minutes in silence. It was broken by Lucy,
who renewed the subject again by saying with some
hesitation—

“ I cannot hear to have-you think me impertineotly
curious; I am sure I would rather do anything in
the world than be thought so by a person whose and
opinion is so well worth having as ours. And am
sure I should not have the aural est far of turning
you ,- indeed I should be veré'y3 glad of your advice how
to manage in such an uncom nahle situaan as I am;
but however there is no occasion to trouble you. I am
sorry you do not happen to know Mrs Ferrars."

“ I am sorry I do not,” said Elinor in great astonish-
ment, “if it could be of any use to m to know my
opinion of her. But really, I never understood that

on were at all connected with that ﬁrnrily, and there-
Iore I an) a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an
inquiry into her character.”

“I dare say ypn are, and I am sure I do not at all
wonder atit. ut if I dared tell you all, you would
not be so much surprised. Mrs Femrs is certainly
nothing to me at present—but the time .0] com—
how soon it will come must depend upon herself—when
we may be very intimately connected."

She looked down as she said this, smiahly bashﬁrl,
with only one side-glance at her companion to observe
ics effect on her.

“ Good havens! " cried Elinor, “ what do
mean? Are you acquainted with Mr Robert Femrs?
Can you be I” And she did not feel much delighted
with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

“ No," replied Lucy, “not to Mr Robert Fermi——
I nevcr saw him in my life; but," ﬁxing her eyes upon
Elinor, “ to his elder brother.”

What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishnsem.

SENSE AND SENS‘IBILITY. 129

that would have been as 'nful as it was strong, had
not an immediate disbelie of the assertion attended it.
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable
to divine the reason or object of such a declaration;
and though her complexion varied, she stood ﬁrm in
incrednlity, and felt in no danger of an hysterical ﬁt
or a swoon.

“You may well be surprised,” continued Lucy;
“ for, to be sure, you could have had no idea of it
before; for I dare say he never dropped the smallest
hint of it to you or any of your family ; because it was
always meant to be a great secret, and I am sure has
been faithfully kept so by me to this hour. Not a soul
of all my relations know of it but Anne, and I never
should have mentioned it to you, if I had not felt the
greatest de ndence in the world upon your seuesy;
and I maliyeLhou ht my behaviour in asking so many
questions about NIH Ferrars must seem so odd that it
ought to be explained. And I do not think Mr F errara
can be displeased when he knows I have trusted you,
because I know he has the highest opinion in the world
of all your family, and looks upon yourself and the
other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own shanty—«She

used.

PaElinor for a few moments remained silent. Her
astonishment at what she heard was at ﬁrst too great
for words; but at length forcing herself to speak, and
to speak cautiously, she said with a calmness of manner
which tolerany well concealed her surprise and solici-
tude—“ May I ask if your engagement is of long
standing?”

" We have been engaged these four years."

“ Four years ! ”

u yup

Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to
believe it.

I. I

I30 SENSE AND SENSlDlLﬂ'Y.

“I did not know," lid she, “that you were ever
acquainted till the other day."

“ Our acquaintance, however, it of many yeah’ date.
He war under my uncle’s care, you know, a connidenhle
while.”

“ Your uncle! ”

“ Yes ; Mr Pratt. Did you never hear him talk of
Mr Pratt ? "

“I think I have,” lied Elinor, with an exertion
of Ipiritl which here-33 with her increale of emotion.

“He was four year: with my uncle, who lives at
Longataple, near Plymouth. It was there our acquaint-
ance begun, for m timer and me was often toying
with my uncle, an it wu there our engagement wan
formed, though not till a year after he had quitxed II a
gupil ; but he was almost always with or afterwardl.

was ve unwilling to enter into it, at you may
imagine, mthout the knowledge and approbation of hi:
mother; but I win too young and loved him too well
to be no prudent at I ought to have hem—Though
you do not know him to well a. me, Mine Dnhwood,
you mun have seen enough of him to be eeruible he
ll very capable of making a woman einoercly attached
to him."

" Certainly,” antwered Elinor, without knowing what
the raid; but after a moment’r reﬂection, she added
with revived tecurity of EdWIl‘d’l honour and love, and
her companion'a falsehood—~“ Engaged to Mr Edward
Ferrari: l—I confer: myself to totally lurprited at what
you tell me, that really—I beg our pardon; but ourer
there must be some mistake 0 person or name. We
cannot mean the name Mr Fen-nu.”

“We can mean no other,” cried Luc , uniling.
“Mr Edward Ferrari, the eldest non of re Fen-an
of Park-street, and brother of your sieta-in-law, Mn
John Daehwood, is the person I mean; you must allow

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 13!

thatlunnotlikel whe deceived as to the name of
the man on who all my happiness depends.”

“It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful
perplexity, “that I should never have heard him even
mention your name."

“ No; considering our situation, it was not strange.
Our ﬁrst care has been to keep the matter secret.—
You knew nothing of me or my family, and therefore
there could he no vermin for ever mentionin my name
to you; and as he was alqu particularly raid of hi;
sister’s suspecting anything, [but was reason enough for
his not mentioning it.”

She was silent.—Elinor's security sunk; but her
self-command did not sink with it.

“ Four years you have been engaged,” said she with
a ﬁrm voice.

“ Yes; and Heaven know: how much longer we may
have to wait. Poor Edward! it puts him uite out of
heart.” Then taking a small miniature from er pocket,
the added, “To prevent the possibility of mistake, he so
good as to look at this face. It does not do him
justice, to he MII'L', but yet I think you cannot be de-
ceivcd as to the person it was drew for. I have had
it above these three years.”

She put it into her hands as she spoke, and when
Elinor saw the aiming, whatever other doubts her fear
of a too hasty eciaion or her wish of detectin false-
hood might sull‘er to linger in her mind, she coufd have
none of its being Edward's face. She returned it
almost instantly, acknowledgin the likeness.

"I have never been able,’ continued Lucy, “to
give him my picture in return, which I am very
much vexed at, for he has been always so anxious to
get itl But I am determined to sit for it the very

nt portunity.”

“ on are quite in the right,” replied Elinor calmly.

132 SERSE AND SHISIBIUTY.

They then proceeded a few pace: in ilenoe. Lucy
spoke first. »

"I am sure,” said the, “I have no doubt in the
world of your faithﬁzlly keeping thin secret, became
you must know of what importance it ll to us not to
have it reach lIlI mother; for she would never a ve
of it, I dare say. I nhall have no fortune. and I ancy
she is an exceeding proud woman.”

“I certainly did not seek your conﬁdence,” aid
Elinor ; “ but you do me no more than justice in
imagining that I may be depended on. Your seem in
safe with me; but pardon me if I expreu some eur-
priae at so unnecemry a communication. You muet
at least have felt that my being acquainted with it could
not add to in ufety."

As the said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hop-
ing to discover something in her countenance,—perha
the fuluhood of the greaten part of what she had been
saying; but Lucy's countenance suffered no change.

“ I was afraid you would think I wan taking a great
liberty with you," aid she, “in telling you all thin. I
have not known you long to be eure, reonally at lent,
but I have known you and all your amin by dncrip—
tion a great while; and as won as I saw ou,I felt
almost an if you wan an old acquaintance. guide; in
the present case, I really thought some explanation was
due to you after my making such particular inquiries about
Edward’s mother; and I am so unfortunate that I have
not a creature whose advice I can ask. Anne in the
only person that know of it, and she he no judgment
at all ; indeed, she does me a great deal more hannthao
good, for I am in constant fear of her betraying me.
She does not know how to hold her tongue, at you mutt
perceive; and I am Here I was in the greatest fright in
the world t' other day, when Edward’e name was men-
tioned by Sir John, lest she should out with it all. You

snusrc nun SENSIBILITV. 133

can’t think how much I go through in my mind from
it altogether. I onl wonder that I am alive after
what I have sulTered gr Edward’s sake these last four
years. Everything in such suspense and uncertainty,
and seeing him so seldom—we can hardly meet above
twice u-ycar. I am sure I wonder my heart is not
quite broke."

Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did
not feel very compassionate.

“ Sometimes,” continued Lucy, after wiping her
eyes, “ I think whether it would not better for us both,
to break of? the matter entirely.” As she said this,
she looked directly at her companion. " But then, at
other times, I have not resolution enough for it. I cam
not bear the thoughts of making him so miserable, as
I know the very mention of such a thing would do.
And on my own account too—so dear as he is to me
—I don’t think I could be equal to it. What would
{gin advise me to do in such a case, Miss Dashwood?

but would you do ourself? ”

“ Pardon me," rep ied Elinor, startled by the ques-
tion; “ but I can give you no advice under such cir-
cumstances. Your own judgment must din-ct you."

“ To be sure," continued Lucy, after a {cw minutcs’
silence on both sides, “ his mother must Provide for him
some time or other; but poor Edward It so cast down
about it! Did not you think him dreadful low-spirited
when he was at Barton? he was so miserable when he
left us at Longstnble, to go to you, that I was afraid you
would think him quite ill.”

" Did he come from your uncle’s then when he visited
us 2 ”

“ Oh yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us.
Did you think he came directly from town E"

“No,” rcnlied Elinor, most feelineg sensible of
every fresh Circumstance in favour of Lucy’s veracity.

134 SENSE AND SENSIIIILITV.

“I remember he told us that he had been staying
a fortnight with some friend: near Plymouth.” She
remembered, too, her own surprise at the time, at his
mentioning nothing further of thee frienda. at his total
silence with respect even to their names.

" Did not you think him Iadly out of spirits?" re-
peated Lucy.

“We drd indeed, particularly so when he lint
arrived."

“ I begged him to exert himtelf for fear you should
an t what were the matter; but it made him no
me anclroly, not being able to may more than a fort»
night with us, and seeing me to much affected—«Poor
fellow !—I am afraid it is just the some with him now;
for he writes in wretched a ‘riu. I heard from him
just before I lth Exemr; ' taking: letter from her
pocket and camlcldy showing the direction to Elinor.
“ You know hie hand, I dare Iay,a charming one it in;
but that in not written so well as usual. He was tired,
I dare say, for he had just ﬁlled the sheet to me as full
as possible."

Elinor saw that it war hil hand, and oh: could doubt
no longer. The picture, the had allowed heruell' to
believe, might have been accidentally obtained; it might
not have been Edward's gift; but a correspondence
between them by letter could Iublilt only under a
positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing
else; for a few moments the was almmt overcome—
her heart sunk within her, and she could hardly stand;
but exertion was indispensably necessary, and she
struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her
feelings that her success was speedy, and for the lime
complete.

“Writing to each other,” said Lucy, returning the
letter into her pocket, “ is the only comfort we have in
such long separations. Yea, I have one other comfoﬂ

' SENSE AND szrrsmnnv. 135
in his ’cture; but poor Edward has not even lbw. If
he hath in picture, he says he should be easy. I
gave him s cc]: of my hair set in a ring when he was
at Long-mph last, and that was some comfort to him,
he said, but not equal to a picture. Perhays you might
notice the ring when you saw him?"

“ I did,” said Elinor, with a com re of voice
under which was concealed an emotion and distress
beyond anything she had ever felt before. She was
mortiﬁed, shocked, confounded.

Fortunately for her they had now reached the cottage,
and the conversation could be continued no further.
After sitting with them a few minutes, the Miss Steele.
returned to the Park, and Elinor was then at liberty to
think and be wretched.

Chm" ﬂ!!!-

OWEVER small Elinor’l general dependence on
Lucy’s veracity might be, it was impossible for
her on serious reﬂection to mslmct it in the pre-

sent case, where no tent tion could be answerable to
the folly of inventing a alsehood of such a
What Lucy had asserted to be true, therefore, Elinor
could not, dared not longer doubt; supported as it was
too on every side by such probabilities and proofs, and
contradicted by nothing but her own wishes. Their
opportunity of ac uaintance in the house of Mr Pratt
was a foundation or the rest, at. once indisputable and
alarming; and Edward’s via't near Plymouth, his
melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own

respects, his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the
intimate knowledge of the Min Steele: as lo Norland
and their family connexion» which had often surmised

r 36 SENSE AND sensrnrun’.

her, the picture' , the letter, the ring. formed altogether
such a body of evidence at overcame every fear con-
demning him unfairly, and emblinhed u u fact which
no partiality could net aide, his ill-treatment of her-elf.
Her resentment of Inch behaviour, her at
having been its dupe, for a thort time made her feel
only for herself ; but other ideal, other consideration“,
noon arose. Had Edward been intentionally deceiving
her? Had he feigned a regard for her which he did
not feel? Wat his engagement to Lucy an engage-
ment of the heart? No; whatever it might one have
been, the could not believe it such at preeent. Hi1
aﬂ'ection was all her own. She could not be deceived
in that. Her mother, liners, Fanny, all had been con-
scious of hi! regard for her at Norland; it war not an
illusion of her own vanity. He certainly loved her.
What it softener of the heart was thin permission! How
much could it not tempt her to forgive! He had been
blameable, hi hly blameable in remaining at Norland
after he ﬁrst elt her inﬂuence over him to be more than
it ought to be. In that, he could not lat-defended; but
if he had injured her, how much more had he injured
himself! If her case were pitiahle, his war hopelen.
His imprudence had made her miserable for: while;
but it seemed to havu deprived hirmclf of all chance of
ever bein otherwise. She might in time regain tran-

uility; ut In, what had he to look forward to?

ould he ever be tolerany ha py with Lucy Steele?
could he, were his aﬂ'ection for lieraelf out of the ques-
tion, with hie integrity, hie delicac , and well-informed
mind, be satisﬁed with a wife like er—illiteratt, artﬁrl,
and selﬁsh ?

The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally
blind him to everything but her beauty and good
nature ; but the four succeeding years—yearn which, if
rationally spent, give such improvement to the under-

SHNS)’. AND SENSIIJIHTY. [37

standing, must have opened his eyes to her defects of
education: while the me period of time, spent on her
side in inferior society and more frivolous pursuits, had
perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which might
once have given an interesting character to her beauty.

If, in the en position of his seeking to marry herself,
his difﬁculties From his mother had seemed great, how
much greater were they now likely to be, when the
object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in
connexions, and probably inferior in fortune to herself!
These difﬁculties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from
Lucy, might not ress very hard upon his patience ; but
melancholy was e state of the person by whom the
expectation of family opposition and unkindness could
be felt as a relief I

As these considerations occurred to her in painful
succession, she wept for him more than for herself.
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing to
merit her present unha piness, and consoled by the
belief that Edward h done nothing to forfeit her
esteem, she thought she could even now, under the ﬁrst
smart of the heavy blow, command herself enough to
guard every suspicion of the tnlth from her mother and
sisters. And so well was she able [0 answer her own
expectations, that when she joined them at dinner only
two hours after she had ﬁrst sulfcrcd the extinction of
all her dearest hopes, no one would have supposed from
the appearance of the sisters, that Elinor was mourning
in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever
from the object of her love, and that Marianne was
internally dwelling on the perfections of a man of
whose whole heart she felt thoroughly possessed, and
whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house.

The necessity of concealing from her mother and
Marianne what had been entrusted in conﬁdence to her-

r 38 srmsn nun snusnnm-rv.

self, though it 0in her to unoeauing exertion. was no
aggravation of Eltnor‘s distress. 0n the contrary, it
was a relief to her so be spared the communication of
what would give such alllicﬁon to them, and to he saved
likewise from hearing that condemnation of Edward
which would probably ﬂow from the excess of their
partial affection for herself, and which was more than
she felt equal to support.

From their counsel or their conversation she knew
she could receive no assistance ; their tenderness and ,
sorrow must add to her distre, while her self-command
would neither receive encouragement from their example
nor from their praise. She was stronger alone, and her
own good sense so well mpported her, that her ﬁrmness
was as unshaken, her appearance of cheerfulness as in-
variable, as, with regrets so poignant and so fresh, it was
possible for them to be.

Much as she had suffered from her ﬁrst convcrmtion
with Lucy on the sub'ect, she soon felt an earnest wish
of renewing it, and this for more moons than one. She
wanted to hear many particulars of their engagement
re ated again, she wanted more clearly to understand
wli; Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were
any sincerity in her declaration of tender refard for him,
and she particularly wanted to convince ucy, by her
readiness to enter on the matter again, snd her calmness
in converting on it, that she was no otherwise interested
in it than as a friend, which she very much feared her
involuntary agimtion, in their morning discourse, mun
have left at least doubtful. That Lucy was diqrosed
to be jealous of her, appeared very probable; it was
plain that Edward had alwa s spoken highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy s amnion, but from her
venturing to trust her on so short a personal acquaint-
ance, with a secret so confessedly a evidently import-
ant. And even Sir John’s joking intelligence must

SENSE AND SENSIHILITY. I39

have had some weight. But indeed, while Elinor
remained so well auured within herself of being really
beloved by Edward, it required no other consideration
of robahilitieu to make it natural that Lucy should be
j our; and that she was so, her very conﬁdence was
u‘gmof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
a ir could there be, but that Elinor mi ht be informed
by it of Luc ’s superior claims on dward, and be
nught to avoi him in future? She had little dilliculty
in understanding thus much of her rival’s intentiom, and
while she was ﬁrmly resolved to act by her as every
principle of honour and honesty directed, to combat her
own alTection for Edward and to see him as little as
possible; she could not deny herself the comfort of
endeavouring to convince Luc that her heart was
unwounded. And as she coud now have nothing
more painful to hear on the subject than had already
been told, she did not mistnrst her own ability of going
through a repetition of particulars with composure.

But it was not immediately that an opportunity of
doing so could he commanded, though Lucy was as
well digesed as herself to take advantage of any that
occurre ; for the weather was not often ﬁne enough to
allow of their joining in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves fmm the othere; and though
they met at least every other evening either at the Park
or com e, and chieﬂy at the former, they could not be
supp to meet for the sake of conversation. Such a
thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady
Middleton's head, and therefore very little leisure was
ever given for general chat, and none at all for par-
ticular discourse. They met for the sake of eating,
drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards or
consequences, or any other game that was sufﬁciently
nousy.

One or two meetings of thia kind had taken place

I40 SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTV.

without aﬂ'ording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy
in private, when Sir John called at the cottage one
morning, to beg in the name of charity, that they would
all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was
obliged to attend the club at Exeter, and the would
otherwise be quite alone, except her mother and the
two Mist Steelee. Elinor, who forecaw a fairer opening
for the point she had in view, in such a party as thin
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselch under
the tranquil and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton
than when her husband united them together in one
noisy purpose, immediately accepted the invitation;
Margaret, with her mother’s permission, wu equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to
join any of their parties, was rsuaded by her mother,
who could not bear to have er seclude hereelf from
any chance of amusement, to go likewise.

The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton wan
happily preserved from the fri htful solitude which had
threatened her. The insipi ity of the meeting wan
exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not
one novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could
he lets interesting than the whole of their discourse both
in the dining parlour and drawing-room: to the latter,
the children accompanied them, and while they remained
there, she was too well convinced of the imposeibility
of en aging Lucy’s attention to attempt it. They quitned
it on y with the removal of the tea-things. The card-
table was then placed, and Elinor began to wonder at
herself for having ever entertained a hope of ﬁnding
time for conversation at the Park. They all rose up
in preparation for a round game.

“ I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy, “you
are not going to ﬁnish poor little Annamaria’a basket
this evening; for I am sure it must hurt your eye. to
work ﬁllagree by candlelight. And we will make the

SENSE AND SHSIBIUTY. I41

dear little love some amends for her dinppointment to-
morrow, and then I hope she will not much mind it."

Thin hint wan enough ; Lucy recollected hemlf
instantly and replied, “ Indeed, you are very much
mistaken, Lady Middleton ; I am only waiting to
know whether you can make our party without me, or
I should have been at my ﬁllagree already. I would
not disappoint the little angel for all the world; and if
you want me at the card-table now, 1 am resolved to
ﬁnish the basket after sup er.”

“You are very good ; hope it won’t hurt your eyes
-—will you ring the bell for some working candles?
My poor little girl would be sadly disappointed, I know,
if the basket was not ﬁnished to-morrow, for though I
told her it Certainly would not, I am sure she depend!
upon having it done.”

Lucy directly drew her workvtahle near her, and
resented herself with an alacrity and cheerfulnens which
seemed to infer that she could mu: no greater delight
than in making a lillngree basket for a rpoilt child.

Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of casino to the
others. No one made any objection but Marianne,
who, with her usual inattention to the forms of general
civility, exclaimed, “ Your ladyohi will have the good-
ness to excuse nit—you know I erect cards. I shall
go to the pinnoforte; I have not touched it since it was
tuned.” And without farther ceremony, she turned
away and walked to the instrument.

Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven
that 11:: had never made so rude a h.

“ Marianne can never keep long rorn that inmment,
you know, ma’am,” said Elinor, endeavouring to amooth
away the offence; " and I do not much wonder at it,
for it is the very beet-toned pianoforte I ever heard.”

The remaining ﬁve were now to draw their cardn.

“ Perhaps,” continued Elinor, “if I should happen

I42 SENSE AND msxnm‘nr.

mmouglnnybeofnome u-etoMiuLucy Steele,
in rollingherpupenfor her; andthereinnomuehnill
to be done to the balket, that it mun be impossible, I
think, for her labour singly, to ﬁnish it this evening. I
thould like the work exceedingly, if she would allow
me a thare in it.”

“ Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for
your help,” cried Lucy, “for I ﬁnd there in more to
be done to it than I thought there VIII; and it would
l: a shocking thing to dimppoint dear Anmmria after

l.” .
“ Oh! that would be terrible indeed,” said Min
Steele. “ Dear little aoul, how I do love her! "

“ You are very kind.” aid Lady Middleton w
Elinor; “ and a you really like the work. perhaps you
will be a: well pleued no: to cut in till another rubber,
or will you take your chance now i”

Elinor joyfull pmﬁted by the ﬁrst of these mpooala,
and time, by a little of that addreu which rianne
could never condeacend to mine, gained her own
end and pleased Lady Mid eton at the name tirne.
Lucy made room for her with nearly attention, and the
two fair rival: were than muted side by aide at the same
table, and with the utmou harmony engaged in forward~
ing the name work. The pianoforte, at which Marianne,
wrapt up in her own music and her own thoughts. had
by thin time forgotten that anybody was in the room
besides herself, wu luckily I0 near them that Milt
Dashwood now judged she might nafely, under the
shelter of in noise, Introduce the intereuing abject.
without any risk of being heard at the card-table.

SENSE AID SENSIBIIJ'I‘Y. I43

Gibson: 5”??-

N a ﬁrm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began-—
“ I should be undeserving of the conﬁdence you
have honoured me with, if I felt no desire for its
continuance, or no farther curiosi on its subject I
will not apologise therefore for ringing it forwnrd
again.’ ’

“Thank you,” cried Lucy warmly, “for hreuking
the ice; you have set my heart at ease by it; for I was
somehow or other afraid I had offended you by what I
told u that Monday."

“ {fended me! How could you suppose so? Be-
lieve me,” and Elinor spoke it widi the truest sincerity.
“ nothing could be farther from my intention than to
give you such an idea. Could you have a motive for
the trust that was not honourable and ﬂattering to
me? ’

“ And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, her little
sha eyes Full of meaning, “there seemed to me to be
a co dnesl and displeasure in your manner that made me
quite uncomfortable. I felt sure that you was angry
with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever
since, for having wok such a liberty as to trouble you
with my all'airs. But I am very glad to ﬁnd it was only
m‘y own fancy, and that you do not really blame me.
I you knew what a consolation it was no me to relieve
my heart by speaking to you of what I am always think-
ing of every moment of my life, your compassion would
make you overlook everything else, I am sure."

“ Indeed I can easily believe that it was I very great
relief to you to acknowledge your situation to me, and
be assured that you shall newr have reason to repent it.
Your case in a very unfortunate one; you seem to me
to be surrounded with dimculties, and you will have

144 SENSE AND SEISIBILI‘I'Y.

need of all your mutual aﬁ'ecu'on to support you under
them. Mr Femn, I believe, is entirely dependent on
llll mother.”

“He hat only two thouund pound- of hi! own; it
would be madneu to marry upon that, though for my
own part I could give up eveuraye‘prospect of more without
a tigh. I have been alwayl to a very anal] income,
and could ltruggle with any verty for him; but I love
him mowell m be the eel ah mean: of robbing him,
perhaps. of all that his mother might give him if he
married to please her. We mnnt wait, it may be for
many years. With almoet every other man in the
world, it would be an alarming prospect; but Edward'-
aﬁ'ection and conmncy nothing can deprive me of, I
know."

“ That conviction mun be everything to you; and he
is undoubtedly rupponed by the am trust in youn.
If the urength of your reciprocal attachment had failed,
as between many people and under many cimummoee
it naturally wou d during a four yart' engagement. your
situation would have been pitiable indeed."

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor wan careful in
guarding her countenance from every expreation that
could give her word: a nupicioul tendency.

“Edward’s love for me," laid Lucy, “but been
pretty well put to the test, by our long, very long ab-
aence since we were ﬁm engaged, and it hal ttood the
trial In well that I Ihould be unpardonable to doubt it
now. I can tafely say that he has never gave me one
moment'e alarm on that account from the ﬁrst.”

Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or nigh at thi-
assertion.

Lucy went on. “ I am rather of a tern ,
too, by nature, and from our different Iituatione in liI‘;
from his being to much more in the world than me, and
our continual separation, I was enough inclined for mu-

SENS! AND SENSIBILITV. I45

prion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there
been the slighteat alteration in his behaviour to me
when we met, or any lowness of spirits that I could not
account for, or if he had talked more of one lad than
another, or seemed in any respect lest happy at ong-
staplethanheuledtobe. Idonotmeantoaaythatl
am particularly observant or quick-nigth in general, but
in Inch 3 case I am cure I could not be deceived."

“ All this,” thought Elinor, “in very pretty; but it
can impose upon neither of us.”

“ But what,” said she, after a short silence, “are

our views? or have you none but that of waiting for
{lira F mars’ death, which is a melancholy and ahocking
extremity? In her son determined to submit to this,
and to l the tediousneta of the many years of mspenae
in which it may involve on, rather than run the risk of
her displeature for a whi c by owning the truth ?"

“ If we could be certain that it would he only for a
while! But Mrs Ferrari is a very headstrong, proud
woman, and in her ﬁrst ﬁt of anger upon hearing it,
would very likely secure everything to Robert; and
the idea of that, for Edward’s sake, frightens away all
my inclination for hasty measures.” .

“And for your own take too, or you are carrying
your dilintereatednest beyond reason.”

Lucy looked at Elinor a ain, and was ailent.

" Do you know Mr R rt Ferrari .’ ” asked Elinor.

“Not at all—.1 never saw him; but I fancy he is

unlike his brother—silly and a great coxeom ”

“ A great coxcombl ” repeated Min Steele, whose
ear had caught those words by a audden pauae in
Marianne’s music—“ Oh! they are talking of their
favourite heaux, I dare say.”

" No, litter,” cried Lucy, “ you are mimken there,
our favourite heaux are not gut coxoom "

“ I can answer for it that Mia- Duhwood’a in not,”

I: K

l 46 SENSE AND SENSIIIIIJTV.

laid Mn Jenningl, laughing heartily; “ {hr be is one of
the modemm, prettiest-behaved young men I ever law.
But as for Lucy, she ll auch a sly little creature, there
in no ﬁnding out who die liken.”

“ Oh! ” cried Min Steele, looking igniﬁcantly
round at them, “I dare nay Lucy'l beau is quite a
modest and pretty-behaved an Miu Dashwood’o.”

Elinor blulhed in spite of heraelf. Lucy hit her lip,
and looked angrily at her timer. A mutual silence
took place for some time. Lucy ﬁrst put an end to it
by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne was then
giving them the powerful protection of a very magniﬁ-
cent concerto—-

“I will honestly tell on of one Icheme which hat
lately come into my hea for bringing matter: to bear;
indeed, I am bound to let you into the aecret, for you
are a party concerned. I dare say you have teen enough
of Edward to know that he would refer the church to
every other profeuion. Now, my p an in that he should
take orders as noon at he can, and then through your
interest, which I am sure you would be kind enough to
use out of friendship for him, and, I hope, out of come
regard to me, your brother mi ht be pemaded to give
him Norland living; which gl understand it a very
good one, and the present incumbent not likely to live
a great while. That would be enough for us to marry
upon,’ and we might trust to time and chance for the
rest.’

“I should be ﬂlwlyl happy,” lied Elinor, “to
show any mark of my esteem and riendlhip for Mr
Ferrm; but do not u perceive that my interest on
such an occasion woull‘l0 be perfectly unneoeuary.’ He in
brother to Mrs John Dashwood—Jbat must be recom-
mendation enough to her husband."

“ But Mn John Dashwood would not much approve
of Edward’t going into orden."

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. I47

“Then I rather suspect that my interest would do

v little.”
hey were again silent for many minutes. At
length Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh--

“ I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end
to the business at once by dissolving the engagement.
We seem so beset with dilﬁculties on every side, that
though it would make us miserable for a time, we
should be happier perhaps in the end. But you will
not give me your advice, Miss Dashwood?"

“No,” answered Elinor, with a smile which con-
cealed ve agitated feelingt, “on such a subject I cer-
tainly wil not. You know very well that my opinion
would have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes."

“Indeed, you wrong me,” replied Lucy with great
solemnity; " I know nobody of whose 'udglnent I
think so highly as I do of yours; and do really
believe, that if you was to say to me, ‘ I advise you by
all means to put an end to your engagement with
Edward Fermrs, it will be more for the happiness of
both of you,’ I should resolve upon doing it imme-
diately." '

Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward’s future
wife, and re li , “ This compliment would ell'ectually
fri hten me rorn giving any opinion on the subject, had
I ormed one. It raises my Inﬂuence much too high;
the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached
is too much for In indiKemnt person."

"'Tis because you are an indiﬁ'erent person," said
Lucy, with some pique, and laying a panicnlar urea
on those words, “ that your judgment might just! have
arch weight with me. If you could he so to be

‘assed in on re in your own feelin r 'nion
would not beywo‘rlihmhazing.” 3', you up.

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer in this,

r48 smn AND smsrmrrv.

lett they might provoke ash other to an umitahle
incmnofemandmraemendwuevenpnrtly
determined never to mention the again. An-
other pauee, therefore. of many minutee' duration Inc-
oeeded thin speech-rid Lucywae Itilltheﬁrlttnendit.

“ Shall you he in town this winter, Mice Daehwood ? ”
said she, with all her accummary complacency.

“Certainly not."

“ I am carry for that," returned the other, while her
eye: brightened at the infatuation; “it would have
gave me such Pleasure to meet you there! But I
dare nay you Wlll go for all that. To be one, your
brother and litter will alt you to come to them."

“ It will not be in my power to accept their invitation
if they do.”

" How unlucky that in! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there. Anne and me are to go the latter
and of January to tame relations who have been wanting
us to visit them thete neural an! But I only go
for the sake of seeing Edwa He will be there in
February; otherwise London would have no charm- for
me, I have not spirit: for it.”

Elinor Wal soon called to the curd-table h the con-
cluaion of the lint mbber, and the conﬁdentia discourse
of the two ladies wan therefore at an end. to which both
of them tubmitted without any relumnce, for nothing
had been said on either title to make them dielike each
other less than they had done before; and Elinor not
down to the curd-table with the melanchol pemntion
that Edward was not only without affection for the
per-on who was to he his wife, but that he had not even
the chance of being tolerany hap y in marriage, which
sincere affection on [m tide woul have given, for lelf-
interelt alone could induce a woman to keep a man to
an engagement of which the seemed so thoroughly aware
that he Wat weary.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. [49

From this time the subject was never revived by
Elinor; and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom
missed an op rtuuity of introducing it, and was par-
ticularly care ul to inform her conﬁdante of her ha i-
nese whenever she received a letter from Ed it
was treated by the former with calmness and caution,
and dismissed as soon as civility would allow; for she
felt ruch conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy
did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.

The visit of the Miss Sleeles at Barton Park was
lengthened far beyond what the Em invitation implied.
Their favour increased, they could not be spared; Sir
John would not hear of their going; and in 'te of
their numerous and long-arranged engagements in xeter,
in it: of the absolute necessity of their returning to
f'ullilJ them immediately, which was in full force at the
end of every week, they were prevailed on to stay
nearly two months at the Park, and to assist in the
due celebration of that festival which requires a more
than ordinary share of private balls and large dinner: to
proclaim its importance.

chapter $51»).

HOUGH Mrs Jennings was in the habit of
spending a large rtion of the year at the
houses of her chi dren and friends, she was

not without a settled habitation of her own. Since the
death of her husband, who had traded with eucceu in a
less elegant part of the town, she had resided every
winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman-

uare. Towards this home, she began on the approach
0 January to turn her thoughts, and thither she one day
abruptly, and very unexpectedly by them, naked the

I50 SENSE AND SENSIBXLXTV.

elder Min Dalhwooda to accompany her. Elinor,
without obnerving the varying complexion of her litter,
and the animated look which spoke no indiﬂ‘erence to
the lan, immediame gave a grateful but absolute denial
for th, in which ahe believed herself to be speaking
their united inclinations. The remn allodged, wal their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that
time of year. Mn Jenninga received the refusal with
some so )l'lllc, and repeated hcr invitation immediately.

“0 0rd! I am sure your mother can spare you
very well, and I do beg you will favour me with your
company, for I’ve quite set. my heart upon it. Don't
fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I
lhan't put myself at all out. of my way for you. It will
only be uendmgrBetty by the coach, and I hope I an
ail'ord lbar. \ e three shall be able to go very well in
my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do not like
to go wherever I do, well and good, you may alwayl go
with one of my dau hten. I am sure your mother will
not object to it; or I have had such good luck in
getting my own children oi? my hands, that the will
think me a very lit pemn to have the charge of you:
and if I don't get one of you at lean well married
before I have done with you, it shall not be my fault.
I uhall speak a good word for you to all the young
men, you may depend u n it."

“I have a noﬁon,’ laid Sir John, “that Min
Marianne would not object to such a scheme, if her elder
sitter would come into it. It in very hard indeed that.
she should not have a little pleaaure, became Min Dah-
wood does not. wish it. So I would advise you two to
set of for town when on are tired of Barton, without
saying a word to Mia- uhwood about it."

“ Nay," cried Mn Jenningu, “I am sure I shall be
monstrous glad of Miss Marianne's company, whether
Min Dashwood will go or not, only the more du-

suns: AN D SENSIBILITY. I s I

merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfort-
able for them to be together; because if they got tired
of me, th might talk to one another, and laugh at my
odd ways hind my back. But one or the other, If
not both of them, I must have. Lord bless mel how
do you think I can live poking by myself, I who lave
been always used till this winter to have Charlotte with
me. Come, Miss Marianne, let us strike lands upon
the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change her
mind by-and~bye, why, so much the better."

“I thank you, ma’am, sincerely thank you," said
Marianne, with warmth; “ our invitation has insured
my gratitude for ever, an it would give me such
ha pmess—yes, almost the greatest happiness I am cap-
ab c of, to be able to accept it. But my mother, my
dearest, kindest mother,——I feel the justice of what
Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made less
happy, less comfortable by our absence—Oh l no,
not mg should tempt me to leave her. It should not,
must not be a struggle."

Mrs Jennings repeated her assmnce that Mn Dash-
wood could spare them perfectly well; and Elinor, who
now understood her sister, and saw to what indiﬁ'erence
to almost everythin else she was carried by her eager-
ness to be with illoughby again, made no farther
direct opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to
her mother’s decision, from whom however she scarcely
expected to receive any support in her endeavour to -
vent a visit which she cou d not approve of for '-
anne, and which on her own account she had particular
reasons to avoid. Whatever Marianne was desirous of
her mother would be eager to promote—she could not
expect to inﬂuence the latter to cautiousness of conduct
in an aKair respecting which she had never been able to
inspire her with distrust: and she dared not ex ‘n the
motive of her own disinclination for going to ondon.

[52 SENS! All) snrsnlu'rv.

That Marianne, Hidioua a in was, My
acquaintedwhhMrquningflmumandimariﬂy
diegmed.hythem,dtonldovulookemyinoonvmience

wwndingtoherirriuhlefoelingyinhetpurﬂitof one
objecgwaa-duymf,» mung.» full.ofthe in!»
porunoeofthatobpctto her,uElinor,inqite olall
that had Pal-ed, war not prqrared to wine...

On being informed of the invitation, Mn Daahwood,
penuadedthat nichao excursionde be productive
of much amuaernent to both her daughten, and perceiv-
ing through all her aﬁcﬁonate attention to heraeIl', how
much the hurt of Marianne was in it, would nu hear
of their declining the offer upon hr account; ineined
on their both accepting it directly, and then began to
foresee, with her uaual cheerfulneq a of advan-
tagelthatwouldaocruetothemallfromthia '

“I am delighted with the Ian,” the c ' “it ia
exactly what I could with. m and I duall he at
much beneﬁted by it a younelvee. When you and the
Middletonlare gone, weahall go on no quietlyand
together with our book: and our mimic! You ‘ I
ﬁnd Margaret to improved when you come back again!
And I have a little plan of alteration lorymrhedmomt
too, which may now be performed without inconveni-
ence to any one. It ll very right that you about“ go
to town ; I would have every young woman of your
condition in life acquainted with the mannen and amuse-
menrs of London. You will be under the care of a
motherly, good non of woman, of whoee kindness to you
I can have no doubt. And in all mbahility you will
tee your brother, and whatever may hit faulta, or the
faults of his wife, when I consider whooe am he in, I
cannot bear to have you so wholly oatmnged from each
other."

“ Though, with your usual anxiety for our happiness,"

sense AND smsmrm. r 53

said Elinor, " you have been obviating every impedi-
ment to the present acheme whidr occurred to you, there
in atill one objection which, in my opinion, cannot be to

uni] remov "

billarianne's countenance lunk.

“ And what,” taid Mrs Dashwood, “in my dear
pmdent Elinor going to suggest? What fomiidable
obstacle in she now to bring forward? Do not let me
hear a word about the expeme of it.”

“ My objection is thin: though I think very well of
Mn Jenningn’ heart, ahe in not a woman whoa:
can ail'ord ua pleasure, or whole protection will give In
con uence.’

" hat in very true,” replied her mother; “but of her
Iociety, separately from that of other people, you will
Icarcely have anything at all, and on will almost always
appear in ublic with Lady Mi eton.”

“ If E inor in frightened away by her dialilte of Mn
Jennings,” said Marianne, “at lealt it need not prevent
my accepting her invitation. I have no Inch temples,
and I am sure I could ut up with every unpleasantneu
of that kind with very ittle eﬁ'on."

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of in-
dilference towards the mannen of a perion to whom
Oh! had often had dilﬁculty in persuading Marianne to
behave with tolerable politeneu, and renolved within
herself. that if her sister perched in going, she would
go likewise, a; she did not think it proper that Marianne
should be leltto the sole guidance of her own judgment,
or that Mrs Jennin a should be abandoned to the mercy
of Marianne for al the comfort of her domedc home.
To this determination the was the more 93in reconciled,
by recollecting that Edward F en'an, by Lucy’s account.
was not to be in town before February, and that their
visit, without any unrenlonable abridgmcm, might be
previously ﬁniahed.

154 SENSE AND SlNSlBlLlTY.

“I will have you Mb go,” id Mrs Dalhwood;
“ these objections are nonsensical. You will have much
pleasure in being in London, and especially in being to-
gether; and if Elinor would ever condetcend to antici-
pate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety
of sources; she would perhaps expect some from im-
proving her acquaintance with her sietcr-in-law's family."

Elinor had often wished for an oppommity of at-
tempting to weaken her mother’s dependence on the
attachment of Edward and herself, that the shock might
be the less when the whole tmth were revealed, and
now on this attack, though almost hopeless of success,
she forced herself to begin her design by saying as
calmly as she could, “I like Edward Femrs very
much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to
the rest of the family, it is a matter of rfect indifference
to me whether I am ever known to t em or not.”

Mrs. Dashwood smiled and said nothing. Marianne
lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor con-
jectured that she might as well have held her tongue. '

After very little farther discourse, it was ﬁnally
settled that the invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs
Jennings received the infonnstion with a great deal of
joy, and many assurances of kindness and care; nor was
It a matter of pleasure merely to her. Sir John was
delighted; for to a man whose prevailing anxiety was
the dread of being alone, the acquisition of two to the
number of inhabitants in London was something. Even
Lady Middleton took the trouble of being delighted,
which was putting herself rather out of her way; and
as for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never
been so happy in their lives as this intelligence made
them.

Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counter-
acted her wishes with less reluctance than she had
expected to feel. With regard to herself, it was now a

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. ! s 5

matter of unconcem whether she went to town or not;
and when due saw her mother so thoroughly pleased
with the Klan, and her sister exhilarated by it in look,
voice, an manner, restored to all her usual animation,
and elevated to more than her usual gaiety, the could not
be dissatisﬁed with the cause, and would hardly allow
herself to distrust the consequence.

Marianne’s joy was almost a degree beyond happiness,
no great was the perturbation of her spirita and her im-
lmtiencc to be gone. Her unwillingness to quit her
mother was her only restorative to calmness; and at the
moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.
Her mother’s afﬂiction was hardly less, and Elinor was
the only one of the three who seemed to consider the
sqraration as anything short of eternal.

Their departure took placc in the first week in
January. 'lhe Middletons were to follow in about a
week. The Miss Steeles kept their station at the Park,
and were to quit it only with the rest of the family.

 

@bepttt ﬁﬁH‘]. T ‘

LINOR could not ﬁnd herself in the carria with
Mrs Jennings, and beginning a 'oumeyto ondon
under her protection, and as er guest, without

wondering at her own situation, so short had their
acquaintance with that lady been. so wholly unsuited
were they in age and disposition, and so many had been
her objections against such a measure only a few days
before I But these ob'ections had all, with that ha

inﬂow of youth which ariannc and her mother quill;
shared, been overcome or overlooked; and Elinor, in
spite of every occasional doubt of Willou hby’s con-
stancy, could not witness the rapture of dflightﬁrl ex-

r 56 ms: All) ssnsraltrrv.

pectation which ﬁlled the whole soul and banned in the
eyesof Marianne, without feeling how blank was her
own prospect, how cheerless her own state of mind in
the comparison, and how gladly she would engage in
the solicutude of Msrianne’s situation to have the lame
animating object in view, the urne posdhility of hope.
A short, a very than time, however, must now deade
what Willoughhy’s intentions were: in all probability
he was already in town. Marianne’s ugerness to be
gone declared her dependanoe on ﬁnding him there;
and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every
. new light as to his character which her own oheervation
or the intelligence of others could give her, but likewise
upon watching his behaviour to her sister with such
zealous attention, as to ascertain what he was, and what
he meant, before many meetings had taken place.
Should the result of her observations he unfavourable,
she was determined at all events to open the eyes of her
sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions would he
of a different nature—she must then learn to avoid every
selﬁsh comparison, and banish every regret which might
lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne.
They were three days on their journey, and Mari-
annc’s behaviour as they travelled was a happy specimen
of what her future complaimnce and companionableness
to Mrs Jennings might be expected to be. She sat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own medita-
tions, and scarcer ever voluntarily speaking, except
when any object of picturesque beauty within their view
drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively
addressed to her sister. To atone for this conduct.
therefore, Elinor took immediate possesdon of the
of civility which she had assigned herself, behaved with
the greatest attention to Mrs Jennings, talked with her,
laughed with her, and listened to her whenever she
could; and Mrs Jennings on her side treated them both

SBNSE AND SBNSIBILITY. 157

with all possible kindness, was solicitous on eve -
sion for their ease and enjoyment, and only disturbed
that she could not make them choose their own dinners
at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets.

reached town by three o'clock the third day, glad to be
released, after such a journey, from the conﬁnement of
; carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good

re.

The house wan handsome and handsomely fitted up,
and the young ladies were immediately put in possession
of a very comfortable Ipartment. It had formerly been
Charlotte’s, and over the mlntelpiece still hung a land-
scape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof of
her having spent seven years at a great school in town
to some effect.

As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours
from their arrival, Elinor determined to employ the
interval in writin to her mother, and sat down for that
purpose. In a ew moments Marianne did the same.
“I am writing home, Marianne,” said Elinor; “had
not you better defer your letter for a day or two 2”

“ I am not going to write to my mother,” replied
Marianne hastily, and as if wishing to avoid an farther
inquiry. Elinor said no more; it immediatey muck
her that she must then be writing to Willoughby, and
the conclusion which as instantly followed was, that
however mysteriously they might widi to conduct the
affair, th must be engaged. This conviction, though
not entire y satisfactory, gave her pleasure, and she con-
tinued her letter with greater alacrity. Marisnne’s was
ﬁnished in a very few minutes; in length it could be no
more than a note: it was then folded up, sealed Ind
directed with eager Widity. Elinor thought she could
distinguish a large in the direction, and no sooner
was it complete then Msriunne, ringing the hell. re-

158 SENSE AND SBNSlBlLlTY.

quested the footmsn who answered it, to get that letter
conveyed for her to the twpenny post. This decided
the matter at once.

Her spirits still continued very high, but there was a
ﬂutter in them which prevented their giving much
pleasure to her sister, and this agitation incmsed as the
evening drew on. She could scarcely eat any dinner,
and when they afterwards retumed to the drawing-
room, seemed anxiously listening to the sound of every
carnage.

It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs
Jennings, by being much engaged in her own room,
could see little of what was passing. The ten things
were brought in, and already had Marianne been dis-
appointed more than once by a rs at a neighbouring
door, when a loud one was sudden y heard which could
out be mistaken for one at an other house. Elinor
felt secure of its announcing illoughby's approach,
and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door.
Everything was silent; this could not be borne many
seconds, she opened the door, advanced a few steps
towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute,
returned into the room in all the agitation which a con-
viction of having heard him would naturally produce;
in the extasy of her feelings at that insmnt she could
not help exclaiming, “O Elinor, it is Willoughhy,
indeed it is! ” and seemed almost ready to throw her-
self into his arms, when Colonel Brandon a red.

It was too great a shock to be borne wixteaoslmness,
and she immediately left the room. Elinor was dis-
a pointed too; but at the same time her regard for

olonel Brandon insured his welcome with her, and she
felt rtieularly hurt that a man sopartial to her sister
shoul: perceive that she experienced nothing but grief
and disappointment in seeing him. She instantly saw
that it was not unnoticed by him, that he even observed

SENS! AND SENSIBILITV. 159

Marianne so she quitted the room, with such mnish-
ment and concern, as hardly left him the Iecollection of
what civility demanded towards herself.

“Is your sister ill?” said he.

Elinor snswmd in some distress that she was, end
then talked of head-aches, low-spiritn, and over-fatigues;
and of everything to which she could decently attribute
her sister's behaviour. .

He heard her with the most eamest mention, but
seeming to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,
and began directly to speak of his plasure at seeing them
in London, making the usual in uiries about their journey
and the friends they had left he rind.

In this calm kind of way, with very little intern: on
either side, they continued to talk, both of them out of
s irits, and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere.

linor wished very much to ask whether Willoughby
were then in town, but she was afraid of giving him
by any inquiry after his rival ; and at length by way of
saying something, she asked if he had been in London
ever since she had seen him last. " Yes,” he re lied
with some embarrassment, “ almost ever since; I ave
been once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has
never been in my power to return to Barton."

This, and the manner in which it was said, im-
mediame brought back to her remembrance all the
circumstances of his quitting that place, with the unasi-
ness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings,
and she was fearful that her question had implied much
more curiosity on the subject than she had ever felt.

Mrs Jennings soon came in. “0 Colonell " said
she, with her usual noisy cheerfulness, “ I am monstrous
glad to see you—sorry I could not come before—beg
yougardon, but. I have been forced to look about me
s li e, and settle my matters; for it is a long while
since I have been at home, and-you know one has always

16° sense arm sustain-n.

a world of little 'odd thing! to do after one ha- been
away for any time; and then I have had Cartwright to
settle with. Lord, I have been at lruly a: a bee ever
since dinner! But pm , Colonel, how came you to
conjure out that I thoul be in town lo-da 2"

“I had tht: pleasure of hearing it at r. Palmer’s,
where I have been dining.”

“Oh! you did; well, and how do they all do at
their home? How does Charlotte do? I warrant you
she it a ﬁne Iize by thin time."

“ Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and X urn com-
miuioned to tell you that you will certainly tee her to-
marrow.”

“ Ay, to be sure, I thoughtaa much. Well, Colonel,
I have brought two young ladiee with me, you DOG—dill
it, you see but one of them now, but there in another
nomewhere. Your friend Min Marianne, too—which
you will not he son—y to hear. I do not Imow what you
and Mr. Willoughby will do between you about her.
Ay, it it a ﬁne thing to beyoung and handsome. Well!
I was young once, but I never wan very handsome-—
wane luck for me. However, I got a very good
husband, and I don’t know what the grated beautycan
'do more. Ah! poor man! he hatbeendead these
eight years and better. But, Colonel, where have you
been to since we parted ? And how does your burineu go
on ? Come, come, let ’I have no secrete among friends"

He replied with his accustomery mildneu to all her
inquiriel, but without tatitfying her in any. Elinor now
began to make the tea. and Marianne val obliged to
appear again.

After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more
thoughtful and silent than he had been before, andMn.
Jennings could not prevail on him to my long. No
other visitor appeared that evening, and the lathe: were
unanimoue in agreeing to go early to bed,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 16!

Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits
and happy looks. The disappointment of the evening
before eeemed forgotten in the expectation of what wan
to he that day. They had not long finished their
h before Mrs Palmer’s borouche stopped Itthe
door, and in a few minutes she came laughing into the
room; to delighted to see them all, that it was hard to
any whether she received most pleasure from meeting her
mother or the Miss Duhwoods again. So ourprised at
their comin to town, though it was what she had nther
expected along; so angry at their accepting her
mother’s invitation after having declined her own, though
It the same time she would never have forgiven them if
they had not come!

“ Mr Palmer will be so [1.1 my to see you,” aid the;
“ what do you think he sai when he hard of your
coming with mammal I forget what it was now, but
it wan something so droll ! ”

After an hour or two lpent in what her mother called
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variet of
inquiry concerning all their acquaintance on {In
Jennings’s side, and in laughter without canoe on Mn
Palmer’e, it was proposed by the latter that they should I
all accompany her to some shops where she had busineu-
thnt mommg, to which Mn Jennings and Elinor readily
coneented, as havin likewise some purchases to make
them-elm; and ‘ nne, though declining it at ﬁrst,
was induced to go likewise.

Wherever they went, she won evidently :1ny on the
watch. In Bond-street especially, where much of their
business lay, her eyes were in conetant inquiry; and in
whatever shop the party were engaged, her mind w:-
equally abstracted from everything actually before them,
from all that interested and occupied the other; Ren-
less and dissatisﬁed everywhere, her sister could never
obtain her opinion of any article of purchrue, however it

I. L

163 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

might equally concern them both; the received no plea-
sure from anything; was onl impatient to he at home
again, and could with dilﬁcu ty govern her vexation at
the tedioueness of Mr- Palmer, whose eye was caught
by everything pretty, expensive, or new ; who was wild
to buy all, could determine on none, and duwdkd away
her time in rapmre and indecision.

It was late in the morning before they retumed home;
and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne
ﬂew eagerly upstairs, and when Elinor followed, the
found her turning from the table with a sorrowful
countenance, which declared that no Willoughhy had
been there.

“ Has no letter been left here for me since we went
out 9 ” said she to the footrnan who then entered with
the parcels. She was answered in the negative. “ Are
you quite sure of it .3” she replied. “Are you certain
that no sean no porter has eft any letter or note 3”

The man replied that none had.

“ How very odd," said she in a low and disappointed
voice, as she turned away to the window.

“ How odd indeed! ’ repeated Elinor within herself,
regarding her sister with uneasiness. “ If she had not
known him to he in town, she would not have written
to him, as she did; she would have written to Cornbe
Magus; and if he is in town, how odd that he should
neither come nor write! 0 my dear mother, you
must be wrong in permitting an engagement between a
daughter to oung, a man so little known, to he can'ied
on in so douhtful, so mysterious a manner! I long to
inquire ; but how will my interference be home! ”

She determined, after some consideration, that if
appearances continued many days longer an unpleasant as
they now were the would repreoent in the strongest man-

ner to her mother the necessity of some serious inquiry
into the affair.

sense AND summary. 163

Mm Palmer and two elderly ladie- of Mn 1min e
intimate acquaintance, whom the had met and invi in
the morning, dined with them. The former left them
soon after ta to fulﬁl her evening engugementa'; and
Elinor was obliged to auiut in making a which-table for
the others. Marianne was of no uae on these occaeiona.
as she would never learn the game; but though her time
was therefore at her own disposal, the evening wan by
no mans more productive of plmre to her dun to
Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiet of expect:-
tion and the ain of din ‘ntment. Syhe uometimea
endeavoured or a few minutes to read; but the book
was soon thrown aside, and the returned to the more
intereeting employment of walking backward: and for-
ward. ncmu the room, panning for a moment whenever
she came to the window, in hopes of diltinguinhing the

long-expected mp.

mulqu loll: anus. Plﬂﬂ‘lls. abut-um.

 

This preservatlon photocopy was made
at BookLab. lm. In compliance with copyright law.
The paper meets the requlrements of ANSI/NISO
23948-1992 (Permanence of Paper)

Austin 1995

 

 

”

 

 

 

 

 

 

' III!

3 2044 uz4 595 u:

 

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS

REGINALD BRIMLEY JOHNSON

IN TEN VOLUMES

VOL. II.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY

VOL. II.

2,3

 

 

 

jANE AUSTEN 3

~61! TEN VOLUME}

 

LONDON: Publiﬂned by J.M.DENT and COMPANY
11 AI.nt HOUSE in Great Eaﬂern Street. E.C.
MDCCCXCH

 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

TH! COLOIIIL'D $10“ . . . Frontigbiea
“Hun You Hum 1m Nswa?” . no: 90

A Run“: AND Fzmmn NIGHT . ,, I41

 

     
  
 

xy—v—qw: w‘

 
     

‘ v

we «w ‘ ‘s »

       

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

——*——

cheater ﬁﬁvjl .

“ F this open weather hold: much longer," said Mn
Jenningl, when they met at breakfut the following
morning, " Sir John will not like leaving Bamn

next week; ’6: a sadthing for Iporumen to loaeaday’l

pleasure. Poor mule ! 1 alny them when they

(lo—they seem to take it so much to rt."

“That. in true," cried Marilnne in a cheerful voice,
and walking to the window an the upoke, to examine the
day. “ I had not thought of tbal. Thin weather will
keep many mm in the country.”

It war a ucky recollection, nll ICI‘ good spirits were
restored by it. “ It is charming weather for 15¢»!
ind ,” she continued, an the lat down to the hie-Hut
table with 2. ha countenance. " How much they
Inuit enjoy it! ut" (with a little return of anxiety),
“it cannot be expected to last long. At this time of
year, and after such a series of rain, we shall certainly
have very little more of it. From will soon net in, and
in all probability with severity. In another d: or two,
perlupe; this exueme mildne- can hardly laot onger—
nay, perhaps it may freeze to-night l "

“ At any rate," aaid .Elinor, winhing to prevent Mn
Jenningl from eeeing her lilter'a thoughts as clme an

H- A

2 SENSE AND SENSXBILXTY.

nhe did, “ I dareuy we Ihnll have Sir John and Lady
Middleton in town the end of next woe ”
"Ay, my dear, ’ll warrant you we do. Mary

always has own wzy."
“And iiow," ' ntly conjectured Elinor, "the will

write to Comhe by thin day’e post."

But if she did, the letter was written and rent away
with a privacy that eluded nll her watchfulnen to lacer-
tain the fact. Whatever the truth of it might be, and
as far as Elinor wan from feeling thorough contentment
about it, et while she saw Marianne in apiritl, Ill!
could not very uncomfortable herself. And Marianne
wan in spirits, happy in the mildnesa of the weather, Ind
still happier in her expectation of a front.

The momin wan chieﬂy apent in leaving card. at
the home: of ﬁMn Jenninge’l ac unintance to inform
them of her being in town ; and arianne Wll all the
time buy in observing the direction of the wind, watch-
ing the variation: of the Iky, and imagining an alteration

in the ' .

“ Dilh’t you ﬁnd it colder than it was in the mom-
ing, Elinor? There seem to me a very decided
difference. I can hardly keep my hand: warm even in
my muff. It was not no yerterday, I think. The
cloud: seem parting too, the nun will he out in a
moment, and we nhall have a clear nRernoon."

Elinor wan alternatel diverted and pained; hut
Marianne persevered, an saw every night in the bright-
ness of the ﬁre, and every morning in the appearance
of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
from.

The Min Dachwooda had no greater ten-on to he
disaatitﬁed with Mrs Jenninge’e ater of living and net
of acquaintance than with her behaviour to themselvee,
which was invariably kind. Everything in her house-
hold nrrnngement- wan conducted on the man: liberal

SENSE AND SINSIBXIJTY. 3

no, and excepting n few old city frieodt, whom, to
ady Middleton’l regret, rhe had never dropped, the
vidted no one to whom en introduction could at all die-
eornpoee the feeling: of her young companions. Pleased
to ﬁnd henelf more comfomhl situated in that ion-
larthan she had expected,E'norwan very ' in to
compound for the went of much real enjoyment gum
any of their evening genie; which, whether It home or
r

nbroad, formed Only cnrdo, could have little to emu-e
her.

Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the
houte, war with them almoot every day; he cameto
look at Marianne and talk toElinor, who often derived
more reinfection from convening with him than from
any other daily occurrence, but who law at the ume
time with much concern hiI continued regard for her
liner. She feared it was I strengthening regard. It
grieved her to see the earnestness with which he often
watched Marianne, and hie lpiritl were certainly worse
than when at Barton.

’ About 1 week nfmr their arrival, it became certain
that Willoughby was also arrived. His card VIII on
the table when the came in from the morning’c drive.

“GoodGodl' criedMnriame, “hehuheen here
while we were out.” Elinor, rejoiced to be ﬁgured
of hie being in London, now ventured to lay, " Depend
upon it, he will call again to-morrow." But Marianne
Ieerned hardly to hear her, end on Mn Jenningl’l
entrance, «coped with the preciouc card. '

Thin event, while it rained the rpir'ite of ‘Elinor,
rettored to their of her «inter nll,nnd more than Ill,
their former agitation. From thin moment her mind
wu never quiet; the expectation of seeing him ev
hour of the day made her unﬁt for anything; She
inlicted on being left hehindthe next momrng, when the
other: went out.

4 SENS! AND SENSIBILITY.

Elinor’athonghhvlere ﬁrllof vlhatnn'ghthepe-in
in Berkeley-meet during their aheenee; but a momenta
glancent her linerwhen theymumed wuenongh to
Inform her that Willonghhy had paid no eecond viit
there. A mtewujun then bmughtin,and hidon
the table. V

“ For me I " cried Marianne, cupping hutily forwud.

“ No, ma’am, for my mime...”

But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.

" It is indeed for Mn Jenninge; how provoking l "

“ You are expecting a letter then i" aid Elinor,
unable to be longer n'lent.

“ Yet! a little-not much.”

After a ahort panae, “ You have no conﬁdence in
me, Marianne.”

“ Nay, Elinor, thin reproach from you l—onI who
have conﬁdence rn no one! " -

“Mel” returned Elinorineomeconﬁuion; “indeed
Marianne, I have nothing to tell.”

“ Nor I," answered Marianne with en: ; “our
durations then are alike. We have neither 0 run any.
thing to tell; you, became you communicate, and I,
because I conceal nothing."

Elinor, dimmed by this charge of reserve in heraelf,
which the war not at liberty to do away, knewnot how,
under Inch cirenmrtanoee, to piece for greater openneee
in Marianne.

Mn Jeoningl soon a peared, and the note hein
given her, aha rad it alormli‘l. Itwaa from Lady MiddleE
ton, announcing their arrival in Conduit-street the night
before, and nesting the company of her mother and
conﬁne the allowing evening. Bun'neu on Sir John’a
part, and a violent cold on her own, prevented their
calling in Berkeley-meet. The invitation wal accepted:
but when the hour of :ppointment drew near, necenary
n it was in common ci ' ity to Mn Jenninga that they

SENSE AND msraru-rv. 5

should both attend her on ouch a viait, Elinor had come
difﬁculty in pemndinﬁ her timer to go, for Itill the had
aeen nothing of W' oughby. and therefore wan not
more indiepooed for monument abroad, than unwilling
to run the rink of his calling again in her absence.

Elinor found, when the evening me over, that die-
poaiu'on in not materially altered lay a change of abode;
for although narcer settled in town, Sir John had con-
trived to collect around him nearly twenty young le,
and to amuee them with a ball. This won an 'r,
however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve.
In the country, an unpremeditated dance was very
allowable; but in London. where the reputation of
elegance was more important and less canin obtained, it
wu rilking too much, for the gratiﬁcation of a few girls,
to have it known that Lady Middleton had given a
small dance of eight or nine couple, with two violina,
and a mere Iidehoard collation.

Mr and Mru Palmer were of the rty; from the
former, whom they had not seen be re since their
arrival in town, an be was careful to avoid the appear-
ance of any attention to hie mother-in-law, and therefore
never came near her, they received no mark of recog-
nition on their entrance. He looked at them vlightl ,
without teeming to know who they were, and merely
nodded to Mrl Jenningl from the other aide of the
room. Marianne gave one glance round the apartment
as ehe entered; it was enough, be was not there—and
the at down, equally ill-dilpoaed to receive or communi-
cate pleuure. After they had been anemhled about an
hour, Mr Palmer Iauntered towardl the Min Dah-
wooda, to expreu hie Inn-price on aeein them in town,
though Colonel Brandon had been at informed of
their arrival at his home, and he had himaelf aid
Iomething very droll on hearing that they were to
cm. ,

6 sense AND smsrnitrrv.

“I thought you were both in DevonIhire,” did he.

“ Did you? ’ replied Elinor.

“When do you go back again?" 4

“I donot know.’ Andthulendedtheirdilooune.

Never had Marianne been no unwilling to dance in
her life an the wee that evening, and never In much
fatigued by the exereiee. She complained of it a: they
returned to Berkele «ﬂeet.

“ Ay. ay,” said hire Jennings, “ we know the moon
of all that very well; if a certain non who shall be
nameleu had been there, you wo not have been a
bit tired; and to lay the truth, itwas not very pretty of
him not to give you the meeting when he was invimd."

“ Invited! ” cried Marianne.

“So my daughter Middleton told me, for it Iceml
Sir John met him Iomcwhere in the street thin morning."

Marianne aaid no more, but looked exceedingly hurt.
Impatient in this ximation to be doing something that
might lead to her niner’s relief, Elinor resolved to write
the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awaken-
ing her fear: for the health of Marianne, to pracure
tho-e inquiries which had been to long delayed; and
she was still more eagerly bent on this measure, by per-
ceiving after hreakﬁwl on the marrow, that Marianne
wzu again writing to Willoughby, for the could not
eupxue it to he to any other pemn.

bout the middle of the day, Mn Jenningt went out
b herself on hunineu, and Elinor began her letter
directly; while Marianne, too reader- for employment,
too anxious for conversation, walked from one window
to the other, or sat down by the ﬁre in melancholy
meditation. Elinor was very eameot in her application
to her mother, relating all that had passed, her suspicion-
of Willoughby’e incomtanc‘ye, urging her by every plea
of duty and uﬂ'ection to mand from Marianne an
account of her real eituation with reepect to him.

SENSE AND SINSIIILITY. 7

Her letter was namely ﬁninhed, when a rap foretold
a visitor, and Colonel Brandon was announced. Meri-
snne, who had oeen him from the window, and who
hated compan of any kind, left the room before he
entered it. lzle looked more than umlly grave, and
though ex reusing utiefaetion at ﬁnding Min Diehwood
alone, ui he had somewhat in particular to tell her,
sat for some time without saying a word. Elinor, per-
suaded that he had some communication to make in
which her sitter wan concerned, impatiently expected
it: openin It wao not the lint time of her feeling the
tune kin of conviction; for more than once before,
beginning with the obeemtion of “Your rialer looks
unwell to-dny,” or “Your rister seems out of spirits,"
he had appeared on the point, either of diseloaing, or of
inquiring, something particular about her. After a pause
of seven] minuter, their silence was broken b hie uk-
ing her, in a voice of some agitation, when was to
congratulate her on the ac uisition of a brother? Elinor
we; not prepared for so a question, and having no
anewer ready, wan obliged to adopt the eimple and com-
mon expedient of akin what he meant? He tried to
smile a he replied, “ our sister's engagement to Mr
Willoughhy in very generally known."

“It cannot be generally known,” returned Elinor,
“ for her own family do not know it.”

He looked surprised, and aid, “I beg your pardon,
I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent ; but I had
not suppooed any secrecy intended, as the open]
corre nd, and their niarnage in univemlly ked of. ’

“ 33w can that be? By whom can you have heard
it mentioned."

- “By mny—-by some of whom you know nothing,
by othen with whom you are moat intimate—JAN
Jenningl, Mn Palmer, and the Middleton. But still
I might not have believed it—for where the mind in '

8 sons: m SENSIBILI'I'V.

Eerhaps rather unwilling to be convinced, it will always
nd nomething to support its doubu—if I had not, when
the tervant let me in to-day, accidentally seen a letter
in his hand, directed to Mr Willoughby in your sieter'e
writing. I came to inquire, but I was conunced before
I could Mk the question. Is everything ﬁnally aetded?
In it impoelihle to—i But I have no right. and I
could have no chance of mending—Excuse me, Mist
Dathwood. I believe I have been wrong in saying .0
much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your
prudence I have the stmn cut dependence. Tell me
that it in all absolutely ved on, that any attasz—
thzt in thort concealment. if concealment be e, is
Ill that remains.’ ’

These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct
avoqu of his love for her sister, :15de her very much.
She was not immediately able to say an ing, and even
when her apiriu were recovered, she d ted for a short
time on the answer it would be moat proper to give.
The real late of things between Willoughby and her
liner was so little known to herself, that In endeavour-
ing to exselain it, lhe might be as liable to say too much
an too lit . Yet at the was convinced that Marianne’s
affection for Willoughby could leave no hope of Colonel
Brandon’s succeu, whatever the event of that aﬁ‘ection
might be, and at the same time wished to shield her
conduct from censure. the thought it most prudent and
kind, after some conaideration, to any more than ahe
really knew or believed. She acknowledged, therefore,
that though she had never been informed by themnelveu
of the terms on which they stood with each other, of
their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of their
corrupondenoe the woe not astonished to hear.

He linened to her with silent attention, and on her
casingto epeak,roee direcdyfrom his Ieagand after
laying in a voice of emotion, “To your sister I will:

.SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. - 9

all imngnnnh' le ha ' eel; to Willoughhy thlt hem-y
endeavour to deal): her,”-—rook leav’e, and went

Iva .

glinor derived no comfortable feelingl from this con-

verlarion to lessen the uneuineu of her mind on other

points; the was left, on the contrary, with I melancholy

impression of Colonel Brandon’s nnha inns, and wad

revented from even wilhing it mm by her anxiety
r the very event that must conﬁrm it.

guru: $959333»

OTHING occurred during the next three or four
days to make Elinor regret what she had done in
applying to her mother; for Willoughby neither
came nor wrote. They were engaged about the end of
that time to attend Lady Middleton to a party, from
which Mn Jennings was kept away by the inmon
of her youngen daughter; and for this party, ' ne,
wholly diepirited, careless of her appearance, and seem-
ing equally indifferent whether she went or mid, pre-

without one look of hope, or one expression of
plamre. She sat h the drawing-room ﬁre after tea,
till the.ruoment of ady Middleton’l an'ival, without
once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude, loot
in her own thoughts and insenlible of her We pre-
sence : and when at lat they were told that Lady
Middleton waited for them at the door, she started as if
Ihe had forgotten that my one wan expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of destination.
and as soon as the Itring of carriages before them would
nllow, alighted, mended the min, heard their names
announced from one ,landing-place to another in an
audible voice, and entered I room splendidly lit up,

10 smse AND SENSIBILITY.

quite full of company, and inculferably hot. When
they had paid their tribute of politeneu by eurtneying
to the lady of the home, they were permitted to mingle
in the croud, and take their there of the beat and In-
canvenience, to which their arrival mun necessarily add.
After Iorne time spent in saying little and doing lea,
Lady Middleton lat down to caaino, and u Marianne
was not in cpiriu for moving about, she and Elinor,
luckily succeeding to chain, placed themcelvel at no
great dittance from the table.

They had not remained in this manner long, before
Elinor perceived Willoughby, standing within a few
yards of them, in earnest convenation with a very
fashionable-looking young woman. She soon caught
hii eye, and he immediately bowed, but without at-
tcmpung to ITeak to her, or to approach Marianne,
though he co d not but see her; and then continued
hi: discourse with the lame lady. Elinor turned in-
voluntarily to Marianne, to ice whether it could be
unobserved by her. At that moment Ill: ﬁm 'ved
him, and her whole countenance glowing wi «ridden
delight, the would have moved toward: him inmntly,
had not her sister caught hold of her.

“ Good heavem! " she exclaim , “ he in them—he
in there. Oh! why doc. he not look at me? why
cannot I Ipeak to him ? ”

“Pray, pray be composed,” cried Elinor, “and do
not betray what you feel to everybody preeent. Perhaps
he ha: not observedyou yet."

This, however, was more than she could believe her-
self, Ind to be composed at such a. moment was not only
beyond the reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish.

She sat in an agony of impatience which affected every
feature.

At lat he turned round again, and regarded them
both; the started up, and pronouncing his name in a

SENS! AND msroru'rv. [1

tone of affection, held out her bind to him. He ap-
ed, and addressing himself rather to Elinor than
‘ no, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined
not to observe her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner
after Mrs Dashwood, and asked how long they had
been in town. Elinor was robbed of all presence of
mind by such an address, and was unable to say u word.
But the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed.
Her face wss crimsoned over, and she exclaimed in I
voice of the greatest emotion, “Good God l Willoughby,
what is the meaning of this? Have you not received
my letters? Will you not shake hands with me?"
He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed
inful to him, and he held her hand only for a moment.
using Ill this time he was evidently smuggling for com-
posure. Elinor watched his countenance, and saw its
expression becoming more tranquil. After a moment's
use, he spoke with calmness.

“ I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley-street
last Tuesday, and very much regretted that I was not
forumnte enough to ﬁnd yourselves and Mrs Jennings at
home. My card was not lost, I hope.”

“ But have you not received In notes?” cried
Marianne in the wildest anxict . “ ore is some mis-
take, I am lure—some dreadfu mistake. What can he
the meaning of it? Tell me, Willoughby—for haven’s
sake, tell me, what is the matter?" '

He made no reply ; his complexion changed and all
his embarrassment returned; but as if, on catching the
eye of the young lady with whom he had been prenously
talking, he felt the neceuity of instant exertion, he
recovered himself again, and after saying, “ Yes, I had
the plusure of receiving the information of your arrival
in town, which you were so as to send to me,"
turned hastily sway with a ﬁght how and joined his
friend.

12 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Marianne, now looking dreadfull white, and unable
to mod, sunk into her chair, a Elinor, expecting
every moment to see her faint, tried to acreen her from
the obeemtion of othen, while reviving her with lavender
water.

“ Go to him, Elinor,” Ihe aid, at noon on Oh! could
lpeak, “and force him to come to me. Tell him I
mun nee him again —mun speak to him imam] . I
cannot rest—I Ihall not have a moment’s 0: ti thin
in explained—come dreadful mirappreheonon or other.
Oh, o to him this moment.”

“ ow can that be done? ‘No, my dearest Marianne.
w: must wait. Thil in not I place for explanation;

ait only till to-morrow.”

With difﬁculty, however, could the prevent her from
following him herself; and to pertuadc her to check her
agitation—to wait, at least, with the appearance of com-
posure—till the might speak to him with more privacy
and more effect. was impossible; for Marianne continued
incenantly to give way in a low voice to the mine of
her feelings, by exclamation: of wretchedneu. n a
Ihort time Elinor saw Willoughbﬁ quit the room by the
door towards the staircase, and te ing Marianne that he
wal gone, urged the impouibility of speaking to him
again that evening, as a frelh argument for her to be
calm. She instantly begged her sister would entreat
Lady Middleton to take them home, as the was too
miner-able to ttay a minute longer.

Lady Middleton, though in a middle of a rubber, on
being informed that Marianne wan unwdl, wu too polite
to object for a moment to her will: of going away, and
making over her cards to a friend, they departed at noon
at the can-inge could be found. Searcer : word wan
apolten during their return to Berkeley-street. Marianne
won in a silent agony, too much oppressed even for teen;
but an Mn Jenningu wax luckily not come home, they

SENS! AND SINSIBILI'H'. 13

could direedytotheirownromn,wherehuuhorn
rem) hernlittleto henelf. Shem-nonunde
and in bed, and an the neemed deimue of being alone,
hereinerthenleft her,nndwhilethe waitedrhereturn
of Mn JenningI, had leieure enough for drinking over
the
hat tome kind of engagement had unlisted between
,Willoughby end Mu'ianne, she could not doubt; and
that Wilioughh was wary of it, Ieemed equnlly clear;
for however might lill feed her own wirhee.
1‘: could not ntuihute ouch behaviour to minke or min-
: rehention of any kind. Nothing but I thorough
change of Ienh'ment could account for it. Her indigna-
don would have been still mnger than it wu, had the
not witneleed that emharrunnent which accrued to Ipenk
n madame.- of his own miecnnduct, end revean
her from believing him an un rincipled u to ve been
Ipordng with the affection. 0 her inner from the 5m,
without an design that would hear inveeti 'on.
Absence might have wakened hie regard, an con- .
mience might have determined him to overcome it, but
that Inch a regud had formerly exich the could not
brin hereelf to doubt.
for Marine, on the pong: which to unhappy I
rneeu'ng mun already have given her, and on thoee etill
more eevere which might await her in its probable con—
eequence, the could not reﬂect without the deepen con-
cern. Her own duration ’ned inthecmnpnrreon; for
while she could mean ward at much u ever, how-
ever diey'might be divided in future, her mind might
be Alway- tupported. But every circumnance that could
embitter each an evil Ieemed uniting to hei hten the
minery of Marianne in a final Iepantion from illoughhy
—in an immediate and irreconcilehle rupture with him.

I4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Chum nae.

EFORE the home-maid had lit their ﬁre the next
clay, or the run gained any ﬁwer over a cold,
gloom morning in January, arianne, only half

dreued, was eeling'a 'net one of the window-learn
for the lake of all the ittle light Ihe could command '
from it, and writing at fast an a continual ﬂow of term
would permit her. In thin simian, Elinor, mined
from sleep by her agitation and Jobs,ﬁrst perceived her;
and after observing her for a few momenta with Iilent
anxiety, laid, in a tone of the moat considerate gentle-
neu—

“ Marianne, may I ask i ”

“No, Elinor,” ahc replied, “ark nothing; you will
noon know all."

The loft of desperate calmness with which thin wa- ‘
mid lasted no longer than while she rpokg, and wan
immediately followed by a return of the lame excetsive
afﬂiction. It was some minutes before the could go on
with her letter, and the frequent hum: of grief which
still obliged her, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were
proof: enough of her feeling how more than probable
It was that the was writing for the lat: time to
Willoughby.

Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtruoive attention
in her power; and «the would have tried to soothe and
tranquiline her rtill more, had not Marianne entrated
her, with all the eagemers of the moat nervout irrita-
bility, not no speak to her for the world. In Inch

'circumttancea, it wu better for both that they should
not be long together ; and the reetleu state of Marianne’e
mind not only prevented her from remaining in the room
a moment after lhe was drened, but requiring at onoe
aolitude and continual change of place, made her wander

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, [5

about the houle till hmkfan time, avoiding the eight of
everybody. ‘ '

At bmkfaut‘ the nertherate nor memgted to eat any-
thing ; and Elinor’e attention was then a! employed, not
in urging her, not in 'tyin her, nor in a rin to re-
gard her, but in endervouriﬁg to engage ﬁre-“Jegningt’e
notice entirely to herself.

A: thin was a favourite meal with Mn Jenninge, it
land I conaiderahle time, and they were letting them-
eelvee, after it, round the common work table, when a letter
wan delivered to Marianne, which Ihe eagerly caught from
the Iervant, and, turning of a dam-like paleneu, instantly
ran out of the room. Elinor, who new an plainly by thin,
to if the had aeen the direction, that it must come from
Willoughhy, felt immediately such a sickneu at heart
ll made her hardly ahle to hold up her head, and not in
such I general tremour an made her fear it impouihle to
coupe Mn Jenninga’a notice. That good lady, how-
ever, eaw only that Marianne had received a letter from
Willoughby, which ap to her a very good joke,
and which the trea accordingly, by hoping, with a
laugh, that the would ﬁnd it to her liking. Of Elinor’l
dimeu, the was too busily employed in mounting
lengths of wanted for her mg, to Ice anythin at all;
and onlme continuing her talk, at noon an arianne
disapﬁeared, the said—~

“ pan my word,I nenr law a nngwoman no
deeper-ater in love in my life! My girls were nothing
to her, and yet they need to be foolinh enough; but as
for Miss Marianne, she in quite an altered creature. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, he won’t keep her
wanting much longer, for it in quite grievous to nee her look
to ill and forlorn. Pray, when are th to be married 2"

Elinor, though never let. dilpoeedyto speak than at
that moment, obli ed her-elf to newer Inch an attack
u this, and, there are, trying to mile, replied, “And

I 6 SENSE AN D SENSXBI LITV.

have you really, ma’am, talked yourself into I persuasion
of my sister’s being engaged to Mr Willoughby? I
thought it had been only a joke, but so serious I ques-
tion seems to imply more: and I must beg, therefore,
that you will not deceive rself any longer. Ido
mmoyou that nothing wo d surprise me more than to
hear their being going to be married.”

“ For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwoodl How
can you talk so! Don’t we all know that it must be a
match-that they were over head and ears in love with
each other from the ﬁrst moment they met? Did not
I see them together in Devon-hire every day, and all
day long? And did not I know that your surer came
to town with me on purpose to buy wedding clothes?
Come, come, this won’t do. Because you are so sly
about it youruelf, you think nobod else has any senses;
but it is no such thing, I can tel you, for it has been
known all over the town this ever so long. I tell
everybody of it, and so does Charlotte."

“Indeed, ma’sm,” said Elinor very seriously, “ you
are mistaken. Indeed, you are doing a very unkind
thing in spreading the report, and you will ﬁnd that you
have, though you will not believe me now."

Mrs Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not

irits to say more, and eager at all events to know that

illoughby had written, hurried awn to their room,
where, on opening the door, she saw arianne stretched
on the bed, almost choked by rief, one letter in her
hand, and two or three others iying by her. Elinor
drew near, but without saying a word ; and seating her-
self on the bed, took her hand, kissed her affectionately
several times, and then gave way to a burst of tean,
which at ﬁm was scarcely less violent than Marianne’s.
The latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all
the tendemeu of this behaviour, and after some time
thus spent in joint allliction, she put all the letter! into

sans: AND SENSIBILITY. ‘ r7.

Elinor’s hands; and then covering her face with her
handkerchief, almost screamed with agony. .Eliuor,
who knew that such grief, shocking as it was to witness
it, munt have its course, watched by her till this exam
of sulfering had somewhat (pent itself, and then turning
eagerly to Willoughhy’s letter, read as follows :—

Bom) Snur, January.

MY Dun Mmu,—I have just had the honour of
receiving your letter, for which I beg to return my
sincere acknowledgments. I am much concerned to
ﬁnd there was anything in my behaviour last night that
did not meet your apProbation ; and though I am quite
all loan to dueover In what point I could be so un-
fortunate an to offend you, I eutreat your forgiveness of
what I can assure you to haw been perfectly un-
intentional. I Ihnll never reﬂect on my former acquaint»-
ance with your family in Devonshire without the most

pleasure, and ﬂatter myself it will not be broken

any mistake or minappreheneion of my actions. M
esteem for your whole family is very Aincere; but if
have been so unfortunate as to give rise toa beliefof
more than I felt. or meant to expreu, I shall reproach
mytelf for not having been more guarded in my pro-
fessions of that esteem. That I should ever have meant
more, you will allow to be impossible, when you under-
and that my alfections have been lon engaged else-
where, Ind it will not be men weeks, I believe, before
this engagement is fulﬁlled. t in with great regret that
I obey your commands of returning the letters with -
which I have been honoured from you, and the lock of
hair which you so obligingly bestowed on me.

I am, dear Madam,
Your most obedient
humble Servant,
Jornr Wrtwuarmr.

n. i n

:8 sense AND snnsmu-rv.

With what indignation luch a letter at thin rmut be
read by Miss Dubwood, may be imagined. Though
aware, before she began it, that it mutt bring a confes-
Iion of hit inconmncy, and conﬁrm their reparation for
ever, the wan not aware that such language could be
tethered to announce it! nor could Ill: have III pound
Willonghby capable of departing to far from tlie p-
pearance of every honourable and delicate feeling—Io
far from the common decorum of a gentleman, u w
lend a letter l0 im udently cruel : a letter which, instead
of bringing with hr: desire of a release any profusion.
of regret, acknowledged no breach of faith, denied all

uliar affection whatever—4 letter of which every
lib: was an insult, and which proclaimed in writer to
be deep in hardened villany.

She panned over it for tome time with indigth
mniehment; then read it again and ageing but. every
penlnl only nerved to increase her abhorrence of the
man, and I0 bitter were her feelings against him, that
she dared not trust herself to speak, lent she might
wound Marianne still deeper b treating their disengage-
ment, not as a lots to her 0 any possible good, but a
an escape from the worst and most memediable of evils,
a connexion, for life, with an unprincipled man, an a
deliverance the most real, a blessing the moat important.

In her eameat meditationl on the contents of the
letter, on the depravity of that mind which could dictate
it, and, probably, on the very dill'erent mind of a very
diEemnt person, who had no other connexion whatever
with the atFair than what her heart gave him with
everything that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate
diam 0 her sitter, forgot that she had three letter! on
her lap yet unread, and an entirely forgot how long the
had been in the room, that when, on hearing a carriage
drive up to the door, the went to the window to see
who could be coming to unrcamnnbly early, ll": was all

SENSE AND smsrmu‘rv. 19

atonilhment m percein Mn Jenninan chariOt, which
the knew had not been ordered till one. Determined
not to quit Marianne, though hopeleu of contributing,
at present, to her ease, Ihe bun-led away to excuee
her-elf from attendin Mn Jenningl, on account of her
tieter being in ' . Mn Jennings, with a thoroughly
good-humoured concern for it- came, admitted the ex-
" cuee most readily, end Elinor, liter seeing her cafe off,
returned to Marianne, whom Ihe found attempting to
rise from the bed, and whom Ihe reached jult in time
to prevent her from falling on the ﬂoor, faint and giddy
fromalong want of p r reet and food; for it wal'
many days aince the any a petite, and many nights
since she had really sl ; an now, when her mind
wan no longer by the fever of nepenee, the
covuequence of? thin wan felt in an aching head, e
weakened stomach, and general nervous faintneu. A
glue of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and the wee at lat able to
expreu tome acme of her kindness, by saying——
“ Poor Elinor! How unhlpPy I make you! ”
“ I only Willi,” replied her mt, “ there were any-
thin I could do which might be of comfort to you."
'lshiu, u everything else would hive been, vm too
much for Marinnne, who could only exclaim, in the
an ' of her heart, “ 0 Elinor, I am minerable
in eed," before her voice wan entirely loet in lobe.
Elinor could no longer withers thin torrent of unre-
ﬁned grief in lilence.
“ Exert younelf,,dear Marianne," Ill: cried, “if
u would not kill younelf and all who love you.
aghink of your mother; think of her misery while Jon
suffer; for her nuke you mun exert yourself."
“I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; “leave me,
leave me, if I diam: you; leave me, hate me, forget
me; but do not torture me no. Oh! how envy or

20 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

tholewhohaveno lanowoftheirown to talkofexer-
don! Ham) , happy Elinor, you cannot have an idea
of what I nuér." '

“Do you call mama) ,Muinnne! Ah; if you
knew! And can you lleve me to be I0 while I tee
you so wretéhed ! ”

“ Forgive me, fo 've me,” throwing her arm: round
her sister’s neck; “ know you feel for me; I know
what a heart you have; but yet you are—you‘muu be
happy; Edward loves you—what, oh 1 what can do

way such ha ineuaa that! "

“ Many, many circumsunou,” said Elinor oolemnly.

“ No, no, no,” cried Marianne wildly; “he lom
you, and only you. You mu have no grie ."

“ I can have no ylenture while I see you in thin
rune.”

“ And I: will never Ice me otherwile. Mine it n
mitery which nothing can do away." ‘

“You mun not talk l0, Marianne. Have you no
comfort-2 no friends? In your loss Inch a: leaves no
opening for consolation ? Much an on Iuﬁ'er now,
think of what you would lave ruff: ifthe dilco
of hi: character had been delayed to a later period—If
your engagement had been carried on {or months and
month, as it might have been, before he chose to put an
end to it. Every additional day of unhappy conﬁdence,
on your ride, would have made the blow more dreadful.”

“ Engagement! ” cried Marianne, “ there ha: been
no en agemenl."

“ o engagement! "

“ No, he in not no unworthy as you believe him. He
hn broken no faith with me.”

“ But he mid you that he loved you?”

“ Yet—no——never—-aboolutely. It was every dz
implied, but never profeuedly declared. Sometimes l
thought it had been—but it never was.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. II

“Yer you wrote to him?"

“Yea—could that bewrong aﬁernll tharhndpaued?
But I cannot ulk."

Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three
letter- which now raised unuch stronger curioeity than
belore, directly ran over the contean of all. The lint,
which war what her either had rent hirn on their nrrival
in town, war to this eflecu—

“Banner Sun-r, January.

“ How I rieed you will he, Willoughhy, on receiv-
ing thin! nun? I think you will feel oomething more
than rurPi-ine, when you know I am in town. An
oppominity of coming hither, though with Mn Jenninge,
wantemytation weeould nmrelist. Iwiah youin:
receive thin in time to come here err-night, but I 'l
not depend on it. At any rate I nhall expect you w-
mm. For the pieeenr, Idle“. M. D.”

Her oeeond note, which hid been written on the
morning aﬁei' the dance at the Middletone’, was in
there word.—

“I cannot cxpreu my disappointment in having
mined you the day before yenerday, nor my anoniuh-
rnent a: not having received any anrwer to a note which
[eentymuboveaweeli ago. I have been expecting
tohearfrorn you,andnillni0ieroaeeycm,e hour
of the day. Pray call again u soon as ponih e. and
explain the realon of my having expecmd thin in vain.
You had better come earlier another ﬁme, became we
are generally out by one. We were Ian ni t at Lady
Middleton’s where there was I dance. have been
told the: you were aired to be of the pug. Bur could
it he no? You inner be very much all: indeed Iinoe
we parted, if that could be the cane, and you not there.

22 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

, But I will not suppose this possible, and I hope very.
soon to receive your personal assuranoe of its being
otherwise. M. D."

The contents of her last note to him were these :—

“What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your be-
haviour last night? Again I demand an explanation of
it. I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure
which our separation naturally produced, with the famili-
arity which our intimacy at Barton a so me to
jusufy. 1 was repulsed indeed! have passed a
wretched night in endeavouring to excuse in conduct
which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but
though I have not yet been able to form an reasonable
apology for your behaviour, I am perfectly read to
hear our justiﬁcation of it. You ave perhaps
misin orrned, or purpome deceived, in something con-
cerning me, which may have lowered me in your
opinion. Tell me what it is, explain the grounds on
which you acted, and I shall be satisﬁed in being able
to satisfy you. It would grieve me indeed to be obliged
to think ill of you; butif I am todo it, ifI am to
learn that you are not what we have hitherto believed

on, that your regard for us all was insincere, that your

haviour to me was intended on] to deceive, let it be
sold as soon as possible. My fee ings are at present in
a state of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you,
but certainty on either side will be ease to what I now
suffer. If your sentiments aré no longer what they
were, you will return my notes, and the lock of my

* hair which is in your possession. M. D."

That such letters, so full of Iﬂ‘ection and conﬁdence,
could have been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby’s
ake. would have been unwillin to believe. But her
condemnation of him did not lind her to the impro-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. l3

priety of their having been written at all; and Ihe wu
silently grieving over the impmdence which had hamded
loch muolicited roof: of tenderness, not warranted by
anything preceding, and' mot severely condemned by
the event, when Marianne, perceiving that the had
lininhed the letters, observed to her that they contained
nothing but what any one would have written in the
lame aituntion.

“I feltm If," eheadded, “to he an eolemnl engaged
tohimu' themicteet legal covenant had u'nd n-
to each other.”

" 1 can believe it,” said Elinor; “ but unfortunately,
he did not feel the name.”

“ He (ﬁd feel the Ianre, Elinor—for week: and weelu
he felt it. I know he did. Whatever may have changed
him now (and nothing but the blackeet an employed
againet me can have done it). 1 was once as dear to him
a my own soul could with. This~ lock of hair, which
now he can so readily give up, was begged‘of me with
the most eameot eupplicntion. Had you seen his look,
hie manner, had you heard his voice at that momentl
Have you fo ot the laat evening of our being ether
at Barton? I‘he morning that we lmrtcd too! en
he told me that it might be many weeks before we met
again-«hie distress—can I ever fo et hil dime-5| ”

For a moment or two she c d say no more; but
when thin emotion had passed away, she added, in a
ﬁrmer tone—

“ Elinor, I hnve been cruelly used, but not by
Willough ." ,

“Dear-eat Marianne, who but himself? By whom
can he have been imtigated ? ”

“ By all the world, rather than by hi: own heart. I
could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance
‘ lengued together to ruin me in hie opinion, than believe
his nature capable of such cruelty. Thin woman of

24 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

, whom he writes—whoever the be—or any one, in ahort,
but your own dear oelf, momma, and Edward, may have
been .0 barbarous to belie me. Beyond In three, in
there a creature in the world whom would not rather
Infect of evil than Willoughhy, whoa: heart I know no
wel ?"

Elinor would not contend, and only replied, “ Who-
ever may have been to deteltably your enemy, let them
be cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear liner, by
seeing how nobly the contciauaneae of your own inno-
cence and good intentions mppom your rpirita.‘ It in a
reaoonable and laudable pride which resists ouch male-
valence."

“ No, no,” cried Marianne, “ minery Inch as mine ha:
no pride. I care not who know: that I am wretched.
The triumph of seeing me [0 may be open to all the
world. lilinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be
proud and ind dent on they like—ma mint insult,
or return mom‘ cation—hut I cannot. rnuat feel—I
must be wretched—and they are welcome to enjoy the
consciousness of it that can.”

“ But for my mother’s sake and mine—”

“ I would do more than for my own. But to appear
harry when I am so mitemble——Ohl who can require
it . ’

Again they were both silent. Elinor wan employed
in walking thoughtfully from the ﬁre to the window,
from the window to the ﬁre, without knowing that the
received warmth from one, or discerning objects through
the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,
with her head leaning againot one of it: pom, again took
up Willoughby’t letter, and after shuddering over every r
nentence, exclaimed.—

" It in too much i O Willoughby, Willoughby,
could thin be yours! Cruel, cruel—nothing can acquit
you. Elinor, nothing can. Whatever he might have

SENSE AND SINSIBILITY. 25

heard against nae—ought he not to have Impended hie
belief? ought he not to have told n1eofit,to have given
me the powerof clearing myeeif? ‘The lock of hair
(repeating it from the letter), which you I0 obligingly
heewwed on me ’-—that in unpardonahle. Willonghby,
where was your heart, when an wrote those words?
Ohl barbarounly insolcnt l~Eliuor, can he be juni-
ﬁed ?”

“ No, Marianne, in no possible way.”

“ And et thin woman—who known what her art
may have —how long it my have been premedi-
tated, and how deeply contrived by her l—Who in ehe?
-——Who can she be i—Whom did I ever hear him talk
of an young and attractive among his female acquaint-
ance? Oh! no one, no one—he talked to me only of
myaelﬁ"

Another uee enlued; Moriaune was greatly agitated,
end it end thu—

I‘Eliuor, I must go home. I must go and con-Aron.
mama. Cannot we be gone Uri-marrow ? ”

“ To-momw, Marianne! "

“Yen why ahould I stay here? I came on] for
Willoughhy’: sake—and now who cares for me? ho
- regards me i ”

" It would be impoluihle to go to-mormw. We owe
Mrs Jenningu much more than civility; and civility of
the commoneet kind mun: prevent ouch a hasty removal
u that." '

“Well, then, another day or .two perhlpl; but I can-
not my here 10:: , I cannot my to endure the quettiona
and remark: of these pie. The Middleton. and
PalmerI—how am I to r their pity? The Pity of
Iuch a woman a Lady Middleton l—oh I what would
be I: to that! "

Ehnor advieed her to lie down again, and for a mo-
ment Ihe did l0; but no attitude could give her cue,

26 SENSE AND swsruru’rv.

and in rettleu pain of mind and body the mud from
one posture to another, till growing more and more
hyeteriml, her litter could with difﬁculty keen her on
the bed at all, and for name time wan fearful of being
constrained to call for auittance. Some lavender drops,
however, which the was at length permaded to take,
were of use; and from that time till Mn leaning!
returned, the continued on the bed quiet and motionless.

chum was.

RS Jenningr came immediately to their room on
her return, and without waiting to have her
request of admittance answered, opened the

door and walked in with u look of real concern.

“ How do you do, m dear ? ” said she, in a voice of
great companion, to rianne, who turned away her
face without attem ting to answer.

“ How in she, in Daahwood? Poor thing! the
look: very bad. No wonder. Ay, it is but too true.
He ll to be married very noon—a good-for-nothing
fellow! I have no patience with him. Mn: Taylor
told me of it half an hour ago, and the was told it by a
particular friend of Mist Grey herself, else I am sure I
Ihould not have believed it ; and I was almost ready to
link a it wan. Well, said I, all I can lay in, that. if it
is true, he has used a young lad of my acquaintance
abornimbly ill, and I wish with my soul his wife my
plague hll heart out. And so I Ihall always lay, my
dear, you may depend on it. I have no notion of men’l
going on in this way; and if ever I meet him again, I
will give him such a dressing as he has not had thin
many a day. But there iI one comfort, my dear Miu
Marianne; he in not the only young man in the world

SENSE AND SENSXBILITV. 27

worth having; and with your pretty face you will never
want admirers. Well, poor thing! I won’t disturb her
my longer, for she had better have her cry out at once
and have done with it. The Parry- and Ssndersans
luckily are coming to-night, you know, and that will
amuse her."

She then went away, walking on ti toe out of the
room, as if she su posed her young riend’s sillictiou
could be increased y noise.
v Marianne, to the rise of her sister, determined on

diningwith them. Ehnor even advised her against it.
But “ no, she would go down r she could bear it very
well, and the bustle about her would be less.” Elinor,
pleased to have her governed fora moment by such a
motive, though believing it hardly possible that she could
sit out the dinner, said no more; and adjum'n herdress
for heras well as she could while Marianne ' remained
on the bed, was ready to assist her into the dining-room
u soon as they were summoned to it.

When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate
more and was calmer than her sister had expected. Had
she tried to speak, or had she been conscious of half Mrs
.lennin s's welldneant but ill-judged attentions to her,
this ufmness could not have been maintained; but not

a syllable escaped her lips, and the abstraction of her
thoughts preserved her in ignorance of everything that
as using before her.

E 'nor, who did justice to Mrs Jennings’s kindness,
though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments. and
returned her those civilities. which her sister could not
make or return for herself. Their good friend saw that .

 Marianne was unhappy, and felt that everything was due
to her which might make her at all less so. She treated
her, therefore, with all the indulgent fondness of a
parent towards a favourite child on the last day of its

:8 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

holidays. Marianne was to have the best place by the
lire,watto betemptedto eat hyeverydeliucyin the
house, and to be unused by the relation of ell the news
of the day. Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of
her sister, seen a checkto all mirth, she could have been
entertained by Mrs Jennings's endeavours to cure 3 die-
appointment in love. by s variety of tweetme and
o ives, and a good lire. As noon, however, no the con-
sciousners of all this was forced by continual repetition
on Morianne, she could stay no longer. With an hasty
exclamation of misery, an a sign to her sister not to
follow her, she directly got up and hurried out of the
room.

“ Poor soul l " cried Mn Jennings, as soon as she was
gone, “ how it gricvcs me to see her! And I declare
if the is not gone away without ﬁnieliing her winel
And the dried cherries too! Lord! nothing seems to
do her any good. I am sure if I knew of anything she
would like, I would send all over the town for it.
Well, it is the oddett thing to me, that A man should
use such a pretty girl so ill! But when there is plenty
of money on one side, and next to none on the other,
Lord bless you ! theycare no more about such thingl 1—”

“The lady then—Mist Grey I think you called her
——is very rich ?"

“ Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see
her? a smart, milish girl, the lay, but not handsome.
I remember her aunt very well, Biddy Henshawe; the
married a very wealthy man. But the family are all
rich together. Fifty thounnd pounds ! and by all
accounts it won’t come before it ’s wanted; for they say
he is all to pieces. No wonder! dashing about with
his curricle and hunmra! Well, it don’t at ify talking.
but when I young man, be he who he wil , comes and
makes love to a pretty girl, and promises marriage,
he has no bueinees to ﬂy off from his word only bemute

SENSE AND SBNSIBILITV. 29

hegrowt ,tndariehergiziitretdytohavehirn.
Why don t he, in and: u cute, tell hit llUl’Iel, let hit
house, turn of hit tenants, and make a thorough reform
at once? I warrant u, Mitt Marianne would have
been ready to wait til matter- cnme round. But that
won’t do now-a-dayt; nothing in the way of pleasure
can ever be given up by the young men of thit age.”

“ Do you know what kind of t girl Mitt Grey it?
Itthe taidmbeamiahle?”

“I never heard any harm of her; indeed, I hardly
ever heard her mentioned; ex t that Mrs Taylor did
any thit morning, that one d3 Itt Walker hinted to
her, that the believed Mr an Mn Elliton would not
be tarry to have Mitt Grey married, for the and Mrt
Elliton could never agree.”

" And who are the Ellieont? "

“ Her guardians, my dear. But now the it of age
and n1: choote for herself; and t Pretty choice the
ill! model—What now," after pautrng : moment—
“ your poor timer has gone to her own room, I nippoee,
turnoan by herself. In there nothing one can get to
comfort her? Poor dar, it seem: quite cruel to let her
be tlone. Well, by-nnd-by we thtll have t l'ew friemlt,
and thtt will nntute her a little. What thtll we play
at? She hates whitt, I know; but it there no round

the area for ? ”

“ Deer ma’arn, thit kindnett it quite unneeetttry.
Marianne, I dare lay, will not leave her room again diit
evening. I shall penunde her, in can, to go early to
bed, for I am lure the wantt rest."

“Ay, I believe that will be beat for her. Let her
name her own upper, and go to bed. Lordl no
wonder the but been looking to had Ind to cut-down
th'n latt week or two, for this matter I tuppote hat
been hanging over her head at long at that. Andto
the letter that came to-day ﬁnished it! Poor tonll I

3° SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

Imnrr'eifl had hadamﬁmofiglwould not have
‘ ked her about it for all my money. But then, you

w, how should I Inch 2 thing? I rude sure
of it: being nothing ut a common love-letter, and you
know young people like to he laughed at about them.
Lord! how concerned Sir John and my daughterl will
bewhentheyhearit! IfI had had myeenlelabout
me, I might have called in Conduit-street in my way
home, and told them of it. But I shall lee them
w—morrow.”

“It would be unneceuary, I am run, for you to
caution Mn Palmer and Sir John again» ever naming

Mr Willoughby, or making the Ili htut nllulion to
what has panned, before my sister. heir own good-
nature mutt point out to them the real cruelty of
appearing to know anything about it when the in recent;
and the led that may ever be mid to m eel on the
rubject, the more my feelings will be rpar , at you, my
dar madam, will easily believe.”

“0 Lordl yes, that I do indeed. It must be
terrible for you to hear it talked of; and a: for your
litter, I am sure I would not mention a word about it
to her for the world. You law I did not all dinner-
time. No more would Sir John nor my daughten, for
.ther are all very thoughtful and considerate—«pecth
if give them a hint, a I certainly will. F or my part,
I think the let. that in mid about Iuch thingl, the
better, the sooner ’tia blown over and forgot. And
what good does talking ever do, you know?"

“ In thin affair it an only do hann—-rnore no perhape
than in many case: of a limilar kind, for it ha- been
attended by circqu which, for the take of every
one concerned in it, make it unﬁt to become the public
convenation. I mmt do :52: juice to Mr Willonghby
—he "has broken no poddve engagement with my
amt.

SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTV. . 3 1

“Law, my dear! Don't retend to defend him.
No yoa'tive enga t in l ufter taking her all
over Allenham once, and ﬁxing on the very moron
theé were to live in hereafterl "

linor, for her sister‘e sake, could not preu the
eubject farther, and she hoped it wan not required of
her for Willoughhy'l; Iince, though Marianne might
lone much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
oftherealtruth. Aftereuhort Iilence on both Iidel,
Mr, Jennings, with all her natural hilarity, hum forth

“Well, my dear, ’tie a true toying about. an ill wind,
for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He
will haveher It lat; u , thathewill. Mindme,now,
if they an’t married by 'dmmmer. Lord! how he’ll
chuckle over thin news! I hope he will come to-night.
Itwillbenlltooneuheuermatchfor our-iner-
Two thounnd a-year without debt or whack—
except the little love-child, indeed; ay, I had forgot
her; but the may be ’ renticed out at mall coat, and
then what doel it Ii ' P Delaford in a nice place, I
can tell you ; exac y what I call a nice old-fuhioned
place, full of comfort: and convenience; quite Ihut in
with gmt garden wall! that are covered With the best
fruib-treel in the country; and ouch u mulberry tree in
one corner] Lord! how Chnrlotte and I did emf the
only time we were there! Then, there in a dovecote,
Iorne delightful stewponde, and I ve putt canal;
and everything, in short, that one cord with or: and,
moreover, it is clone to the church, and only a quarter

, of a mile from the mrnpike-road, no ’tii never dull, for
if you only go and lit up in an old yew arbour behind
the houte, you muy see all the carriage- that'paal along.
Ohl ’til a nice place! A butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-hone: within a none I throw.
To my fancy, a thousand timer prettier than Berton
Park, where they 'are forced to lend three miles for

32 - SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y.

their meat, and have not A neighbour nearer than your
mother. Well, I thall spirit up the Colonel u noon on
I can. One Ihoulder of mutton, u know, drivel
another down. If we ran but put illoughby out of
her head I ”

“Ay, if we can but do lbal, ma’am," aid Elinor,
“ we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brun-
don.” And then lining, the went nwny to join Mori-
anne, whom Ill! found, at the expected, in her own
room, leaning, in silent misery, over the email romaine
ff a ﬁre which, till Elinor’e entrance, had been heronly
ight.

“You had better leave me,” wae all the notice that
her litter received from her.

“ I will leave you,” said Elinor, “if you will go to
bed.” But this, from the momentary pervenenen of
impatient Iuﬁ'ering, the at lirat refund to do. Her
litter'l earnest, though gentle. per-union, however, Ioon
ooftened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her
aching head on the pillow, and now her, an the hoped,
in a way to get tome quiet rat before the left her.

In the drawing-room, whither the then repaired, the
was toon joined by Mn Jenninge, witha wine-glue,
full of something, in her hand.

“ My dear," laid the, entering, “I have just recol-
lcctcd that I have some of the ﬁnest old Constantin
wine, in the home, that ever we- mted—oo I have
brought a glau of it for your litter. My poor huubandl
how fond he wu of it! Whenever he had a touch of
hit old cholick gout, he laid it did him more good
than anything Joe in the world. Do take it to your
linen”,

“Dear ma’am," replied Elinor, emiling at the differ-
ence of the comphinu for which it wae recommended,
“how good you are! But I have juet left Marianne
in bed, and, I hope, almoet aeleep; and u I think

sense Arm SBNSIBHJTY. 33

nothingwillbeoftomuchtenieetoheruretgif'you
would give me leave, I will drink the wine mytelf.‘

Mrt Jennings, though regretting that the had not
been ﬁve minutet earlier, was utitﬁed with the com-
promite; and Elinor, at the mllowed the chief of it,
reﬂected that, thou h in good eﬂ'ecu on a cholickygout
were at preterit 0 little importance to her, in
powert on a diuppointed hem might be at rentonahly
tried on henelf at on her timer.

Colonel Brandon came in while the were at
tea, and by hit manner of looking round room for
Marianne, Elinor immediame fancied that he neither
expected nor wished to Ice her there, and, in than,
that he was already aware of what occu'oned her
ahtence. Mrt Jenningt wet not etnrck by the tame
thought; for, noon after hit entrance, the walked urott
the room to the ten-mhle where Elinor presided, and
whitpered—“The Colonel lookt at grave at ever, you
' tee. He knowt nothing of it; do tell him, my dear."

He shortly afeerwardn drew a chair clote to here,
and, with a look which perfectly assured her of hit good
information, enquired after her aimr.

“ Marianne it not well,” said the. “ She hat been
Wanda” andwehavepertuaded hertogom

“Perhapt, then," he hesitatingly replied, “what I '
heard thit morning rna he true—there may be more
truth in it than I could {elieve pot-'hle at in.”

“What did you hear?”

“ That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think-
in than, that I man, whom I brew to he engaged—but
how shall I tell you? If on know it already, at ourer
you mutt, I may be "

“You man,” tntwered Elinor, with forced calm-
nett, “Mr Willoughby’t marriage with Mitt Grey.
quedoknowittl Thitteelntrohtvebeen I

II. C

34 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

day of general elucidation, for this very morning ﬁrst
unfolded it to In. Mr Willoughby is unfathomable!
Where did you hear it? "

“ In a stationer't shop in Pall Mall, where I bad
business. Two ladies were waiting for their carriage,
and one of them was giving the other an account of
the intended match, in a voice so little attempting con-
calrnent, that it was impossible for me not to hear all.
The name of Willoughhy, John Willaughby, frer‘pently
repeated, lint caught my attention, and what fo owed
was a positive assertion that everything was now ﬁnally
settled respecting his marriage with Miss C —it was
no longer to be a secret—it would take r;lyace even
within a few weelu, with many rticulars of p
don and other mattern. One thing, especially? re-
member, because it served to identify the man still
more ;—-as soon as the ceremony was over, they were
to go to Combe Magna, his seat in Somenetehire. My
astonishment! But it would be impossible to describe
what I felt. The communicative lady, I learnt an
enquiry, for I staid in the shop till they were gone, was
a Mrs Ellison, and that, as I have been since informed,
is the name of Miss Grey’s guardian.”

“ It is. But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey
has ﬁfty thousand pounda.’ In that, if in anything, we
may ﬁnd an explanation."

“ It may be so ; hut Willoughby is capable—at least
'I think "—he stopped a moment; then added in a
voice which seemed to distrust itself, “ And your sister
ehow did she-4’

“ Her sufferings have been very severe. I have only
to hope that they my be proportionally short. It has
been, it it a most cruel afﬂiction. Till yesterday, I
believe, she never doubted his regard; and even now,
perhaps—but I am almost convinced that he never was
really attached to her. He has been very deceitful!

sense AND smxmm, 35

snd,in some points,thene seems a hardness ofheart
about him."

“Ah I ” said Colonel Brandon, “ there is, indeed!
But your sister docs not—I think you said so—she does
not consider it quite as you do i”

“ You know her disposition, and may believe how
ea erly she would still justify him if she could."

e made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the
removal of the tea things, and the arrangement of the
card the subject was necessarily Mrs
Jennings, who had watched them with plasure while
the were talking, and who expected to see the effect
of iss Dashwood’s communication, in such an instan-
taneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon’s side as might have
become a man in the bloom of youth, of hope and
happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole
evening more serious and thoughtﬁil than usual.

«Eb-9m 5%]-

ROM I night of more sleep than she had expected,
F Marianne awoke the next morning to the same '
consciousness of misery in which she had closed
her eyes.

Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of
what she felt; and before breakfast was ready, they
had gone through the subject again and again; with the
same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on
Elinor‘s side, the same impetqu feelings and varying
opinions on Marianne’s, as before. Sometimes she
could believe Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as
innocent as herself, and at others, lost every consolation
in the impossibility of acquitting him. At one moment
- she was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all

36 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

the world, It mother she would seclude herself from it
for ever, and at a third could resist it with energy. In
one thing, however, she was uniform, when it come to
the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the pre-
sence of Mrs Jennings, and in a determined silence
when obliged to endure it. Her heart was hardened
against the belief of Mrs Jennings’s entering into her
sorrows with any compassion.

“ No, no, no, it cannot be,” she cried ; “she cannot
feel. Her kindness is not sympathy; her good-nature
is not tenderness. All that she wants is gossip, and she
only likes me now because I supply it.”

Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the in-
justice to which her sister was often led in her opinion
of others, by the irritable reﬁnement of her own mind,
and the too grout importance placed by her on the deli-
cacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a polished
manner. Like half the rest of the world, if more than
half there be that are clever and good, Marianne, with
excellent abilitien and an excellent disposition, was
neither reasonable nor candid. She expected from other

ple the name opinions and feelings as her own, and
she judged of their motives by the immediate eﬂect of
their actions on herself. Thus a circumstance occurred,
while the sisters were together in their own room after
bmaltfatt, which sunk the heart of Mrs Jennings still
lower in her estimation; because, through her own
weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to
herself, though Mrs Jennings was governed in it by an
impulse of the utmost good-will.

With a letter in her outstretched hand, and counten-
ance gaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing com-
fort, she entered their room, saying——

“ Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am
sure will do you good."

Marianne heard enough. in one moment her imag-

SENSE AND SRNSXBILH'Y. 37

ination placed before her a letter from Willou hby, full
of tendemeu and contrition, explanatory of a that had
, latiefactory, convincing; Ind instantly followed

Willoughb hrrmelf, ruehin eagerly into the room
to inforce, at her feet, by the oqueuce of hit eyee, the
wurancel of his letter. The work of one moment was
demoyed by the next. The handwriting of her mother,
never till then unwelcome, wan before her; and, in the
acutenete of the disappointment which .followed such an
extasy of more than hone, the felt as if, till that instant,
the had never suffered.

The cmelty of Mrs Jennings no language, within her
reach in her moment: of happiest eloquence, could have
expreued; Ind now the could reproach her only by
the tent: which streamed from her eyes with pauionate
violence—a Enoch, however, .0 entirely lost on its
object, that r many expreuiom of pity, the with-
drew, etill referring her to the letter for comfort. But
the letter, when the was calm enough to read it, brou ht
little comfort. Willoughby ﬁlled every page. er
mother, ntill conﬁdent of her engagement, and relying a:
warmly at ever on hie constancy, had onl been routed
by Elinor’t application,to cntrent from nrinnne greater
openneu toward: them both, and thin, with such tender-
neu toward: her, such affection for Willoughby, and
each a conviction of their future huppineu in each other,
that the wept with agony through the whole of it.

All her impatience m be at home again now returned ;
her mother wan dearer to her than ever—dearer through
the very excess of her minaken conﬁdence in Willough ,
and Ihe was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor, unab e
henelf to detemrine whether it were bener for Marianne
to be in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her
own exc of patience till their mother's wieheeeauld
could be nown; and at length the obtained her sister’s
content to wait for that knowledge.

38 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Mn Jenninga left them earliu' than non]; for die
cmrldnotbeeuytilltheMiddletom and PalmerIwere
able to grieve In much an henelfg and poritively reﬁna-
ing Elinor’e offered attendance, went out alone for the
rent of the morning. Elinor, with a very heavy heart,
aware of the in the will going to communicate, and
Perceiving by 'anne’e letter how ill the had moceded
In laying any foundation for it, then eat down to write
her mother an account of what had panned, and intreat
her direction: for the future; while Marianne, who
came into the drawing-room on Mn Jenninga’l going
away, remained ﬁxed at the table where Elinor wrote,
watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over her
for the hardship of Inch a task, and grieving mill more
fondly over its effect on her mother. .

In thin manner they had continued about a quarter of
an hour, when Marianne, whme nerve: could not then
bear any sudden noile, war otartled by a rap at the
door.

“ Who can thil be ?” cried Elinor. “ So early
too! I thought we bad been cafe.”

Marianne moved to the window.

“ It is Colonel Brandon 1 ” said the, with vention.
“ We are never safe from Liar."

“ He will not come in, as Mrs Jenningl it from
home.”

a I will not mm to rbar," retreating to her own room.
“ A man who has nothing to do with hie own time has
no eonrcience in his intrusion on that of othen."

The event proved her conjecture right, though it was
founded on injum'ce and error, for Colonel Brandon did
come in; and Elinor, who wu convinced that eolicitude
for Marianne brought him thither, and who raw {bat
aolicitude in hit disturbed and melancholy look, and in
hit anxioue though brief inquiry after her, could not for-
give her Iiater for esteerning him an lightly.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 39

“ I met Mn Jennings in Bond Street,” laid he, offer
the lint laluution, “and uh: encouraged me to come
on; and I was the more euily encouraged, became I
thought it‘ probable that I might ﬁnd you alone, which
I was very denim“. of doing. My object—my wish—
my sole wreh in desiring ib—I hope, I believe it ie—il to
he I mean: of giving comfort—no, I must not any com-
fort—not present comfort—4:11: conviction, lasting con-
viction to your aimer'u mind. My ard for her, for
younelf, for your mother—Mill you low me to prove
It by relating some circumstances, which nothin but
a on) sincere regard—nothing but an oament desire of
being useful—. I think I am justiﬁedé-though where
so many hours have been spent in convincing mylelf
thut I am right, in there not name reason to fear I may
be wrong 2 " He stopped.

“ I understand you,” said Elinor. “ You have
something to tell me of Mr Willoughby, that will open
hit character farther. Your telling it will be the greatest
act of friendship that can be Ahewn ho Marianne. My
gratitude will be insured immediately by any infornuﬁon
tending to that end, and be" muat be gained by it in
time. Pray, my, let me hear it."

“You Ihal ; nnd,to be brief, when I quitth Barton
last October—but this will give you no idea. I mun go
farther back. You will ﬁnd me a very awkward narra-
tor, Mill Duhwood; I hardly know where to begin.
A abort account of m If, I believe, will be necessary,
and it do” be z abs: one. On nah a subject,"
Iighing huvily, “I can have little temptation to be
diﬁirse."

He stopped a moment for recollection, and then,
with another nigh, went on.

“ You have probably entirely forgotten a conversa-
tion—(it i. not to be luppooed that it could make any
impmnon on you)-—-o conversation between ul one

4O SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

evening at Burton Park—4t war the evening of a dance
-—in which I alluded to a lady I had once known, as
reeembling, in some measure, your sitter Marianne."

" Ind ” answered Elinor, “I have not forgotten
it.” He looked pleated by this remembrance, and
added—

“ If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the
partialin of tender recollection, there is a very mung
resemblance between them, as well in mind as person-—
the name warmth of heart, the same eagernen of fancy
and apin'ts. Thin lady was one of my nearest relations,
an orphan from her infancy, and under the guardianship
of my father. Our ages were nearly the same, and
from our earliest years we were plan How. and frienda.
I cannot remember the time when did not love Eliza;
and my affection for her, as we grew up, was arch, as
perhaps, judging from my present forlorn and cheerle-
gmvityhyou might think me inca ble of having ever
elt. era, for me, was, I beieve, fervent u the
attachment of your sister to Mr Willoughby, and it
was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate.
At seventeen she was lost to me for ever. She was
married—married against her inclination to my brother.
Her fortune wan large, and our family estate much en-
cumbered. And this, I fear, is all that can be raid for
the conduct of one who war at once her uncle and
guardian. My brother did not deserve her; he did
not even love her. I had hoped that her regard for
me would so rt her under any diﬂicult , and for
some time it id ;—but at last the misery 0 her situa-
tion, for she experienced great unkindneu, overcame
all her resolution, and though she had romiaed nae that
nothing—but how blindly I relate l have never told
you how this war brought on. We were within a few
hours of elopin together for Scotland. The treachery,
or the folly, o my cousin’. maid betrayed us. I was

sense AND seusrmu’nv‘. 4r

banished to the house of a relation far distant, and she
was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement, till
my father's point was gained. I had depended on her
fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe one—but
had her marriage been happy, so young as I then was,
a few months must have reconciled me to it, or at least
I should not have new to lament it. This, however,
was not the one. My brother had no reprd for her:
his pleasures were not what they ought to have been,
end from the ﬁrst he treated her unkindly. The con-
sequence of this, n a mind so young, so lively, so
inexperienced as re Brandon's, was but too natural.
She herself at ﬁrst to all the misery of her
situation; and happy had it been if she had not liVed
to overcome those regrets which the remembrance of
me occasioned. But can we wonder that with such a
husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend
to sdvise or restrain her (for my father lived only s
few months after their marriage, and I was with m
regiment in the East Indies), she should fall? Had
remained in England, perhaps—but l meant to promote
the happiness of both by removing from her for years,
and for that purpose had procured my exchange. The
shock which her marriage had given me,” he continued
in a voice of great agitation, " was of triﬂing weight——
was nothing—to what I felt when I heard, about two
years afterwards, of her divorce. It was Ibo! which
threw this gloom,—~even now the recollection of what
I suffered—"

He could so no more, and rising hastil walked for
a few minutes a ut the room. Elinor, a ted by his
relat'mn, and still more by his distress, could not speak.
He saw her concern, and coming to her, took her hand,
premed it, and kissed it with grateful respect. A few
minutes more of lilent exertion enabled him to proceed
with composure.

42 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ It wu nearly three year: after this unhappy period
before I returned to England. My ﬁrst care, when I
did arrive, was of course to seek for her; but the
Iearch wan as fruitless a. it wan melancholy. I could
not trace her beyond her ﬁrst aeducer, and there wan
every moon to fear that the had removed from him
only to tink deeper in a life of sin. Her legal allow-
ance was not adequate to her fortune, nor luﬂicient for
her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
brother that the power of receiving it had been made
over some months before to another penon. He
imagined, and calmly could he imagine it, that her
extravagance and consequent distress had obliged her
to dilpone of it for some immediate relief. At Ian,
however, and after I had been nix months in England,
I M ﬁnd her. Regard for a former servant of my
own, who had Iince fallen into misfortune, carried me
to visit him in a apunging-houae, where he wan con-
ﬁned for debt; and there, in the same house, under a
similar conﬁnement, was my unfortunate liner. So
altered—co faded—wom down by acute suffering of
every kind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and
sickly ﬁgure before me, to be the remain: of the lovely,
blooming, healthful girl, on whom I had once doated.
What I endured in so beholding her—but I have no
right to wound your feelinga by attempting to describe
it—I have pained you too much already. That the
was, to all aplwarancc, in the lam. stage of a conuumption,
wan—yet, in such a situation it was my greatert com-
fort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving
time for a better preparation for death; and that wan
given. I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and
under proper attendants; I visited her every day during
the rent of her short life: Iwal with her in her [ant
momenta."

Again he stopped to recover himelf ; and Elinor

SENSE AND SENSHIILITY. ’ 43

he her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern
It the fate of his unfortunate friend.

“Your sister, I hope, cannot be offend ,” said he,
“by the resemblance I have fancied between her and
my poor dirgrnced relation. Their fates, their fortunes
cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet disposi-
tion of the one been guarded by a ﬁrmer mind, or a
happier marriage, she might have been all that you will
live to see the other be. But to what does all this
lead? I seem to have been distressing you for nothing.
Ah! Miss Dashwood—a subject such as this—un-
touched for fourteen years—4t is dangerous to handle it
at all! I will be more collected—more concise. She
left to my care her only little child, a little girl, the
offspring of her ﬁrst guilty connection, who was then
about three years old. She loved the child, and had
always kept it with her. It was a valued, a precious
trust to me; and gladly would I have discharged it
in the strictest sense, by Watching over her education
myself, had the nature of our situations allowed it; but
I had no funily, no home; and my little Eliza was
therefore placed at school. I saw her there whenever
I could, and aﬁzr the death of my brother (which
happened about ﬁve years ago, and which left me the

'on of the fami y p rty), she frequently visited
me at Delaford. I called er a distant relation; but 1
am well aware that I have in general been suspected of
a much nearer connection with her. It is now three
year! ago (she had 'uut reached her fourteenth year),
that I removed her rorn school, to place her under the
care of a very respectable woman, residing in Dorset-
shire, who had the charge of four or ﬁve other girls of
about the same time of life; and for two years I had
every reason to be pleased with her situation. But last
Febnrary, almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly
disappeared. I had allowed her (imprudently, a It

44 SIMS! AND SENSIBIUTY.

huainoemmdout),athereamertdeeire,togoto
Bath with one of her young frienda, who wan attending
her father there for hit health. Iknewhim to hea
very good Iort of man, and 1 than ht well of his
daughter—better than ahe deoerved, or, with a molt
obstinate and ill-judged Iecrecy, the would tell nothing,
would give no clue, though the certainly knew all. He,
her father. a well—meaning, but not a quick-lighted man,
could really, I believe, give no information; for he had
been generally conﬁned to the home, while the girl:
were ranging over the town and making what acquaint-
ancea they chose; and he tried to convince me, a
thoroughly n he war convinced himself, of his daugh-
ter‘n being entirely unconcerned in the hardness. In
ahort, I could learn nothing but that the van gone; all
the rent, for eight long montha, wan left to conjecture.
What I thought, what I failed, may be imagined ; and
what I suffered too.”

“Good heaveml” cried Elinor, “could it he!
could Willoughby—J’

“The ﬁrst newt that reached me of her,” he con-
tinued, “came in a letter from behalf lalt October.
It was forwarded to me from Delaford, and I received
it on the very morning of our intended party to Whit-
well; and this war the remn of my leaving Barton to
ruddenly, which I am lure must at the time have
alilmml Itmngc to everybody, and which I believe
gave oﬂence to name. Little did Mr Willoughhy
imagine, I euppoee, when his look: censured me for
incivility in breaking up the party, that I wan called
away to the relief of one whom he had made r and
miserable; but ball be known it, what wonltlpi’lj have
availed? Would he have been let- gay or less happy
in the Irniles of your sister? No, he ha: already done
that which no man who can feel for another would do.
He had left the girl whose youth and innocence he had

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 45

seduced, in a situation of the utmost distress, with no
creditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his
address! He had left her, promising to return; he
neither returned, nor wrote, nor relier her.”

“This is beyond everythingl " exclaimed Elinor.

“ His character it now before you—-expentive, dissi-
pated, and worse than both. Knowing all this, at I hen
now known it many weeks, guess what I must have felt
on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever, and on being
assured that the was to marry him; guess what I must
have felt for all your sakes. When 1 came to you last
week and found you alone, I came determined to know
the truth, thou h irretolute what to do when it mu
known. My Eehaviour must have seemed ttmnge to
you then 5 but now you will comprehend it. To suffer
you Ill to be so deceived; to tee your sister—but what
could I do? I had no hope of interfering with tuccett;
and sometimes I thought your sister's inﬂuence might
yet reclaim him. But now, after such dishonounble
usage, who can tell what were his dedgns on her?
Whatever they may have been, however, the may now,
and hereafter doubtless mi”, turn with gratitude towards
her own condition, when she compares it with that of
my poor Eliu, when the considers the wretched and
hopeless situation of this r girl, and her to
heneIf, with In affection or him at strong, still at strong
as her own, and with a mind tormented by self-reproach,
which must attend hEr through life. Surely this com-
parison must have its use with her. ’She will feel her
own tufferings to be nothing. They proceed from no
misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the con-
trary, every friend must be made still more her friend
by them. Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for
her fortitude under it, must strengthen every attachment.
Use your own discretion, however, in communicating to
her what I have told you. You must know best what

46 SENSE AND smsrsrurv.

will beineffect; but hadI notseriouslysndfrom my
heart believed it might be of service, might lessen her
regrets, I would not have suffered rn self to tmuhle
you with this account of my family a 'ctions, with s
recital which may seem to have been intended to raise
myself at the expense of others."

Elinor’s thanks followed this speech with grateful
enrnesurest; attended too with the assurance of her
expecting material advantage to Marianne, from the
communication of what had passed.

“ I have been more pained,” said she, “ by her en-
deavours to ac uit him than by all the mt; for it
irritates her min more than the most perfect conviction
of his unworthinels can do. Now, though at first she
will suffer much, I am sum she will soon become easier.
Have on,” she continued, after .1 short silence, “ ever
seen Mvr Willoughhy since you left him at Barton i"

“ Yes,” he replied gravely, “once I have. One
meeting was unavoidable." .

Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,
saying——

“ What! have you met him to—”

“I could meet him in no other way. Eliza had
confessed to me, though most reluctantly, the name of
her lover; and when he returned to town, which was
within a fortnight after myself, we met by a intment,
he to defend, I to punish his conduct. e mtumcd
unwounded, and the meeting, therefore, never got
abroad.”

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of thin ; but
to a man and a soldier, she presumed not to censure
it.

“ Such,” said Colonel Brandon, after a. pause, “ has
been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of
mother and daughter! and so imperfectly have I
discharged my trust! ”

SENSB AND SENSIBILITY. 47

“ Is she still in town l ”

“No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in,
for I found her near her delivery, I removed her and
her child into the country, and there she remains.”

Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably
dividing Elinor from her sister, he put an end to l'lll
visit, receiving from her again the urne grateful acknow-
ledgments, and leaving her full of compassion and
esteem for him.

that" MW]!-

HEN the particulars of this convemtion were
repeated by Miss Dashwood to her sister, an

very soon were, their eﬁ'ect on her was

entire! such as e former had hoped to see. Not
that rianne appeared to dinrust the truth of any Part
of it, for she listened to it all with the most steady and
submissive attention, made neither objection nor remark,
attern ted no vindication of Willoughby, and seemed to
shew y her tears that she felt it to be impossible. But
though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction
ofhis guilt emu carried home to her mind; th h she
saw wrth satisfacu'on the eﬂ‘ect of it, in her no anger
avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called, in her speak-
ing to him, even voluntarin speaking, with it kind of
compassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits
lest violently irritated than before; the did not see her
less wretched. Her mind did become settled, hut it
was settled in a gloomy dejecu'on. She felt the lots of
Willoughhy’s character yet more heavily than she had
felt the loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of
Miss Williams, the misery of that poor girl, and the
doubt of what his designs might one have been on her-

48 SENS! arm msmun.

calf, reyedaltogetherlomuch on her " that the
couldan bring hutlfto rpak ofwhatmt even to
Elinor; Ind brooding over her Iome in I'lenee, gave
morepninmhern'atertluncmrldhave been communi-
cated bythernoetopen andmuﬁequentwnfeeiouof
them.

To give the feelingl or the language of Mn Dad:—
wood on mdving and anewering Elinor’i letter, would
be only to give a repetition of what her daughterl had
almdy felt and aid; of a dinppoinunent hardly lea
painful than Marianne’s, and an indignation even greater
than Elinor’L Long letter: from her, quickly aucceed-
ingachother,arrivedmtell all that the suffered and
thought; to expreu her anxious rolicitude for Marianne,
and entreat ahe would her up with fortitude under thin
mill'omue. Bad indeed mun the nature of Marianne’e
aﬂliction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude!
rnonifying and humil'ming must be the origin of thoee
“3“”: which (I): could with her not to indulge!

A 'net the intereet of her own comfort,
Mn Sinhwood had determined that it would be better
for Marianne to be anywhere at that time, than at
Barton, where everything within her View would be
bringing back the part in the strongest Ind mod allia-
ing manner, by connantly placing Wilioughby before
her, ouch an she had alwayr seen him there. She m
commended it to her daughters, therefore, by all mm
not to shorten their visit to Mr: Jennings; the length
of which, though never exactly ﬁxed, had been expected
by all to compriae at least five or rix weekn- A
variety of occupations. of ohjectr, and of company,
which could not be rocured at Barton, would be inevit—
ahle there, and mi t yet, she hoped, that Marianne,
at n'mel, into come interest beyond hernelf, and even
into tome amusement, much an the idea of both might
now be rpumed by her.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 49

From‘ all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her
mother considered her to be at least equally safe in
town as in the country, since his acquaintance must now
be dropped by all who call themselves her friends.
Design could never bring them in each other’s way;
negligence could never leave them exposed to a surprise ;
and chance had less in its favour in the crowd of
London than even in the retirement of Barton, where
it might force him before her while pa ' g that visit at
Allenharn on his marriage, which Mrs gnuhwood, from

. foreseeing at first as a probable event, had brought her-
self to expect as a certain one.

She had yet another reason for wishing her children
to remain where they were; a letter from her son-in-
law had told her that he and his wile were to be in
town before the middle of February, and she judged it
right that they should sometimes see their brother.

Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother’s
opinion, and she submitted to it therefore without op-
position, though it proved perfectly different from what
she wished and expected, though she felt it to be
entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that
by requiring her longer continuance in London it
deprived her of the only possible alleviation of her
wretchedness, the personal sympathy of her mother, and
doomed her to such society and such scenes as must
prevent her ever knowin a moment’s rest.

But it was a matter 0 great consolation to her, that
what broughtevil to herself would bring good to her
sister; and Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that
it would not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely,
comforted herself by thinking, that though their longer
stay would therefore militate against her own happiness,
it would be better for Marianne than an immediate
return into Devonahire.

Hermﬁtlneuinguardinghersisterfromever

II. D

50 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

hearing Willoughhy‘a name mentioned, in not thrown
away. Marianne, though without knowing it heraelf,
reaped all in admtﬁe; for neither Mn Jenninga, nor
Sir John, nor even re Palmer heraelf, ever he of
him before her. Elinor wished that the lame

once could have extended towarda heraelf, but that was
impouible, and ahe wan oblifed to liaten day after day
to the indignation of them I.

Sir John could not have thought it polaihle. “A
man of whom he had always had such reaaon to think
well! Such a good-natured fellowl He did not
believe there was a holder rider in Englandl It wa-
an unaccountable bmineta. He wished him at the
devil with all hia heart. He would not speak another
word to him, meet him where he might, for all the
world! No, not if it were to he by the side of Barton
covert, and they were kept Waiting for two houn
together. Such a neonndrel of a fellow! such a deceit-
fuldog! It wan only the last time they metthathe
had offered him one of Folly’n puppies! and this was
the end of it! "

Mn Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. “She
wan determined to drop hia acquaintance immediately,
and she was very thankful that ahe had never been
acquainted with him at all. She WlBth with all her
heart Combo Magna woe not I0 near Cleveland; but it
did not signify, for it was a great deal too far off to
viait; she hated him no much that the wan reaolved
never to mention hie name again, and she Ihouid
tell everybody the saw, how good-for-nothing he
ml,

The rest of Mn Palmer’s sympathy waa ahown in
procuring all the rticulara in her power of the approach-
ing mamage, an communicating them to, Elinor. She
could toon tell at what coachmaker’a the new carriage
we. building, by what painter Mr Willoughhy’a portrait

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 51

was drawn, and at what warehouee Min Grey’s clothes
mi ht be seen.

he calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton
on the occaeion was a happy relief to Elrnor’s spirits,

apprelsed u the often were by the clamorous kindneae
the others. twan ngmt comforttoher to besure

of excitin no interest in one person at least among their
circle of riends ; I t comfort to know that there
wal on: who waul meet her without feeling an
curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety for her sis s
health.

Every qumiﬁention is raised at times, by the circum-
mncee of the moment, to more than its real value; and
she was sometimes worried down by oﬂicious eon-
dolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature. I

Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair
about once every day, or twice, if the subject occru-red
ve oﬂen, hy sayin , “ It is very Ihocking indeed! ”
an the mean- 0 thin continual though gentle vent,

e not only to see the Mist Dashwoods from the
ﬁrst without the smallest emotion, but very soon to Ice
them without recollecting a word of the matter; and
having that supported the dignity of her own sex, and
spoken her deer ed censure of what was wrong in the
other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the in-
terest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined
‘tﬂhough rather against the o inion of Sir John), es Mrs

' illoughby would at once a woman of elegance and
fortune, to leave her card with her as soon as the
married.

Colonel Brandon’s delicate unobtnisive inquiriee were
never unwelcome to Mill Dashwood. He had abun-
dantl earned the privilege of intimate dimension of her
Eatery: dinppointment, by the friendly zeal with which
he had endeavoured to when it, and they always con-

52 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

nmdwith conﬁdence. Hiachiet'rewardforthepnin—
ful exertion of dioclouing put tormws and present
humiliation, was given in the eye with which
Marianne lometimuoheervedhim,andtlie done-of
her voice whenever (though it did not happen)
the war ohliged, or could oblige herlelf to spat to him.
Then unwed him that hi: exertion had prodnoed an
increase of good-will lowardt himnelf, and that we
Elinor hopes of in heing‘ farther augmented h r;
but Mn Jennings, who knew nothing of all thin—who
knew only that the Colonel continued as grave as ever,
and that she could never Prevail on him to nuke the
offer hirmelf, nor commimon her to make it for him—-
began at the end of two day: to think that, intend of
Midsummer, they would not he married till Michael-
mas, and by the cm! of a week that it would not be
a match at all. The good understanding between the
Colonel and Min Dathwood seemed rather to declare
that the honour: of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the
ew arbour, would all be made over to lur ,- and Mn
inning. had for some time ceased to think It all of
Mr Ferraro.

Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt
of Willoughby’o letter, Elinor had the painful ofﬁce of
informing her sister that he was married. She had
taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to herself,
at noon at it war known that the ceremony was over, as
the was desirous that Marianne should not receive the
lint notice of it from the public paper» which the saw
her eagerly examining every morning.

She received the new: with resolute composure;
made no oboervation on it, and at tint ehed no team;
but after a abort time they would hum out, and for the
rest ofthe day uhewu in a etate hardlyle- pitiahle
than when Ill: 5m learnt to expect the event.

The Willnughbyl leﬁ town ll noon a they were

sans: AND SENSIBILITY. 5 3

married; and Elinor now h as there could be no

danger of her seeing eithero them, to prevail on her

sister, who had never yet left the house since the blow

Listo fell, to go out again by degrees as she had done
re.

About this time, the two Miss Steeles, late! arrived
at their cousin’s house in Bartlett’s Buildings,  olbom,
presented themselves again before their more grand
relations in Conduit and Berkeley-street, and were
welcomed by them all with great cordiality.

Elinor only was sorry to see them. ‘Their presence
always gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to make
n very gmcious return to the overpowering delight of
Lucy in ﬁnding her Mill in town.

“ should have been quite disappoian if I had not
found you here m'l," said she re tedly, with a swng
emphasis on the word. “ But I ways thought I :bauld.
I was almost sure you would not leave London git
awhile ; though you told me, you know, at Barton, t
you should not stay above a month. But I thought, at
the time, that you would most likely change your mind
when it came to the point. It would have been such a
great pity to have went away before your brother and
sister came. And now, to be sure, you will be in no
burr] to be gone. I am amazingly glad you did not

keep to your ward."
Elinor rl'ectly understood her, and was forced to use

all her sel -command to make it appear that she did not.

“Well, my dear," said Mrs Jennings, “ and how did
you travel ?’

“ Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Miss Steele,
with quick exultation; “ we came post all the way, and
had a very smart beau to attend us. Dr Davies was
coming to town, and shoe we thought we‘d jﬁin him in a
post-chaise; and he haved ve tee , and ‘d
ten or twelve shillings more than Ilizegdeiiil." y Pm

54 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“Oh,ohl” criedMnJenoingI.“ ,io-
deedl and the doctor in I single man, Imﬁ’m”

“ There now,” mid Mi- Steele, aﬂ'ecnedly Iimpering;
“everybody laugh: at me to about the Doctor, end I
cannot think why. My ooutim eaytheyare rule I luve
mach conqueet; but for mypun I declare I never
think about him from one hour's end to another.
‘ Lmdl here cornea your beau, Nancy,’ my couuin laid
t’other day, when the law him crossing the meet to the
bone. ‘My ban, indeed!’ raid I, ‘Imnnot think
who on mean. The Doctor is no beau of mine.’ ”

“ , a ,that in re talkin —but it won’t do
—-t.he Bocytor is the mrznfﬁe.” 8

“ No, indeed!” replied her couein, with aﬁ'ected
cornmeal, “and I beg you will contradict it, if you
ever hear it talked of.”

Mn: Jenningu directly gave her the gratifying outr-
ance that «the certainly would rm, and Min Steele wan
made completely ham.

"I tuppoae you ' go and stay with your brother
and sister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to town,"
laid Lucy, returning, after a eeuation of hostile hinte,to
the charge.

“ No, I do not think we shall."

“ Oh, yea, I dare say you will.”

Elinor would not humour her by farther o uition.

“ What a charming thing it it that Mn athwood
can a re you both for so long a time together!”

“ ong a time, indeed l " interpoaed Mn Jennings.
“ Why, their visit is but just begun l ”

Lucy was silenced.

“ I am sorry we cannot see your deter, Min Duh-
wood," said Mist Steele. “ I am lorry the ll not well ;”
for Marianne had left the room on their arrivaL

“ You are very good. My sister will be equally
sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she has

;

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 55

been very much pl ed lately with nervous headaches,
which make her on t for company or conversation.”

“ Oh, dear, that is a great pityl but such old friends
as Lucy and me l—I think she might see su- ; and I on
are we would not speak 3 word." '

Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal.
“ Her sister was perha laid down upon the bed, or in
her dressing-gown, an therefore not able to come to

them."

“Oh, if that’s all," cried Miss Steele, “we can just
as well go and see her.”

Elinor began to ﬁnd this impertinence too much for
her temper; but she was saved the trouble of checking
it, by Lucy’s sharp reprimand, which now, as on many
occasions, though it drd not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sister, was of advantage in governing
those of the other.

chum: ﬁﬁiiil

FTER some opposition. Marianne yielded to her
sister's cntrcaries, and consented to go out with
her and Mrs Jennings, one morning for half an

hour. She expressly conditioned, however, for paying
no visits. and would do no more than accompany them
to Gray’s in Sackville-street, where Elinor was carrying
on a negotiation for the exchange of a few old-fashioned
jewels of her mother.

“'hen they stopped at the door, Mrs Jennings recol-
lected that there was a lady at the other end of the
street on whom she ought to call; and as she had no
business at Gray's. it was resolved, that while her young
friends transacted theirs, she should pay her visit, and
return for them.

56 SENSE AN’D SENSIBILITY.

On ascending the stairs, the Miss Duhwoods fmmd
so many people before them in the room, that there was
not I person at liberty to attend to their orderl; and
they were obliged to wait. All that could be donewal,
to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to
promise the quickest succession; one gentleman only
was standing there, and it is probable that Elinor was
not without hope of exciting his politeness to a quicker
despstch. But the con'ectness of his eye, and the

r delicacy of his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness.
He was giving orders for n toothpick-case for himself,
and till its size, Iha , and ornaments were determined,
—all of which, a ter examining and debating for a
quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the
shop, were ﬁnally arranged by his own inventive fancy,
-—he had no leisure to bestow any other attention on
the two ladies, than what was comprised in dim or
four very broad stares; a kind of notice which served
to imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and
face of strong, natural, sterling inrigniﬁcance, though
adorned in the ﬁrst ater of fashion.

Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings
of contempt and resentment, on this impertinent exami-
nation nf their features, and on the puppyism of his
manner in deciding on all the diﬁ'erent horrors of the
different toothpick-cases resented to his inspection,
remaining unconscious o it all; for she was as we
able to collect her thoughts within herself, and be as
ignorant of what was passing around her, in Mr Gray‘s
shtx, as in her own bed-room.

t laet the afiair was decided. The ivory, the old,
and the pearls, all received their appointment, an; the
gentleman having named the last day on which his
existence could be continued without the possession of
the toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely
care, and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dash-

SENSE AND SINSlBle. 57

woods, but such a one as seemed nther to demand than
express admiration, walked of with an happy air of real
conceit and affected indiﬁ‘erenee.

Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward,
and was on the point of concluding it, when another
gentleman presented himself at her side. She turned
her eyes towards his face, and found him with some
su rise to be her brother.

heir aﬂ‘ection and pleasure in meeting was jun
enough to make 3 ve creditable appearance in Mr
Gray’s shop. John asth was really far from
hein sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave them
mi action; and his inquiries after their» mother were
msle and attentive.

inor found that he and Fanny had been in town
two days.

“I wished very much to call upon you yesterda ,”
mid he, “ but it was impossible, for we were obli to
take Harry to see the wild beam at Exeter Exchange :
and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs Femrs.
Harry was vantly pleased. Tlu': morning I had fully
intended to call on you, if I could possibly ﬁnd a spare
half-hour, but one has always so much to do on lint
coming to town! I nm come here to hespenk Farm n
seal. But to—morrow I think I shall ceminly be a e
to call in Berkeley-string and be introduced to your
- friend Mrs Jennings. I undemnd she is a woman of
very good fortune. And the Middletons too, you must
introduce me to 11:01:. As my mother-in-law’l rela-
tions, I shall be happy to show them every respect.
They are excellent neighbours to you in the county, I
understand.”

“ Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfort,
their friendliness in every particular, is more than I can
express."

“I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word;

58 r SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y.

extrensd glad indeed. But so it oughttobe; they
arepeo eof hrgefmmdieymnlatedwmand
every civility and accommodatiogethxt can serve to make
your situation leannt, might reasombl expected.
And so you urle) most comfortably settled hi your liule
cottage, and want for nothing. Edward brought us a
most charming account of the place; the moat comylew
thing of in kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond anything. It was a great
ntisfaction to us to hear it, I assure ou."

Elinor did feel a little ashamed 0 her brother; and
was not sorry to be red the necessity of answering
him, by the anival of rs Jennings’s servant, who am
so tell her that his mistress waited for them It the

oor.

Mr Dashwood attended them down stairs, vm intro-
duced to Mrs Jennings at the door of her carriage, and
repeating his hope of being able to call on them the next
day, look leave.

His visit was duly paid. He came with a pretence
at an a logy from their sister-in-law, for not coming
too; “ ut she was to much engaged with her mother,
that really the had no leisure for going anywhere.”
Mrs Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she
should not stand upon ceremon , for the were all
counins, or something like it, an she shou d certainly
wait on Mrs John Daahwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her. His manners to Ilmn, though calm,
were perfectly kind; to Mrs Jennings, most attentiver
civil; and on Colonel Brandon’s coming in soon after
himself, he eyed him with a curiosity which seemed to
say, that he onl wanted to know him to be rich to be
equally civil to im.

After staying with them half an hour,he asked Elinor
to Walk with him to Conduit-street, and introduce him
to Sir John and Lady Middleton. The weather was

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 59

remarkath line, and she readily oomented. As soon as
were out of the house, his inquiries began.

“ Who is Colonel Brandon? Is he a man of for-
tune P ”

"Yes; he has a v ood ro in Donetshire.”

“I am glad of incl-Ilse gentlemanlike
man, Ind I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the
prospect of a very respectable establishment in life.”

“ Me, brother—what do you mean i ”

“He likes you. I observed him nsrrowl , and am
convinced of it. What is the amount of his rtune i”

" I believe about two thousand 3-year.”

“ Two thousand a-year;” andthen working himself
up to e pitch of enthusiastic generosity, he added :

“ Elinor, I wish with all my hurt it were mic: as
much, for our sake.”

" Ind I believe you,” lied Elinor, “ but I am
very sure that Colonel Bronco has not the smallest
with of marrying rue."

“ You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mis-
taken. A very little trouble on your side secures him.
Perhaps just at resent he may be undecided ; the small-
ness of your liirtunc may make him lmng back; his
friends may all advise him against it. But some of those
little attendant and encourageman which ladies can no
easil give, will ﬁx him, in spite of himself. And there

no reason why you should not try for him. It
is not to be supposed thst any prior attachment on your
side—in short, you know as to an nmrchmem of that
kind, it is quite out of the question, the objections are
insurmountable have too much sense not to see all
that. Colonel Brandon must be the man; and no
civility shall be wanting an my part, to make him pleased
with you and ydur famil . It II a match that mm give
universal satisfaction. {11 short, it is a kind of thing
that "—lowering his voice to an important whisper—

6° suns: AND sausrnrurv.

“ will be exceedingly welcome to all parties.” Recol-
lecting himself, however, he added, “That ia,’I mean
to lay—your friends are all truly anxious to nee you well
settled, Fanny particularly, for she has your interest very
much at heart, assure you. And her mother too, Mrs
Fen-are, a very good—natured woman, I am are it would
give her great pleasure, the aid as much the other day.”

Elinor would not vouchsaﬁ: any answer.

“ It would be something remarkable now,” he con-
tinued, “ something droll, if Fanny should have a brother
and I a sister settling at the same time. And yet it is
not ve unlikely.”

“ Isrldr Edward Ferraro,” said Elinor with resolu-

tion, “ going to be married?"

“ It is not actually settled, hut there in such a thing
in agitation. He has a most excellent mother. Mrs
Fermrs, with the utmost lilx-rnlity, will come forward,
and settle on him a thousand a-year, if the match takes
place. The lady is the Honourable Miss Morton, only
daughter of the late Lord Morton, with thirty thound
pounds—a very desirable connexion on both sides, and I
have not a doubt of its taking place in time. A thousand
a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, to make
over for ever ; but Mr: Ferraro has a noble irit. To
give you another instance of her liberality :-— be other
day, as soon as we came to town, aware that money
could not he very plenty with us just now, the put bank-
notes into Fanny’s hands to the amount of two hundred
pounds. And extremely acceptable it is, for we must
ive at a great expense while we are here.”

He paused for her assent and companion; and the
forced herself to say—

“ Your expeneel both in town and country must
certainly be considerable, but your income is a large
one.”

“ Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 6|:

I do not mean to complain, however! it is undoubtedly
a comfortable one, and, I hope, will in time he better.
The enclosure of Notland Common, now carrying on, is
a most aerious drain. And then I have made a little
purchaae within this half-year—Em Kingharn Farm,
on must remember the place, where old Gibeon uaed to
ive. The land was so very desirable for me in every
res ct, IO immediately adjoining my own property, that
I elt it my duty to buy it. I could not have answered
it to my conscience to let it fall into any other hands.
A mu must pay for his convenience, and it bu coat me
a vast deal of money.”

“ More than you think it really and intrineically
worth ? "

“Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again,
the next day, for more than I gave : but with regard to
the purchawmoney, I might have been very unfortunate
indeed ; for the stocka were at that time so low, that if
I had not happened to have the neccasnry sum in m
banker’s handl, I must have sold out to very great loss. ’

Elinor could only smile.

“Other great and inevitable expenses too we have
had on ﬁrst coming to Norland. Our respected father,
an you well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill effects
that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother. Far be it for me to repiue at his
doing so; he had an undouth right to dispose of hil
own property as he choae. But, in consequence of it,
we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen,
china, &c., to supply the place of what was taken awa .
You may guess, after all these expenses, how very
\ve muat be from being rich, and how acceptable Mn
Ferrar' I kindnesr is.”

“ Certainly,” said Elinor; " and assisted by her
liberalitylhgpeyoumayyetlivetobeinmy
circumstance!-

62 SENSE AND SENSXBILITY.

“Another ear or two may do much toward: it,"
he ravely ied; “hithoweverdiereit m'll a great
d to be done. There it not a crane laid of Fannie
greenhouae, and nothing but the plan of the ﬂower-
garden marked out.”

“ Where in the greenhoule to be i ”

“Upon the knol behindthe house. The old walnut-
treel are all come down to make room for it. It will
be a very ﬁne object from many part: of the park, and
the ﬂower-garden will slope down jun before it. and be
exceedingly pretty. We have cleared away all the old
thorn: that grew in patchel over the brow.’

Elinor kept her concern and her centure to henelf,
and was very thankful that Marianne was not pruent to
share the provocation.

Having now said enough to make hll poverty clear,
andto do away the ncccluity of buying a pair of ear-
ringl for each of his sisters, in hie next visit at Gray‘s,
hit droughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began to
congratulate Elinor on having ouch a friend as Mn
Jennings.

“She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her
house, her style of living, all bespeak an exceedizg good
income, and it it an acquaintance that has not 0 y been
of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may prove
materially advantageou. Her inviting you to town is
certainly a vast thing in your favour; and, indeed, it
speaks altogether so great a regard for you, that in all
probability when the dies you will not be forgotten.
She must have a reat deal to leave.”

“Nothing at a] , I should rather suppote; for the had
only her jointure, which will descend to her children.”

“ But it in not to be imagined that ehelivel up to
her income. Few people of common nrdence will
do:tbar; and whatever the saves, the will be able to
dilpoae of,”

SENSE AND SENS! BI L1". 63

“ And do you not think it more likely that she should
leave it to her daughters, than to us?”

“Her daughters are both exceedingly well married,
and therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of her
remembering them farther. Whereas, in my opinion,
by her taking so much notice of you, and treating you
in this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim
on her future consideration, which a conscientious woman
would not disregard. Nothing can be kinder than her
behaviour ; and she can hardly do all this, without bdng
aware of the expectations she raises."

“ But she raises none in those most concerned. Indeed,
brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity
carries on too far.”

“ I y to be sure,” said he, seeming to recollect him-
self, “people have little, have very little in their rower.
But, my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne?
—-she looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is
grown quite thin. Is she ill?” '

“ She is not well, she has had a nervous comphint
on her for semal weeks.”

“I am sorry for that. At her time of life, nnything
of an illness destroys the bloom for ever! Hers has
been a very short one! She was as handsome s girl
lad September as any I ever saw, and as likely to attract
the men. There was something in her style of beauty ‘
to please them particularly. I remember Fanny usedto
my that she would marry sooner and better than you
did; not but what she is exceedingly fond of you—but
so it happened to strike her. She will be mistaken,
however. I question whether Marianne now will marry
a man worth more than ﬁve or six hundred a-year at
the utmostI and Tim very much deceived if you do not
do better. Dorsetshirel I know very little of Dorset-
Ihire, but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedin y glad
to know more of it; and I thinkI can aosv7er or your

64 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

having Fanny and mylelf among the earlieet and belt
pleased of your vinitorl.”

Elinor tried ve oerioualy to convince him that there
was no likelihoo? of her marrying Colonel Brandon;
but it was an expecmion of too much pleuure to him-
uclf to be relinquished, and he was really reeolved on
Ieeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting
the marriage by every 'ble attention. He had
compunction enough l3” having done nothing for hie
sisters himlelf, to be exceedingly anxious that everybody
elue should do a great deal; and an offer from Colonel
Brandon, or a legacy from Mn Jenninga, wait the eaaiest
mean of atoning for his own neglect.

They were lucky enough to ﬁnd Lady Middleton at
home, and Sir John came in before their visit ended.
Abundance of civiliticu paused on all Hides. Sir John
was manly to like anybody, and though Mr Dunlin
did not uccm to know much about horses, he noon set
him down as a very good-natured fellow; while Lady
Middleton saw enough of fashion in his a ranoe to
think his ac uaintance worth having; and r Duhwood.
went awa lighted with both.

“ I shall have a charming account to carry to F anny,”
aid he, an he walked back with his sister. “ Lady
Middleton is really a most elegant woman l such a
woman an I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. And
Mn Jennings too, an exceeding well-behaved woman,
though not so elegant ac her daughter. Your liner need
not have any ecruple even of visiting ber, which, to say
the truth, has been a little the cane, and very naturally;
for we only knew that Mn Jennings wan the widow of
a man who had got all his money in a low way; and
Fanny and Mn Femn were both Itrongly prepoueoaed
that she nor her daughters were such kind of women an
Fanny would like to associate with. But now I can
any her a man Iatinl‘actory account of both.”

snusc AND smsrmu-rv. 65

Chum $115317.

R8 JOHN DASHWOOD had In much con-
ﬁdence in her husband’l judgment, that the
waited the very next d: both on Mn Jenninge

and her daughter; and her con dence was rewarded by
ﬁnding even the former, even the woman with whom
her sisters were staying, b no rheanl unworthy her
notice ; and an for Lady Middleton, Ill! found her one
of the moat charming women in the worldl

Lady Middleton wan eqtu pleued with Mn
Duhwood. There wan a kind of cold-hearted telﬁsh-
nest on both sides, which mutually enacted Shem; Ind

ioed with each other in an iuli i 1i
$135313, and a general want of nude P “y

The name manuen, however, which recommended
Mn John Dashwood to the good ioion of Lady
Middleton, did not unit the fancy of re Jennings, and
to hr lhe appeared nothin more than a linle proud-
looking woman of unco 'Il address, who met her
hunhnnd’e liners without any uﬂiction,nnrl nlmmt with-
out having nnything to m to them, for of the quarter
of an hour hectowcd on rkclcy-rtreet, she sat at lean
seven minutes and a half in silence.

Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did
not chute to ask, whether Edward was then in town;
but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to
mention his name before her, till able to tell her that his

' with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till
her hu-hand’s expectations on Colonel Bnndon were
emwered; because she believed them still so very much
attached to each other, that they could not be too
aedulounly divided in word and deed on ever ocacion.
The intelli enCe, however, which lb: woul not give,
noon ﬂow from another quarter. Lucy came very

II. E

66 suns: AND snusmruw.

ehortly to claim Elinor’t companion on being unable to
ace Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr
and Mn Dathwood. He dared not come to Bartlett'-
Buildingt for fear of detection, and though their mutual
impatience to meet wot not to he told, they could do
nothing at preterit but write.

Edward assured them hiuuelf of hit lacing in town,
within a very thort time, by twice calling in Berkeley-
ureet. Twice wan hil card found on the table, when
they returned from their moming’l engagement. Elinor
was pleated that he had called, and still more planed
that the had mined him.

The Danhwooda were I0 prodigioutly delighted with
the Middletons that though not much in the habit of
giving anything, they determined to give them a dinner,
and won after their acquaintance began, invited them to
dine in Harley-street, where they had taken a very good
boon for three monthu. Their sisters and Mrs Jennin a
were invited likewise, and John Duhwood wan care
to aecure Colonel Brandon, who, always glad to be
where the Mine Dashwooda were. received hie eager
civilitiel with tome ourprioe, but much more Pleuure.
They were to met Mr: Ferraro; but Elinor could not
learn whether her Jone were to be of the party. The
expectation of seeing Iver, however, was enough to make
her interened in the engagement ; for though the could
now meet Edward's mother without that strong anxiety
which had once dprornioed to attend such an introduction,
though the cool now see her with perfect indifference,
an to her inion of herself, her detire of being in com—
pany with n Ferraro, her curiosity to know what the
wan like, was a lively an ever.

The intereet with which she thus anticipated the
party, was soon uftew/arda increased, more mrfully
than yleuantly, by her hearing that the m Steele!
were alto to be at it,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 67

50 well had they recommended themaelvee to Lady
Middleton, so agreeable had their neliduitiee made them
to her, that though Lucy wan certainly not elegant, and
her sister not even genteel, she was an rendyu Sir John
to ask them to npend a week or two in Conduit-amen
and it happened to be rtieularl convenientto the Min

Steeles, at soon as the ashw ’ invitation wa- known,
that their visit should begin a few dayl before the party
took place.

Their claiml to the notice of Mn John Duhwood,
an the niece: of the gentleman who for many year: had
had the care of her brother, might not have done much,
however, towards procuring them acme at her table; but
as Lady Middleton’s guests they mutt be welcome; and
Luc , who had long wanted to be reanally known to
the filmily, to have a nearer view 0 their characters and
her own diﬂicnlties, and to have an opportunity of
endmvouring to lease them, had seldom been ha ier
in her life than «he was on receiving Mrs John ash-
wood’e card.

On Elinor its effect was very diﬂerent. She
immediately to determine that Edward, who lived with
hie mother, moat be asked, no hit mother wet, to aparty
given his liner; and to tee him forftllie ﬁrst time,
after that paued, in the com y 0 ac l—ehe
hardly knew how she could bear itplan y

These apprehensions perhaps were not founded en-
tirely on reason, and certainl not at all on truth. They
were relieved, however, not her own recollection, but
by the goodwill of Lucy, who believed herself to be in-
ﬂicting a oevere dinppointment when Ihe told her that
Edward certainly would not be in Harley-street on
'I‘ueeda , end even hoped to be carrying the pain etill
farther [y minding her, that he will kept away by that
extreme a ecdon for her-elf, which he wild not con-
eeal when they were together.

68 sense AND smstnxu'rv.

The important Tuesday mine that was to introduce
the two young ladiel to thin formidable mother-iu-law.

“Pity me, dear Min Dnhwood! ” laid Lucy, a
they walked up the Itairl together—for the Middleton-
amved to directly after Mn Jenninga. that they all
followed the lemnt at the me time—“ There in no-
body here but you, that can feel for me. I declare I
can hardly mud. Good graciouII—In a moment I
shall nee the perton that all my happineu depend: on—
that in to be my mother! "—

Elinor could have given her inuuedinte relief by
euggerting the potlibility of its being Mi- Morton:
mother, rather than her own, whom they were about to
behold; but instead of doing that, she tenured her, and
with great aincerity, that she did pity her,-—to the utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable
bent-If, hoped at lean: to be an object of inepreuiblc
envy to Elinor. -

Mrs Ferraro was a linle, thin woman, upright, even
to formality, in her ligurc, and serious, even to Journal,
in her aspect. Her complexion was allow: and her
features small, without beauty, and naturally without
expremion: but a lucky commotion of the brow had
reocued her countenance from the disgrace of inlipidity, 
by giving it the strong characters of privk and ill-nature.
She was not a woman of many words; for, unlike people
in general, the proportioned them to the number of her
idea: : and of the few syllables that did coupe her, not
one fell tothe ahare of Min Daahwood, whom the eyed
with the spirited determination of dialiking her at all
events.

Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this be.
haviour. A few month ago it would have hurt her
exceedingly; but it was not in Mn Ferran' power In
diru'eu her b it now; and the difference of her man-
ner: to the in Steele—a difference which seemed

sense AND situsrurmv. 69

purpose] made to humble her more—only amused her.
he can d not but smile to see the gmciousness of both
mother and daughter towurds the very person—for Lucy
was particularly distinguished—whom of all others, had
they known as much as she did, they would have been
most anxious to mortify; while she herself, who had
comparatively no power to wound them, sat pointedly
slighted is both. But while she smiled at u graciousneu
so misapp ied, she could not reﬂect on the mean-spirited
folly from which it spnm , nor observe the studied
attentions with which the iss Steeles courted its con
tinunnce, without thoroughly deqrising them all four.

Lucy was all exultntion on being so honourably dis-
tinguished; and Miss Steele wanted only to be tented
about Dr. Davi[e]s to be perfectly happy.

The dinner was a grand one, the servants were
numerous, and everythin bespoke the Mistrees’s inclina-
tion for shew, and the ﬁaster’s ability to support it. In
spite of the im rrovements and additions which were
making to the orland estate, and in spite of its owner
having once been within some thousand pounds of being
obliged to sell out at a loss, nothing gave any s mptom
of that iudigenee which he had tried to infer rum it ;
no of so kind, ex t of conversation, red
ﬁnite thz deﬁcienzeyp was considenblefppfl-oltn
Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was
worth heuring, and his wife had still less. But there
was no peculiar disgrace in this, for it was very much
the one with the chief of their visitors, who almost Ill
laboured under one or other of these disqualiﬁcation
for being agreeable—want of sense, either natural or
improved. want of elegance, want of spirits, or want of
tent r.

hen the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after
dinner, this povert was particularly evident, for the
gentlemen bad supp ied the discourse with some variety

70 SIRS! AND SINSIBILITY.

—the variety of polin'm, indoaing land, and breaking
hornet—but then it wan all over, and one only
engaged the ladie- till coll'ee came in,\vhirhwu the
comparative heights of H Duhwood, and Lady
Middleton’l neeond Ion Wm, who were narIy of
the nine age.

Had both the children been there, the affair might
have been determined too easily by meaaurin them at
once; but II Harry only wu present, it we oon'ec-
tun-l usertion on both aides, and everybody had a right
to be equally punitive in their opinion, and to repeat it
over and over again an often an they liked.

The parties stood thus:

The two mothen, though each really convinced that
her own son war the tallest, politely decided in favour
of the other.

The two grandmotherl, with not let: partiali , but
more Iincerit , were nail amen in nu rt 0 their
own deacendany t. q y PP“

Lucy, who was hardly lesa anxioua to pleaoe one
parent than the other, thought the boy: were both re-
markably tall for their age, and could not conceive that
there could be the smallest difference in the world be-
tween them; and Min Steele, with yet greater addreu,
gave it, an fact an she could, in favour of each.

Elinor, having once delivered her 0 )inion on William’l
Iide, by which the oﬂ'cnded Mr: l’cmm, and Funny
etill more, did not nee the necenrity of enforcin it by
any farther Insertion; and Marianne, when ed on
for hen, offended them all by declaring that the had no
opinion to give, u the had never thought about it.

Before her removing from Norland, Elinorhad painted
a very pretty pair of screens for her riater-in-law, which
being now just mounted and brought home, ornamented
her present drawing-room; and these Icreena catching
the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7K

gentlemen into rhe morn, were olﬁcionaly handed by
him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration.

“Theae are done by my eldelt sister,” eaid he;
“and. you. an man ofmte,will,Idnre ny.hepleaed
with them. I do not know whether ever happened
to see any of her performance: are, but ahe it in
general reckoned to draw extremely well.”

The Colonel, though dinclaiming all pretenaionl to
connoiueurehip, warmly admired the ocreena,“ he would
have done anything 'nted by Miss Duhwood; and
the curioqu of the 0 er- heing of course excited, they
were handed round for general impaction. Mu Ferraro,
not aware of their bung Elinor’a work, particularly
requested to look at them; and after they had received
the gratifying teotimony of Lady Middleton’l I”)th
tion, Farm presented them to her mother, conrideratdy
informing er at the lame time that they were done by
Mica Danhwood.

“Hum "—taid Mrs Ferraro—“ very pretty,”— and
without regarding them at all, returned them to her
daughter.

Pcrhrrpo Fanny thought for a moment that her mother
had been uitc rude enough,-—for, colouring a little, Ihe
immedi;te y raid, ’ , n

"T are very pretty, In: am—an t P But
then aggn, the dread of having been city civil, too
encouraging henelf, probably came over her, for Ihe
presently added,

" Do you not think they are Iomething in Mira
Morton's ater of ‘nring, ma'aml Sb: dot: paint
most delightfully. ow beautifully her lint landmpe
in done! ’ .

“ Beautifully indeed. But :6: doe! everything well."

Marianne could not bear thin. She wan already
greatly diapleued with Mrs Ferraro; and Inch ill-timed
praioe of another, at Elinor’r expenle, though the had

72 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

not any notion of what was principally meant by it,
provoked her immediatel to any with warmth,

“ Thin in admiration o a very rticular kind! What
in Miss Morton to uni Who own or who enrol for
her? It in Elinor of whom we think and geek.”

And so ‘ng, the took the ecrecna out of her inner-
in-law’n hnn : to admire them hem-If a they ought to
be admired.

Mn Fennn looked exceedingly angry, and drawing
herself up more niﬂly than ever, pronounced in retort
thin bitter Phillippk: “ Misc Morton is Lord Morton’s
daughter.’

Fanny looked very angry too, and her huehand we
all in a fright at his sister’s audacity. Elinor wan much
more hurt by Marianne’s warmth, than the had been by
what reduced it; but Colonel Brandon’s eyes, as they
were ixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only
what wan amiable in it; the affectionate heart which
could not beer to see a sister slighted on the mallen

Int. V
P0Ivfarinnne’e feelings did not stop here. The cold in-
lolenee of Mrs Femn’ general behaviour to her litter,
neemed, to her, to foretell auch dill'icultiee and distreues
to Elinor, as her own wounded heart tnught her to think
of with horror; and urged by a Atrong impulte of aﬁec-
tionate Ieneibility, she moved, after a moment, to her
sister's chair, and putting one am round her neck, and
one check close to here, laid in a low, but ea er voice :

“ Dear, dear Elinor, don’t mind them. on’t let
them make you unhappy.”

She could ﬂy no more; her iriu were quite over-
come, and hiding her face on linor‘l shoulder, the
burst into team Everybody’e attention was called, and
almost everybody wan concerned. Colonel Bnndon rose
u and went to them without knowing what he did.

rs Jennings, with a very intelligent “ Ah! poor dear,”

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 73

immediately gave her her salts; and Sir John felt no
desperately enraged against the author of this nervous
dilutes, that he instantly changed hie neat to one clone
by Lucy Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief
account of the whole chucking aﬂnir.

In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered
enough to ut an end to the hustle, and sit down among
the rest; ough her spirits retained the impression of
what had passed, the whole evening.

“Poor Marianne!” said her brother to Colonel
Brandon in a low voice, as noon as he could secure his
attention, “ She has not such good health as her sister,
—ehc is very nervona,—ehe hna not Elinor’e conetitu-
tion; and one must allow that there in something very
trying to a young woman who bar been a beauty, in the
loss of her mnal attractions. You would not think
it perhaps, ut Marianne tutu remarkably handsome a
few months ago—quite as handwme al Elinor. Now
you see it is all gone.”

'Chspttr 975w.

LINOR’S curiosity to see Mrs Ferrars was satis-
fied. She had found in her everything that
could tend to make a farther connexion between

the families undesirable. She had seen enough of her
pride, her meanness, and her determined rejudice
ngninn heroelf, to comprehend all the diﬂic ties that
Inuet have rplexed the engagement. and retarded the
marriage 0 Edward and herself, had he been otherwise
free; and Ihe had seen almost enough to be thankful for
her own sake, that one greater obstacle preserved her
from suffering under any other of Mn Ferrarl’ creation,
preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice, or

74 ms: AND smsmu'rv.

any solicitude for her good Or at lean, if die
did not bring henelf quite to rejoice in Edward'n bu'ng
lettered to Lucy, Ihe determined, that had Lucy been
more amiable, the ugh to lnve rejoiced.

She wondered that any’r 'nu could be In very
much elevated by the civili 0 Mn Fem; tint her
intcmt and her vanity Ihou d In very much blind ha,
alto make the attention which teamed odypaidher
heauneahewnsulEIh-or,apparocomplimtwher-
Itlf—or to allow her to derive encourath from I
preference only given her, hecauae her real inalion VIII
unknown. Buttlnt itwu “had not onlybeeode-
dared by Lucy’u eye: at the time, but waadeclnrod over
again the next morning more openly; for, at her pani-
cular desire, Lady Middleton let her down in Berkeley-
strcct on the chance of seeing Elinor alone, to tell her
how happy the Will-

The chance proved a lucky one. for a from
Mrs Palmer, won after she arrived, carried Mr- ennings
away.

“ My dear friend,” cried Lucy u soon as they were
? them-elven, " I come to talk to on of my hyphen.

ould anything be so ﬂattering an r- Ferran' way of‘
treating me yesterday? So exceedingly affable u the
wax l You know how I dreaded the thought of Iecing
her; but the very moment I was introduced, there wan
much an aﬁahility in her behaviour an really should Item
to ray, she ind quite look a fancy to me. Now we:
notitao? You raw ital]; andwaanotyouquitem'uck
with it ? ”

" She wan certainly very civil to you.”

" Civil !—Did you see nothing but only civility? I
now a vandal more—arch kindnmatfell to thelhare
of nobody but me! No pride, no hauteur, and your
riner just the amp—all meetness and Illabilityl "

Elinor wished to talk of aornething else, but Lucy

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 75

still Pressed her to own that the had reason for" her
happiness, and Elinor wan obliged to go on.

" Undoubtedly, if th had known your engagement,”
said the, “nothing co d be more ﬂattering than their
traunent of you ; but as that we! not the cue—"

“ I gueued you would say no,” lied Lu quickly;
“but there wan no reauon in the wor d why u Ferraro
ahould seem to like me, if she did nob—and her liking
me in thing. You thnn’t ulk me out of my catio-
faction. am sure it will all end well, and there will
be no difﬁculties at all, to what I uled to think. Mn
Ferrar- il a charming woman, and lo in your sister.
Th are both delightful women indeed !-'-—I wonder I
tho d’never hear you say how agreeable Mrs Dashwood
was P ’ -

To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not
attern t any.

“ﬁre you ill, Miu Duhwood ?—you seem low—-
you don’t speak ;-—sure, you an’t well. ’

“ I never wan in better health.”

" I am glad of it with all my heart, but really you did
not look it. I Ihould be so so to have you lll,——you,
that have been the greateot com on to me in the world!
—Heaven known what I Ihould have done without your
friendehip."

Elinor tried to make a civil unmet, though doubu'ng
her own oucceol. But it neerned to utitfy Lucy, for
the directly replied:

" Indeed I am IEerﬁmly convinced of your regard for
me, and next to dwnr I love, it in the greateat com-
fort I have. Poor Edward! But now, there in one
good thing—we lhall be able to meet, and meet retty
often, for Lxdy Middleton ’e delighted with Mn E -
wood,» we ohall be a good deal in Harley-meet, I
due a , and Edward spend: half his time with hie
sister—de5, Lady Middleton and Mrs Ferrari will

76 sans: AND snusrmu-rv.

visit now ; and Mrs Ferrar- und your sister were both
so good to say more than once, they should alwaye be
glad to see me.—Th are such charming women l—I
am sure if ever you tel your sister what I think of her,
you cannot speak too high.”

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to
hope that she lbw!!! tell her sister. Lucy continued :

“I am sureI should have seen it in a moment, if
Mrs Ferraro had took a dislike to me. If she had only
made me a formal curtsey, for instance, without saying a
word, and never after had took any notice of me, and
never looked at me in a pleasant way—you know what
I Imam—if I had been treated in that forbidding sort of
way, I should have gave it all up in d ‘r. I could not
have stood it. For where she doe: di ike, I know it in
most violent.”

Elinor was prevented fmm making any reply to this
civil triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the ser-
vant’s announcing Mr Ferrars, and Edward’s imme-
diater walking in. A

It was a very awkward moment ; and the countenance
of each showed that it was so. They all looked ex-
ceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed to have as great
an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to ad-
vance farther into it. The very circumstance, in its
unpleasantest form, which they would each have been
most anxious to avoid, had fallen on them—they were
not only all three together, but were together without
the relief of any other person. The ladies recovered
themselves ﬁrst. It was not Lucy’s business to put
herself forward, and the appearance of secrecy must still
be kept up. She could therefore only loo! her tender-
ness, and after slightly addressing him, said no more.

But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she,
for his sake and her own, to do it well, that the forced
herself after a moment's recollection, to welcome him,

SENSE AND SENSIBILXTY. 77

with a look and manner, that were almost easy and
almost n; and another struggle, another effort still
improv them. She would not allow the resence of
Lucy, nor the consciousness of some injustice towards
herself, to deter her from saying that she was y to
see him, and that she had very much regretted ‘ g
from home, when he called before in Berkeley-meet.
She would not be frightened from paying him those
attentions which, as a fnend and almost a relation, were
his due, by the observant eyes of Lucy, though she soon
perceived them to be narrowly watching her.

Her manners gave some reassurance to Edward, and
he lud courage enough to sit down ; but his emban‘ass-
ment still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion
which the case rendered reasonable, though his sex might
make it rare; for his heart had not the indifference of
Lucy's, nor could his conscience have quite the ease of
Elinor‘s.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed deter-
mined to make no contribution to the comfort of the
othern, and would not say a word; and almost every-
thing that war said, )rocecdcd from Elinor, who was
ﬂed to volunteer «lithe information about her mother’s

th, their coming to town, &C., which Edward ought
to have inquired about, but never did.

Her exertions did not no here; for she soon after-
wards felt herself so heroitu disposed as to determine, '
under pretence of fetching Marianne, to leave the others
by themselves; and she really did it, and (but in the
haudsomest manner, for she loitered away seveml minutes
» on the landing place, with the most high-minded forti-
tude, before she went to her liner. When that was
once done, however, it was time for the raptures of
Edward to cease; for Marianne’s jo hurried her
into the drawin -room immediatel . I'l'er pleasure in
seeing him was like every other ofy her feelings, strong

78 sans: AND SBNSIBILITY.

in inelf and mneg ken. She met him with I
handelmwouldben andnvoicethuexpraued
theaﬁecﬁouoflim.
“DmEdwnrdl”Ihecried,“thinian momentof
great hnppine-l—Thil wouldllmoetmake amendlfor

"ﬁlmy ”

' wardtriedtoreturnher kindness u it deserved,
butbeforemchwitne-uhednrednotu hdfwhnhe
really felt. Again they all at down, for: moment
or two all were silent; while Marianne w looking
with the moat Ipaltiug tendemeu, remain-le- at Edward
and sometimes at Elinor, regrem'ng only that their de-
light in each other Ihould be checked by Lucy’l unwel-
come presence. Edward was the lint to lpBak, sad it
was to notice Mnrianne’n altered loch, and express hil
fear of her not ﬁnding London agree with her.

“ Oh! don’t think of me! ” ulu: lied, with upirimd
eurncotneu, though hcr eyes were ﬁ led with turn as
.he spoke, “don’t think of III, health. Elinor in well,
you see. That mud be enough for “I both.”

Thin remark was not calculated to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to concilial: the good-will of
Lucy, who looked upat Marianne with no very benign“:
expulsion.

u no you like Londnn?” laid Edward. willing to
my an thing that might introduce another Iuhjcct.

“ at at all. I expected much ylearure in it, but I
have found none. The night of you, Edward, in the
only comfort it has afforded; and, thank Heaven! you
are what you :1ny were! ”

She paused—no one spoke.

“I think, Elinor,” the prelunlly added, “we mun
employ Edward to take care of u in our mum to
Eamon. In a week or two,I suppose. we Ihall he
going; and, I mm, Edward Will not he very unwilling
to accept the charge”

sense AND snusrmu-rv. 79

Poor Edward muttered romethin ; but what it was,
nobody knew, not even himlelf. ut Marianne, who
aw l'lll agitation, and could eaaily trace it to whatever
cause beet pleaaed herself, wu perfectly utirﬁed, and
noon talked of something else.

“We Ipent each I day, Edward, in Harley-meet,
yeeterdnyl So dull, l0 wretchedly dull! But I have
much, to say to you on that had, which cannot be laid
now. ’

And with thin admirable dinretion did she defer the
entrance of her ﬁnding their mutual relatives more die-
agreeable than ever, and of her being particularly disgusted
with hil mother, till they were more in private.

“ But why were you not there, Edward 2—Why did
you not come ? "

“ I was engaged elsewhere."

“ Engaged l—But what was that, when euch friends
were to be met?"

“ Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to
take tome revenge on her, “ you think young men never
and upon engagements, if they have no mind to keep
them, little at well an great.”

Elinor wnt very angry, but Marinnnc seemed entirely
insemibIc of the sting; for the calmly NPllcd,

“ Not to, indeed ; for, serioully speaking, I am very
eure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley-
meet. And I reall believe he La: the moot delicate
conlcienee in the wor d ; the moat scrupulous in perﬁm-
ing eve engagement, however minute, and however it
may eagainu hie intereet or leaeure. He in the moat
fearful of giving pain, of woun 'n ex ration, and the
moat incapable of being Ielﬂeh organ dy I ever saw.
Edward, It in so, and I will lay it. What! are you
never to hear yourself pained? Then you mun be no
friend of mine; for those who will accept of m love
and esteem, must submit to my open commendation.”

80 sense AND sexsruru'rv.

The nature of her commdation in the Present
cue, however, happened to be panicularly ill-outed to
the feelings of two-thirds of her auditorl, and we: In
very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very noon got up
to go away.

“ Going In soon I " aid Marianne; “ my dear
Edward, thin must not be.” . -

And drawin him a little aide, she whispered her
persuasion that ucy could not stay much longer. But
even this encouragement failed, for he would go; and

Lucy, who would have oumaid him had hi: visit luted
two hours, noon afterwards went away.

“ What can bring her here I0 often I " said Marianne,
on her leaving them. ‘“ Could the not see that we
wanted her gone? How teazing to Edward! ”

“ Why no l—wc were all his ﬂit-min, and Lucy hal
been the longest known to him of any. It in but
nutuml that he uhould like to see her ac well at
ourselves."

Marianne looked at her steadily, and aid, “You
know, Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I
cannot bear. If on only hope to have your assertion
contradicted, an mutt mppoee to he the case, you
ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world
to do it. I cannot descend to be tricked out of sunr-
ancet that are not really wanted.”

She then left the room; and Elinor dared not fol-
low hcr to y more, for bound as the wall by her pro-
mine of secrecy to Luc , she could give no information
that would convince arianne; and painful an the
connequences of her still continuing in an error might
be, the was obliged to Iuhmit to it. All that the
could hope, was that Edward would not often expoae
her or himself to the dim-cu of hearing Marianne’l
miataken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other
part of the pain that had attended their recent meeting
—and this she had every reason to expect.

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I’Y. 8!
| .

chum: $5517].

ITHIN I few day. after thin meeting, the
newlpogen announced to the world, that the
lady 0 Thomas Palmer, Euq., woe cafer

delivered of a Inn and heir; a very interesting and
Iltilfactory paragraph, at least to all thooe intimate
connection. who knew it before. '

This event, hi hly imporunt to Mr- Jenniogr’a
happineu, produe a temporary duration in the dia-
poeal of her time, and inﬂuenced in a. like degree the
engagement: of her young friends 3 for u'she wiehed to
he at much u pouible with Charlone, Ihe went thither
every morning at soon a the wan dressed, and did not
return till late in the evening; and the Mine Duh-
woodr, at the particular request of the Middleton, t
the whole'of every day in Conduit-meet. For '
own comfort, they would much rather have remained,
at lent all the morning, in Mrs Jenninge’e home; but it
war not a thing tohe urged against the wither of eve -
bod . Their hour: were therefore made over to Lady
Mi dleton and the two Min Steelu. by whom their
can?” war in fact a little valued, u it was profeuedly
“ll In

hey had too much sense to be delinbk compan-
ions to theformer; and by the latter they were con-
Iidered with a jealoua eye, It intruding on their ground,
and chariu the kindneu which they wnnted to mono-
lile. ugh nothing could be more lite than
ady Middleton’l behaviour to Elinor In Marianne,
she did not really like them at all. Became they
neither ﬂuttered her-elf nor her children, she could not
believe them good-natured ; and became they were fond
of tending, lhe feneied them satirical: Perhaps without
exactly knowing what it w to be atrial; but 16¢:

11. r

82 sense AND snusmm'rv.

did not signify. It wan oenrure in common nee, and'

energy given.
heir reoence we a reetraint both on her and on
Lucy. t checked the idleneu of one, and the buineﬂ
of the other. Lady Middleton wan aehamed of doing
nothing before them, and the ﬂattery which Lucy wan
mid to think of and adminieter at other times, the
ed they would despite her for oﬂ‘ering. Mina Steele
was the lealt diecompoeed of the three by their pretence ;
and it was in their power to reconcile her to it entirely.
Would either of them only have given her a full and
minute account of the whole alfnir between Marianne
and Mr Willoughhy, the would have thought herself
amply rewarded for the cacriﬁce ' of the belt place
h the ﬁre after dinner, which their arrival occacioned.
gut thin conciliation wan not granted; for though the
often threw out expreuione of pity for her tiller to
Elinor, and more than once dro ped a reﬂection on the
incomtancy of beaux before ' nne, no eﬁ’eet we:
produced, but a look of indifference from the former or
of iii-gust in the latter. An effort even yet lighter
might have made her their friend. Would they only
have laughed at her about the Doctor! But to little
were they, any more than the othen, inclined to oblige
her, that if Sir John dined from home, the might spend
a whole day without hearing any other millery on the
lubject than what she was kind enough to beeww on
hereelf.

All theae jealousiee and discontenta, however, were
to totally unsuspected by Mn Jennings, that ehe thought
it a delightful thing for the girls to be together; and
geneme congratulated her young friends every night,
on having escaped the company of a nu id old woman
to long. She joined them lometimes at ir John's, and
Iometimet at her own house; but wherever it wan, Ihe
alny came in excellent spirits, full of delight and im-

sense AND SENSIBILITY. 83

pomnce, attributing Charlotte’s well-doing to her own
care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail of
her situation, as only Mia Steele had curiosity enough
to desire. One thin M disturb her; and of that she
made her daily comp int. Mr Palmer msinuined the
common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex, of all
infants hein alike; and though she could plainly per-
ceive at di rent times the most striking resemblance
between this baby and every one of his relations on both
sides, there was no convincing his father of it; no per-
suading him to believe that it was not exactly like
0/ gym other baby of the same age; nor could he even
brought to acknowledge the simple proposition of in
being the ﬁnest child in the world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune which
about this time befcll Mrs John Dashwood. It so
happened that while her two sisters with Mrs Jennings
were ﬁrst calling on her in Harley-street. another of
her acquaintance had dropped in—a circumstance in
itself not apparently likel to produce evil to her. But
while the imaginations a other people will carry them
away to form wrong judgments of our conduct, and to
decide on it by slight appearances, onc’s happiness must
in some measure be always at the more of chance. 1n
the present instance, this last-arrived ady allowed her
fancy so far to outrun truth and probability, that on
'merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods, and '
‘ understanding them to be Mr Duhwood's sisters, she
immediatel concluded them to be staying in Harley
street; on this misconstruch produced within 3 ds
or two afterwards cards of invitation for them, as we
as for their brother and sister, to a small musical party
at her house. The consequence of which was, that
Mrs John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to
the exceedingly reat inconvenience of sending her
carriage for the iss Dashwoods, but, what was still

84 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

wont, mutt be enbject to all the unpleasantneu of
up ring to treat them with attention: and who could
«I that the might not expect to go out with her a
second time The power of dimppointing them, it was
true, must alwaye be here. But that was not emu ;
for when people are determined on a mode of con act
which they know to be wrong, they feel injured by the
ex rcctntion of anything better from them.
rianne had now been brought by degrees .0 much

into the habit of going out every day, that it we! become
a matter of indiKemnce to her whether she went or not:
and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every
evening's engagement, though without expecting the
smallest amueernent from any, and very often without
knowing till the last moment where it wan to take her.

To her dress and appearance she was growing so
perfectly indiﬁ'urcnt, on not to bestow half the considera-
tion on it, during the whole of her toilette, which it
received from Miss Steele in the ﬁrst live minute: of
their being together, when it was ﬁnished. Nothing
escaped lur minute observation and general curioaity;
she saw everything, and asked everything; was never
eaay till she knew the price of every rt of Marianne’l
dress; could have guessed the num r of her gowns
altogether with better judgment than Marianne herlelf,
and was not without hope: of ﬁnding out before they
parted, how much her washing cost per week, and how
much the had every year to spend upon lrcraclf. The
impertinence of these kind of scrutinres, moreover, was
generally concluded with a compliment, which though
meant an it: douceur, was considered by Marianne u
the greatest impertineoce of all ; for after undergoing an
examination into the value and make of her gown,
the colour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her
hair, the was almoot sure of being told that upon “ her
word she looked vastly smart, and she dared to say
would make a gmt many conquests.”

SENSE AND SENSlBle. 85

With such encouragement as this, was she dismissed
on the present occasion to her brother’s caniage; which
they were ready to enter ﬁve minutes after it stopped at
the door, a punctuality not very agreeable to their
n'ster-in-law, who had preceded them to the house of
her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay
on their part that might inconvenience either herself or
her coachman.

The emu of the evening were not very remarkable.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended a
great many people who had real taste for the perfor-
mance, and n grent many more who had none at nil;
and the perfomicrs themselves were. as usual, in their
own estimation, and that of their immediate friends, the
first private performers in England.

As Elinor was neither musical, nor aﬂ'ecting to he
so, she made no scruple of turning awa her eyes ﬁom
the grand pisnoforte, whenever it suite her, and unre-
strained even by the presence of a harp, and a violen-
cello, would iix them at pleasure on any other object in
the room. In one of these excursive glances she perceived
among the group of young men, the very he who had given
them a lecture on toothpick-cases at Gray’s. She per-
ceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, and
speaking familiarly to her brother; and had deter-
mined to find out his name from the latter, when they
both came towards her, snd Mr Dashwood introduced
him to her as Mr Robert Fen-an.

He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his
head into a bow which assured her as plainly as words
could have done, that he was exact] the coxcomb she
had heard him described to be by Lucy. Happy had
it been for her if her regard for Edward had depended
less on his own merit, than on the merit of his nesrest
relations. For then his brother's bow must have given
the ﬁnishing stroke to what theill-humour of his mother

85 sense nun sensrnru-rv.

Ind aiuer would have begun. But while the wondered
at the difference of the two young men, the did not ﬁnd
that the emptineu and conceit of the one put her at all
out of charity with the modelty and worth of the other.
Why they were different, Robert explained to her him-
Iclf In the mom of a quarter of an hour’t conversation;
for, talking of hi! brother, and lamenting the extreme
gaucberic which he really believed kept him from mixing
in proper toeiety, he candidly and generoucly attributed
it much lL'll to any natural deﬁciency, than to the mic-
fortune of a private education; while he himeelf, though
probably without any particular, any material euperiori

y nature, merely from the advantage of a. public echoo ,
wan an well ﬁtted to mix in the world as any other
man.

“ Upon my soul,” he added, “ I believe it is nothing
more : nnd so I often tell my mother, when ahe in
grieving about it. ‘My dear madam,’ I ulwuyl any to
her, ‘you must make yourself easy. The evil in now
irrenrcdiablc, and it has been entirely your own doing.
Why would you be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert,
against your own judgment, to place Edward under
private tuition, at the most critical time of his life? If

on 1er only sent him to Weetminater at well at myself,
instead of sending him to Mr Pratt’s, all this would
have been prevented.’ This ll the way in which I
always consider the matter, and my mother is perfectly
convinced of her error."

Elinor would not oppose his opinion, became what-
ever might be her general estimation of the advanuge of
a public school, she could not think of Edward’s abode
in Mr Pratt's famil with any ﬁnﬁction.

“ You reaide in ﬂevonshire, I think," was llll next
observation, “in a cottage near Dawlish.”

Elinor set him right as to its situation, and it seemed
rather eurprieing to him that anybody could live in

sense AND sensmu'rv. 87

Devonehire without living near Dawlieh. He hertowed
:1: hearty approbation, however, on their of
uee.

“ For my own part,” said he, “I am exceedvely
fond of a cottage ; there it always to much comfort, so 
much elegance about them. And I retest. if I had
any money to a re, I should buy a li e land and build
one mylelf, wi 'n a short dinner: of London, where I
might drive myself down at any time, and collect a few
friend: about me and be happ . I advise everybody
who is going to build, to butldyn cottage. My friend
Lord Courtland came to me the other city on urpoae
to ink in advice, and laid before me‘three iﬂ'erent
plane of nomi’e. I was to decide on the beat of
them. ‘ My dear Courdand,’ said I, immediately
throwing them all into the lire, ‘do not ado either of
them, but b all means build -a cottage.’ ed that, I
fIncy, will the end of it."

“ Some people imagine that there can be no accom-
modation, no e in a cottage; but this in all a
ntietake. I warm month at my friend Elliott’s near
Dnrtford. Lady Elliott Villth to give a dance. ‘ But
how can it be done?’ laid the; ‘ my dear Perm-e, do
tell me how it it to he managed. There ll not a room
in this cottage that will hold ten couple, and where can
the an be 2 ’ I immediately taw thatthere could he
no ' culty in it, so I said, ‘My dear Lady ElliottI
do not be uneasy. The dinin parlour will admit eighteen
couple with ease; card-tab eI may be placed in the
drawing-room; the library may be 0 for tea and
other refrahmentr; and let the upper set out in the
Ialoon.’ Lady Elliott wan delighted with the thought.
We mentored ~ the dining-room, and found it would
hold exactly eighteen couple, and the affair war ar-
. ranged precieely after my plan. So that in fact, you
lee, if people do but know how to set about it, every

88 snusn AND seusruru'rv.

comfort may be at well enjoyed in a comge as in the
most lpaciout dwelling."
Elinor agreed to It all, for she did not think he
deserved the com liment of rational oppoeition,
As John Dan wood had no more pleasure in mul'c
' than hit eldest litter, his mind wat equall at liberty to
ﬁx on anything elae; and a thought strut: him during
the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her approbation, when they got home. The considera-
tion 0 Mrs Dennison’s mistake, in supposing his linen
their guests, had suggested the propriety of their being
really invited to become ouch, while Mrs Jenniugt's en-
‘ gagemenu kept her from home. The expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was
altogether an attention which the delicacy of hi: con-
scienCe inled out to be requisite to its complete
enfranchnement from his promise to hit father. Fanny
wan startled at the proposal.

“ I do not tee how it can be done,” said she, “ with-
out aﬁi'onting Lady Middleton, for they spend every
day with her; otherwiae I should be exceedingly glad
to do it. You know I am always ready to pay them
any attention in my power, as my taking them out this
evening them. But they are Lady Middleton’s viiton.
How can I ask them away from her?"

Her husband, but with great humility, did not see the
force of her objection. “They had already spent a
week in this manner in Conduit-street, and Lady
Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the
name number of days to such near relations."

ifanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigour,
u ..

“ My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it
was in my power. But I had just settled within myself
to ink the Miss Steeles to apend a few days with us.
They are very well-behaved, good kind of girlt; and I

sense AND sensxnm'rv. 89

think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so
very well by Edward. We can ask your sisters some
other year, you know; but the Miss Steele: may not
hein townan more. [am sure youwill like them;
indeed, you like them, you know, very much already,
and so does my mother; and they are such favourites
with Harry! "

Mr Dashwood was convinced.- He saw the accu-
sity of inviting the Miss Steel" immediately, and his
conscience was paciﬁed by the resolution of inviting his
linen another year; at the same time, however, slyly
suspectin that another year would make the invitation
needless hybringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's
wife, and ' ne u Meir visitor.

Farm , re' icin in her esoa , and mud of the reed
wit thatyhad proEured it, wrﬁe thepuext morning t4);
Lucy, to not her company and her sister’s for some
days in Bar ey-street, as soon so Lady Middleton could
spare them. This was enough to make Lucy really
and reasonably happy. Mrs Dashwood seemed actually
working for her herself, cherishing all her hopes, and
promoting all her views! Such an oyportunity of being
with Edward and his family was, above all things, the
most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feelings! It was an advantage that
could not he too gratefuly acknowledged, nor too speedily
made use of ; and the visit to Lady Middleton, which
had not before had any precise limits, was instantly
discovered to have been always meant to end in two
da time.

hen the note was shown to Elinor, u it was
within ten minutes after its arrival, it gave her, for the
lint time. some share in the expectations of Lucy; for
such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchmfed on ' so
short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-
will towards her arose from something more than merely

90 SENSE AND SBNSIBIUTV.

malice against henelﬁmd nightbebmghghytime
mdaddmmdoeverythingzhatLu wiahed. Her

ﬂaueryhadalmdymbduedtheprideo LndyMiddle- . .

tan,and made an entryinto the clone heartoerI
John Duhwood; and thele were eﬂ'ecu that laid oyen
the Probability of greater.

'lhe Min Steelee removed to Harley-meet, and all
that reached Elinor of their inﬂuence there, men
her expectation of the event. Sir John, who on
them more than once, brought home such account- of
the favour they were in u mutt he univemlly etriking.
Mn Daahwood had never been to much pleased with
any young women in her life an the wet with them 5
had given each of them a needle-book, made by lome
emigrant; called Lucy by her Chriatian name; and did
not know whether she should ever be able to part with
them.

 

Chili"? ﬁii'ﬂll

RS PALMER was to well at the endofa fort-
night, that her mother felt it no longer neceelary
to give up the whole of her time to her; and

contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day,
returned from that period to her own lwmc, and her own
habits, in which she found the Min Daahwoodl very
ready to reauume their former share.

About the third or fourth mornin aﬁer their being
that re-eettled in Berkeley-street, rl Jenninga, on re-
turning from her ordinary visit to Mn Palmer, entered
the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting by herself,
with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her
to hear something wonderful; and giving her time only
to form that idea, began directly to juttify it by laying,

 

waymxwuuam?

mwz

 

SENSE AND SENSIBXLITY. ' 91

“Lord! my dear Miss Duhwood! have you heard
the news P "

" No, ma'sm. What is it i ”

'“ Something so strange! But on shall hear it all.
When I got to Mr Palmer’s, I end Charlotte quite
in a fuss about the child. She was sure it was ve ill
—it cried, and fretted, and was all over prim es. 0 I
looked at it directly, and ‘ Lord! my dear, says I, ‘ it
is nothing in the world but the red-gum;’ and nurse
said 'ust the same. But Charlotte, she would not be
sati ed, so Mr Donavan was sent for; and luckily he
happened to be just come in from Harley-street, so he
sﬂped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the
c d, he said just as we did, that it was nothing in the
world but the red-gum, and then Charlotte was easy.
And so, just as he was going away again, it came into
my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to
think of it, but it came into my head to ask him if there
was any news. 80 upon that, he emirked, and limpercd,
and looked grave, and seemed to know something or
other, and at last he said in a whisper, ‘ For fear any
unpleasant report should reach the mug ladies under
your eare M to their sister’s indisposttion, I think it ad-
visable to say, that I believe there is no great mean for
alarm; I hope Mrs Dashwood will do very well.’ "

“Whatl is Fanny ill 3”

“That is exactly what I said, my dear. ‘ Lordl '
says I, ‘ia Mrs Dashwood ill?’ So then it all ante
out; and the long and the short of the matter, by all I
can lenm, seems [to] be this :—Mr Edward Ferrars,
the very young man I used to joke with you about (but
however, as it turns out, I am monstrous glad there
never was anything in it), Mr Edward Fermrs, it seems,
has been engaged above this twelvenwnth to my cousin
Lucy !—There's for you, my dear l—And not a crea-
ture knowing a syllable of the matter except Nancy !—

91 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Could you have believed such a thing possible Q—There
is no great wonder in their liking one another; but that
matter! should be brought so forward between them, and
nobody suspect it! Tba: is strange !—I never be ed
to see them together, or I am sure I should have nd
it out directly. Well, and to this was kept a great
secret, for fear of Mrs F err-an; and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter,—
till this very morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a
well-meaning creature, but no conjuror, t it all out.
‘ Lord ! ’ thinks she to herself, ‘they are 1 so fond of
Lucy, to be sure they will make no difﬁculty about it ; ’
and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all
alone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to
come—for she had just been saying to your brother, onl

ﬁve minutes before, that she thought to make a mate

between Edward and some lord's daughter or other, I
forget who. So you may think what a blow it was to
all her vanity and pride. She fell into violent hystericl
immediately, with such scream as reached your brother’s
ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-room down-
stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the
country. So up he ﬂew directly, and a terrible scene
took lace, for Lucy was come to them by that time,
little reaming what was going on. Poor soul! I pity
lur. And I must wa think she was used very hardly;
for your sister scolded like any fury, and won drove her
into a fainting fit. Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and
cried bitterly; and your brother, he walked about the
room, and said he did not know what to do. Mrs
Dashwood declared th should not stay a minute longer
in the house, and your rother was forced to go down
upon bi: knees too, to persuade her to let them stay till
they had packed up their clothes. Tbm she fell into
hysterics again, and he was so frightened that he would
send for Mr Donavan, and Mr Donavan found the

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 93

house in all this uproar. The carriage was at the door
ready to take my poor cousins away, and they were
stepping in as he came of; poor Lucy in such a condi-
tion, he says, she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she
was almost as bad. I declare, I have no patience with
your sister; and I hope, with all my heart1 it will be a
match in spite of her. Lord! what a mkin rpoor Mr
Edward will be in when he hears of it! 0 have his -
love used so scornfullyl for they say he is monstrous
fond of her, as well he may. I should not wonder, if
he was to be in the greatest of: passion! and Mr
Donavan thinks just the same. He and I had a great
deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that he is
gone back again to Harley-street, that he may be within
call when Mrs Ferrars is told of it, for she was sent for
as soon as ever m cousins left the house, for your sister
was sure :5: wo d be in hysteria too; and so she may,
for what I care. I have no pity for either of them. I
have no notion of people’s making such a to-do about
mone and greatness. There is no reason on earth why
Mr dward and Lucy should not marry; for I am cure
Mrs Ferraro may afford to do very well her son;
and though Lucy has next to nothing rersell', she
knows better than anybody how in make the most of
everything; and I dare say, if Mrs Femm would only
allow him ﬁve hundred 3-year, she would make as good
an a parance with it as anybody else would with eight.
Lord] how snug th might live in such another cottage
as yours—or a little 'gger—with two maid: and two
men; andIbelieveI couldhelpthemtoa housemaid,
for my Betty has a sister out of place, that would it
them exactly.”

Here Mm Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had
time enough to collect her thoughts, she was able to give
such an newer, and make such observations, as the sub-
ject might naturally be suppooed to produce.—-Hnm to

94 SENSE AND SERSlBllm.

ﬁnd that the was not lide of any extraordinary
iutereatin it; that Mn mninge an all: had oflaue
often might be the caae) ceaaed Io
herat amchedto Edward; and happy above allthe
rut, in the abeence of Marianne, she felt very well able
to areal: of the aﬁir without embarraan and to give
herjudgmcnt, an the believed. with on the
oonductofevu-yoneconnemedinit.

She could hardly determine whather awn expecta-
n'on of its event really was ;——though the earne‘ly tried
todrivcawa thenotionofiuheingpouihletoend
otherwiaeat amthan inthe Inrriageof Edwardand
Lucy. What Mn Fer-ran would ﬂy and do, though
there could not be a douhofiummrgahewaaanxioul
m hm; and still more anxious to know how Edward
would conduct Minnelli—For Li— she felt much com-
passion ;—for Lucy ve little—and it coat her name
pains to irocum that lit eg—for the rest of the party
none at l.

As Mr: Jmningt could talk on no other subject,
Elinor noon saw the neoeality of preparing Marianne for
in diacussion.—No time war to be lost in undecu‘ving
her, in making her acquainted with the real trulyand in
endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by when,
without betraying that she felt any uneasine- for her
sister, or any resentment against Edward.

lilinor’l ollicc wua a [minful own—She wan going to
remove what the really believed to be her sister's chief
conaolation,—r.o give Inch particular: of Edward, :5 the
feared would ruin him ﬁtr ever in her good
and to make Marianne, by a reaemblnnce in their situa-
tiona, which to ba- fancy would ocean strong, feel all her
own dinppointment over again. But unwelcome In such
a tank mun be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor
therefore hastened to perform it.

Shewavery farfromwiahing tadwell ouher own

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 95

feelings, or to represent herself as suffering much, any
otherwisethan as the self—command she had practised
since her ﬁrst knowledge of Edward's en a ment, mi ht
suggest a hint of what was practicable to arianne. er
narrau'on was clear and simple; and though it could not
be given without emotion, it was not accompanied
violent agitation, nor irn gﬁeﬂ—Tba! belonged
rather to the hear-er, for arianne listened with horror,
and cried excessively. Elinor was to be the comforter
of others in her own dime-es, no less than in theirs;
and all the comfort that could be given by assurances of
her own composure of mind, and a very earnest vindica-
tion of Edward from every charge but of irnpnulence,
was readil offered.

But arianne for some time would 've credit to
neither. Edward seemed a second Will‘ou hby; and
acknowledging as Elinor did, that she bad oved him
most sincerely, could she feel less than herself I As for
Luc Steele, she considered her so totally unnminble, so
abso utely incapable of attaching s senible man, that she
could not be permaded at ﬁrst to believe, and afterwards
to pardon, any former affection of Edward for her. She
would not even admit it to have been natural; and
Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that
which only could convince her, a. better knowledge of
mankind.

Her ﬁrst communication had reached no farther than
to state the fact of the engagement, and the length of
ﬁnse it had existed. Marianne’s feelings had then broken
in, and put an end to all regularity of detail; and for
some time all that could be done was to soothe her dis-
tress, lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment.
The first question on her side, which led to farther
pu'ticulars, was——

" How long has this been known to you, Elinor?
Has he written to you 3"

96 sums: AND SENSlBer.

“I have known it thue four month. When Lucy
that came to Barton-park last Novernber,the told me in
conﬁdence of her engagement."

At thete words, arianne’l eyes expreued the u-
tonichment which her li could not utter. Aﬁer n
pane: of wonder, the exc aimed——

“ Four montlu l—Have you known of this Mr
month: 2 "—

Elinor conﬁrmed it.

“What l—while unending me in all my misery. hu
thin been on your heart 2 and I have repmached you for
hein happy! "—

“ twu not ﬁt that you ohould then know how much

l was the revere.”—

“ Four months! " cried Marianne again. “ So calm !
to cheerful I How have you been supported?”

“ By feeling that I was doing my duty. My
mini” to Lucy, obliged me to be secret. I owed it to

, therefore, to avoid giving any hint of the truth;
and I owed it to my family and fnenda not to create in
them a Iolicitude about me, which it could not he in
my power to tatiefy."

Marianne eeemed much Itruck.

“ I have very often wished to undeceive youreelf and
my mother,” added Elinor; “ and once or twice I
have attempted it ;——but without betraying my must, I
never could have convinced you.”

“ Four months !—-and yet you loved him I”

“Yes. But I did not love only hirn;—-and while
the comfort of others was dear to me, I wan glad to
spare them from knowing how much I felt. Now, I
can think and speak of it with little emotion. I would
not have you suffer on my account; for I auure you I
no longer auﬂ‘er materially myself. I have many thing:
to support me. I am not conecioua of having provoked
the disappointment by any impnrdence of my own, and

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. ’9']

I have home it as much as possible without spreading it
farther. I acquit Edward of all essential miseonduet.
I wish him very happy; and I am so sure of his always
doing his duty, that though now he may harbour some
regret, in the end he mun become so. Lucy does not
want sense, and that is the foundation on which every—
-thingaﬁood m be built. And after all, Marianne,
aﬁer that is 'tching in the idea of a single and
constant attachment, and all that can be said of one's
happiness depending entirely on any‘pam'cular person, it
is not meant—it is not fit—it is not possible that it
should be so. Edward will marry Lucy ; he will marry a
woman superior in rson and understanding to half her
sex; and done an habit will teach him to forget that
he ever thought another superior to 1m."

“ If such is your way of thinking,” said Marianne, “if
thelossofwhatismostvaluedis so easilyto be made
up h something else, our resolution, your self-com-
mamz are perhaps a ittle less to be wondered at.
They are brought more within my comprehension.”

“I understand you. You do not so that I have
ever felt much. For four months, riannc, I have
had all this han 'ng on my mind, without being at
liberty to speak 0 it to a single creature; knowing that
it would make you and my mother most unhappy when-
ever it were explained to you, t unable to prepare you
for it in the least. It was to! me—it was in a manner
forced on me by the very person herself whose prior
engagement mined all myIprospects; and told me, as I
thought, with triumph. his person’s suspicions, there-
fore, I have had to oppose, by endeavouring to appear
indifferent where I have been most deeply interested;
And it has not been only once; I have had her hopes
and exultation to listen to again and again. I have known
myself to be divided from Edward for ever, without
hearing one circummnce that could make me less desire

ll. 6

98 sense nun SENSIIIILITV.

the connexion. Nothing hat proved him unworth ; nor
huanythingdeeluedhimrndilferentwme. have
had to contend againn the unkindneu of hi- sitter, end
the ineolence of bio mother, Ind have euﬂ'ered the pun-
ishment of an attachment without enjoying iu advantage;
And all this has been going on at a time when, no you
too well know, it has not been my only
If you can think me capable of ever feelin y you
may suppose that I have tuﬂered now. he 00

of mind with which I have brought mylelf at pment to
comider the matter, the coneolation that I have been V
willing to Idmit, have been the effect of coth and
painful exertion g—they did not Ipring up of tluerruelvee 1
they did not occur to relieve m spirit: at ling—no,
Marianne. Thu, if I had not been bound to Iilenoe,
perhngu nothing could have kept me entirely—not even
what owed to my dcnrcet friends—from openly thawing
that I wait «my unhappy.”

Marianne wu quite subdued.

“ Oh! Elinor, ’ she cried, “ you have made me hate
myself for ever. How barbaroue have I been to you! .
—you, who have been my only comfort, who have
borne with me in all my misery, who have teemedm be
only suffering for me l—In thin my gratitude? Ia thin
the only return I can make you? Became your merit
cries out upon myself, I have been trying to do it army."

The tenderest careuea followed this confession. In
Inch 3 frame of mind :- Abe was now in, Elinor had no
diﬁicul in obtaining from her whatever prowl-e she
requir 3 and, at her requeet, Marianne engaged never
to (peak of the affair to any one with the lean appear~
ance of bitterness ;-—to meet Lucy without betraying the
umalleet increase of dislike to her ;—a.nd even to Ice
Edward himself, if chance should bring them together,
without any diminution of her \uual cordiality. Theme
were great concessions, but where Marianne felt that Ihe

SENSE AND SENSHIHJTY. 99

had injured, no reparation could be too much for her to

make.

She performed her romise of ba'ng discreetto ad-
miration. Shentten to all that Mn Jennings had to'
say upon the uhjeet with an unchanging complexion,
dissented from her in nothing, and was heard three times
to say, “Yes, ma’am.” She listened to her praiae of
Lucy with only moving from one chair to another, and
when Mrs Jennings talked of Edward’s aﬁection, it cost
her only a npaam in her throat.‘ Such advances towards
heroism in her timer, made Elinor feel equal to anything
herself.

The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a
visit from their brother, who came with a most serious
aspect to talk over the dreadful affair, and bring them
new: of his wife. I ’

i “ You have heard, suppoae,’ said he with
eolemnity, as soon as he was seated, “of thesvleury‘
shocking dilcowry that took place under our roof
yesterday." . .

They all looked their went; it seemed too awful a
moment for speech.

“ Your sister,” he continued, “ hna eulfcred dread-
fully. Mra Ferrars too—in short, it his been a scene
of such complicated distresa; but I will hope that the
atom may be weathered without our being, any of un,
quite overcome. Poor Fanny! she was in hyuerics all

emerday. But I would not alarm you too much.

onann says there is nothing materially to be ap-
prehended; her constitution in a good one, and her
resolution equal to anything. She has home it all with

, the fortitude of an angel! She saye she never shall
think well of anybody again; and one cannot wonder
at it, aﬂer being so deceived L—meen'ng with each in-
gratitude, where so much kindness had been shown, so
much conﬁdence had been placed. It was quite out of

20° SENSE AND SBNSIBILI‘I‘V.

the benevolence of her heart that she had ulred there
young women to her houoe; merely became she thought
they deserved some attention, were harmleu, well-
'hehaved girls, and would be pleuant companions; for
otherwite we both wiohed very much to lure invited
you And Marianne to he with or, while your kind friend
there we: attending her daughter. And nowto be no ’
rewarded! ‘I with with all my henrt,’ lye poor '
Funny in her affectionate way, ‘ that‘we had Inked your
aiotern inatead of thern.’ ”

Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done,
he went on.

“What poor Mrs Ferraro ruffeer when ﬁm Fanny
hrolte it to her, in not to be described. While the with
the truest affection had been planning a moot eligible
connexion for him, was it to be supposed that he could
be all the time secretly engaged to another person i—
euch a Inapicion could never have lentered her head I If
the su led an reputation eaewhere, it could not
be in ii: quartet}, ‘ The", to he Inre,’ laid the, ‘I
might have thought myself safe.’ She war quite in en
agou . We consulted together, however, as to what
uhou d be done, and at last the determined to lend for
Edward. He came. But I am lorry to relate what
ensued. All that Mrs Ferraro could ﬂy to make him
put an end to the engagement, assisted, too, at you may
well luppose. by my argumenu, and Fanny'l entreotiee,
was of no avail. Duty, nﬂ‘eetion, everything war die-
regarded. I never thought Edward to etubborn, Io
unfeeling, before. Hie mother explained to him her
liberal designs, in case of his marrying Mice Morton;
told him the would settle on him the Norfolk «rate,
which, clear of land-tax, bringl in a good thoumnd a-
yenr; oﬁ'eted even, when matter: grew deepeme, to
make it.twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if he
still perniited in thin low connexion, repmented to him

SENSE AND SINSlBle. lo!

the certain penury that must attend the match. His
own two thousand pounds she protested should be his
all; she would never see him again 5 and so far would
she be from aﬂ'ording him the smallest assistance, that
if he wereto enter into any profession with a view of
better support, she would do all in her power to prevent
his advancing in it.”

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped
her hands together and cried, “ Gracious Godl an
this be possiblel ”

“ Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied her
brother, “ at the obstinacy which could resist such
arguments as these. Your exclamation is very natural."

Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered
her promises, and forbore.

" All this, however," he continued, “ was urged in
vain. Edward said very little; but what he did say
was in the most detemuned manner. Nothing could
prevail on him to give up his engagement. He would
stand to it, coat him what it might. '

“ Then," cried Mrs Jennings, with blunt sincerity, no
longer able to be silent, “ he has acted like an honest
man. I beg your pardon, Mr Dashwood, but if he had
done otherwise, I should have thought him a rascal. I
have some little concern in the business, as well as your-
self, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there
is not a better kind of girl in the world, nor one who
more deserves a good husband."

John Dashwood was greatly astonished ; but his
nature was calm, not open to provocation, and he never
wished to offend anybod , especially anybody of good

, fortune. He therefore rep 'ed, without any resentment—a

“ I would by no means ‘ It disrespectfully of any
relation of yours, madam. m Lucy Steele II, I dare
say, a very deserving young woman, but in the present
case, you know, the connexxon must be impossible. And

I02 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

whave entered iritouecretengagemtwith nymg

’ man under her uncle’s care, the Ion of a woman coped-
ally of such very large fortune on Mn Ferraro, isperhapl
altogether a little extraordinary. In short, I do not
mean to reﬂect upon the behaviour of m whom
you have a regard for, Mn Jennings. e all wish her
extreme] happy, and Mn Ferrars’a conduct throughmrt 
the whoe has been such an every conscientioul, good
mother, in like circumstancet, would adopt It had
been digniﬁed and liberal. Edward has drawn his own
lot, and I fear it will be I bad one.”

Marianne sighed out her eimilar a rehension; and
Elinor’s heart wrung for the feelings 0 Edward, while
braving hie mother’s threats, [or a woman who could not
reward him.

“ Well, sir,” laid Mr: Jennings, “and how did it
end 2" »

“I am terry to my, ma'am, in a most unhappy rup-
ture—Edward is dismissed for ever from hie mother's 4.
notice. He left her home yesterday, but where he is

one, or whether he is still in town, I do not know;
or we of course can make no inquiry."

“ Poor young man ! and what is to become of him i”

” What indeed, ma’am! It it a melancholy con-
sideration. Born to the prospect of Iuch nﬂiuencel I
cannot conceive a simation more deplorable. The interest
of two thousand pounds—how can a man live on it !—
and when to that is added the recollection that he might,
hut for his own folly, within three months have been in
receipt of two thousand ﬁve hundred a-year (for Miss
Morton has thirty thousand pounds), I cannot picture to
myself a more wretched condition. We must all feel
for him; and the more no, because it is totally out of
our power to artist him.”

“ Poor young man I " cried Mn Jenningl, “ I am
sure he thould he very welcome to bed and board at my

SENSE AND SBNSIBILITY. 103

house; andeo I would tell him,ifI could see him. It
it not ﬁt that he ahould be living about at hia own charge
now, at lodging: and tavenu."

Elinor'e heart thanked her for Iuch kindneea towards
Edward, though Che could not lbrbear tmiling at the
form of it.

“ If he would only have done at well by hinuelf,”
laid John Duhwood, “u all hie friendt were diepoeed
Iodo byhim,he'might now have been in hit roper
nitration, and would have wanted for nothing. But I:
it it, it must be out of anybody'e power to auth him.
And there ll one thing more reparing again» him,
which mun be worse than all in mother haa deter-
mined, with a very natural kind of lpitit, to nettle that
estate u Robert immediately, which might have been
EdwardianI on proper condition; 1 left her this morning
with her lawyer, talking over the bueineu."

‘4 Well i ’ raid Mn Jennings, " that is bar revenge.
‘ Emybod he a way of their own. But I don’t think

’rnine woqu be to make one son independent become
another had plagued me.”

Marianne got up, and walked about the room.

“Can anything be more galling to the Ipirit of a
man,” continued John, “than to tee hll unger
brother in poeeetsion of an estate which mig t have
been hiI own? Poor Edwardl I feel for him tin-
oerely." >

A few minute. more spent in the lame kind of efﬁn-
Iion, concluded his vilit; and with repeated auunneee
on hie litter- that he really believed there wan no material
danger in Fanny’l indispoaition, and that they need not
therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladiee unanimoul in their 'eentimentl
on the present occasion, at far at least as it regarded
Mn Femn’a conduct; the Dashwooda’, and Edward’s.

Marinnne’t indignation burst forth as noon at he

104 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

quittcdthe room; and uhervehemeneemade reeerve
impossible in Elinor, and unneoemry in Mn Jenningu.
they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party.

Charm new”.

RS JENNINGS wu very warm in her price
of Edward'a conduct, but only Elinor and
Marianne understood it: true merit. 734, only

knew how little he had had to tempt him m be dio-
obedient, and how small war the conaolau'on, beyond the
coneciouaneta of doing right, that could rennin to him
in the lore of frienda and fortune. Elinor gloried in
hie integrity; and Marianne forgave all hie oﬂ'encea in
companion for his punishment. But though conﬁdence
between them mm, by this public diecovery, lettered to
ita proper «ate, it was not a Iubject on which either of
them were fond of dwelling when alone. Elinor uvoided
it upon principle, an tending to ﬁx Itill more upon her
thoughu, by the too wann, too positive anurancee of 7
Marianne, that belief of Edward I continued nifection
for hemlf, which she rather wished to do away; Ind
Marianne'a courage soon failed her, in trying to con-
vene upon a topic which always left her more dia-
utieﬁed with herself than ever, by the compel-icon it
necessarily produced between Elinor‘e conduct and her
own.

She felt all the force of that comparison; but not at
her sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now; the
felt it with all the pain of continual elf-reproach, re-
gretted most bitterly that the had never exerted henelf
before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. Her mind wan so
much weakened that the still fancied preeent exer-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 105

n'on impossible, and therefore it only dispirited her
more.

Nothing new was heard by them for s d: or two
afterwards, of affairs in Harley-meet, or ardett’s
Buildings. But though so much of the matter was
known to them already, that Mrs Jennings might have
had enough to do in rpreading that knowledge farther,
without seeking after more, she had resolved from the
ﬁrst to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to her coun'nl
as soon as she could; and nothing but the hindrance of
more visin than usual, had prevented her going to
them within that time.

The third day succeeding their knowledge of the
particulars, was so ﬁne, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw
many to Kensin ton Gardens, though it was only the
second week in arch. Mrs Jennings and Elinor were
of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the
Willoughbys were again in town, and had a constant
dread of meeting them, chose rather to stay at home,
than venture into no public a place.

An intimate acquaintance of Mrs Jennings 'oinL-d
them soon after they entered the Gardens, and ilinor
was not sol?i that by her continuing with them, and
enga ing all rs Jennings’s conversation, she was her-
self eft to quiet reﬂection. She saw nothing of the
Willoughhys, nothing of Edward, and for some time
nothing of anybody who could by any chance, whether
grave or gay, be Interesting to her. But at last, she
ound herself, .with some surprise, accosted by Miss
Steele, who, though looking rather shy, expressed great
ntisfsction in meeting them, and on receivin eneoura e-
, ment from the particular kindness of Mrs ennings, eﬂ
her own party for a short time, to join theirs. Mrs
Jennings immediately whispered to Elmor—

“Getitallout of her, my dear. She will tell uany-
thing ifyou ask. You seel cannot leave Mrs larke.”

106 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

It wan lucky, however, for Mr: Jenninge’l curioity,
sud Elinor’l too, that the would tell anything without
being auked, for nothing would otherwiee have been learnt.

" I am to ghd w nee you,” said Mil: Smele, taking
her familiarly by the arm, “ for I wanted to Ice you of
all thingl in the world ; " and then lowering her voice,
“ I suppose Mrs Jennings has heard all about it. It she
angry . ’

“ Not at all, I believe, with you."

“ That in a good thing. And Lady Middleton, in
:5: angry ?"

“I cannot suppose it ‘ble that she Ihould."

“ I am monstrous gla of it. Goodgﬂcioulld have
had such a time of it! I never saw Luc in ouch a rage
in my life. She vowed at ﬁrst the woul never trim me
up a new bonnet, nor do anything else for me again, I)
long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we
are as good friend: an ever. Look, she made me this
bow to my hat, and put in the feather last night. There
now, you are going to laugh at me too. But why Ihould
not I wear pink ribbon»? I do not care if it i: the
Doctor’s favourite colour. I am lure, for my part, I
should never have known he did like it better than any
other colour, if he had not happened to say. so. My
oourins have been no plaguing me? I declare eometirnel.
I do not know which way to look before them."

She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor
had nothing to my, and therefore noon judged it ex-
pedient to ﬁnd her way back again to the ﬁrst.

“ Well, but, Miss Dashwood," speaking triurn )hantly,
“people may say what they chuae about Mr erran’t
declaring he would not have Lucy, for it ’e no ruch a
thing, I can tell you; and it ’I quite a Ihame for such
ill-natured reports to be opread abroad. Whatever Lucy
might think about it herself, you know it wae no buri-
neaa of other people to set it down for certain."

SENSE AND SENSXBILI‘I'V. [07

“ I never heard anything of the kind hinted at before,
I assure on," said Elinor.

“0h did not you? But it war said, I know very
well, and by more than one; for Miss Godby told
Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses could expect
Mr Femrs to give u a woman like Miss Morton, with
thirty thousand pen to her fortune, ibr Lucy Steele,
that had nothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks
myself. And besides that, my cousin Richard laid
himself, that when it came to the point, he was afraid
Mr Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not
come near ml for three days, I could not tell what to
think myself ; and I believe in my heart Lucy gave it
all u for lost; for we came away from your brother's
W ncsday, and we saw nothing of him not all
Thursday, Friday, and Saturda , and did not know
what was become with him. nce Lucy tho ht to
write to him, but then her spirit rose against that. ow-
ever, this morning he came, just as we came home from
church; and then it all came out, how he had been sent
for Wednesday to Harley-street, and been talked to by
his mother and all of them, and how he had declared
before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and
nobody but Lucy’would he have. And how he had
been so worried by what passed, that as soon as he had
went away from his mother's house, he had got upon

1 his horse, and rid into the country somewhere or other;
and how he had staid about at an inn all Thursday and
Friday, on purpose to get the better of it. And after
thinking it all over and over again, he said it seemed to
him as If, now he had no fortune, and no nothing at all,
it would be quite unkind to k her on lo the engage-
ment, because it must be for her on, for he had nothing
but two thousand pounds, and no hope of anything else;
and if he was to go into orders, as he had some thoughts,
he could get nothing but a curacy, and how was they

108 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

to live upon that ?—He could not bear to think of her
doing no better, and so he begged, if the had the least
mind [or it, to ut an end to the matter directly, and
lave him to sh' for himtelf. I heard him say all thin
as plain as could possibly be. And it was entirely for
[Mr sake, and upon bar account, that he laid a word
about being off, and not in n his own. I will take my
oath he never dropt a syl able of being tired of her, or
of wishing to marry Miss Morton, or anything like it.
But, to be sure, Lucy would not ‘ve ear to such kind
of talking; so she told him direc y (with a great deal
about sweet and love, you know, and all that—Oh, In!
one can’t repeat such kind of things, you know)——she
told him directly, the had not the least mind in the
world to be off, for she could live with him upon luch
a trille, and how little soever he might have, she should
be very glad to have it all, you know, or somethin of
the kind. So then he was monstrous ha )py, and ked
on some time about what the shoal do, and they
agreed he should take orders irectly, and they must
wait to be married till he got a living. And' 'uot then
I could not hear any more, for my cousin ca ed from
below to tell me Mrs Richardson was com in her
coach, and would take one of us to Kentington Gar-
dens; so I was forced to go into the room and interns
them, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she did
not care to leave ltdward; to I just run upmin and put
on a pair of silk stockings, and came off with the
Richardsons.”

“ I do not understand what you mean by interrupting
them," said Elinor; “ you were all in the same room
together, were not you i "

“ No indeed! not us. La! Miss Dashwood, do
you think people make love when anybody else is by?
Oh! for shame !—-To be sure, you must know better
than that. (Laughing aﬂ'ectedly.)—No, no; they were

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 109

shut up in the drawing-room together, and all I heard
was only by listening at the door.” '

“ How i ” cried Elinor; “ have you been repeating
to me what you only learnt yourself by linening at the
door? I am son'yI did not know it before; for I
certainly would not have suffered you to give me par-
ticulars of a conversation which you ought not to have
known yourself. How could you behave so unfairly by
your sister? ” '

“Oh, la! there is nothin in I54. I onl stood at
the door, and heard what Igcould. And am sure
Lucy would have done 'ust the same by me; for, a
year or two back, when artha Sha and I had on
many oeerets together, she never ma any bones of
hiding in s closet. or behind I chimney-board, on

to hear what we sai ”
liner tried to talk of something else; but Miss
Steele could not be kept beyond a couple of minute!
from what was uppermost in her mind.

“ Edward talks of going to Oxford soon,” said she,
“ but now he is lodging at No. ——, Pall Mall. What an
ill-natured woman his mother is, an't shci And your
brother and sister were not ver kindl However,I
shan’t say anything against them to you ,~ and to be sure
they did send us home in their own chariot, which was
more than I looked for. And for my part, I was all
in : fright for fear your sister should ask us for the
huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but
however, nothing was said about them, and I took care
to keep mine out of sight. Edward have got some bun.
nets at Oxford, he says, so he must go there for a
time: and after tbal,ss soon ss he erm light upon a
bishop, he will be ordained. I wonder whst curacy he
will get l—Good gracious! (g'ggling as she spoke) I ’d
lay my life I know what In cousins will say, when they
hear of it. They will teli' me I should write to the

HO SENSE AND SENSlBILITV.

Doctor, to get Edward the cure of his new living. I
know they will; but I am cure would not do inch 8
thing for all the world.—' Lal' Ishnll any directly,
‘ I wonder how you could think of such a thing. I write
unIiutheDoctor, indeed! ”’ ‘

“Well,” said Elinor; “it is a comfort to be pre-
psar‘ed’agninst the worn. You have got your answer
it y.

Miss Steele was going to reply on the same eubject,
but the approach of her own party made another more
necessary.

“oh, la! here come the Richard-om. I had a
vaet deal more to say to you, but I must not stay away
from them not an longer. I assure you they are very
genteel people. e makes a monstrous deal of money, ‘
and they keep their own coach. I have not time to
wk to Mrs Jennings about it myself, but pray tell her

am quite happy to hear she in not in anger against ul,
and Lady Middleton the same ; and if anythin should
happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs ennings
Ihould want company,I am sure we should be very glad
to come and stay with her for as long a time as she likes.
I Iuppose Lady Middleton won't ask iii any more thin
bout. Good-bye; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not
here. Remember me kindly to her. La! if you have
not got your best spotted muslin onl—I wonder you
was not afraid ofita being torn.”

Such was her parting concern; for after thin, the
had time only to pay her farewell com limentl to Mrs
Jennings, before her company was 'med by Mrs
Rian : and Elinor was left in possession of know-
ledge which might feed her powers of reﬂection some
time, though she had learnt v little more than what
had been already foreseen andEllhre-planned in her own
mind. Edward’s maniage with Lucy was I: ﬁrmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remained

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. l l l

as absolutely uncertain, as she had concluded it would
be;—everything depended, exactly after her expecta-
tion, on his etting that preferment, of which, at present,
there seem not the smallest chance.

As soon as they renamed to the carriage, Mrs Jen-
ning was eager for information; but u Elinor wished to

read as little as possible intelligence that had in the
ﬁst place been so unfairly chained, she conﬁned herself
to the brief repetiu'on of such simple particulars, as she felt
assured that Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence,
would chute to have known. The continuance of
their engagement, and the means that were to be taken
for promotin its end, was all her communication; and
this prodch from Mrs Jennings the following natural
remark :—

" Wait for his having a living l—ay, we all know
how that will end ;——the will wait a twelvemonth, and
ﬁnding no good comes 0 it, will set down upon a curacy
of ﬁfty pounds a-year, with the interest of his two thou-
sand pounds, and what little matter Mr Steele and Mr
Pratt can give her.—'Then they will have a child every
yearl and Lord help ’eml how poor they will bel—
I must see what I can give them towards furnishing their
house. Two maids and two men indeed l—as I talked
of t’other da .-—-No, no, they must get a. stout girl of
all workm— tty’s sister would never do for than
new."

The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-
penny post, from Lucy herself. It was as follows :—

Bunc-rr’s Burmncs, Manly.

I hope my dear Miss Duhwood will excuse the
liberty take of writingto her : hut I know your friend-
ship ormewillmake you pleatedwhearsuchs
account of myself and my dear Edward, alter the
tronbler we have went through lately, therefore will make

I I? SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

no more apologies, but proceed to say that, thank God!
thoughwe have suffered dradﬁrlly, we are both quite
well now, and as happy as we must always be in one
anodrer’s love. We have had great trials, and greet
persecutions, but however, at the same time, gratefully
acknowledge many friends, yourself not the least among
them, whose great kindness I slulll alwaye thankfully
remember, as will Edward too, who I have mid of it.
I am sure lyou will be glad to hear, as likewise deaers
Jennings, spent two happy lﬁirrs with him yesterday
afternoon, he would not hear of our parting, though
earnestly did I, as I thought my duty required, urge
him to it for prudence sake, and would have parted for .
ever on the spot, would he consent to it ; but he said it
should never be, he did not regard his mother's anger,
while he could have my affections; our prospects are
not very bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and
for the best; he will be ordained shortly, and should it
ever be in your power to recommend him to anybody
that has a living to bestow, am very.sure you will not forget
us, and dear Mrs Jennings too, trust the will break a
good word for us to Sir John, or Mr Palmer, or any
friend that may be able to assist us.-——Poor Anne was
much to blame for what she did, but she did it for the
best, so I my nothing; hope Mrs Jennings won’t think
it too much trouble to give us a call, should she come
this way any morning, ’twould be a great kindness, and
my cousins would be roud to know hen—My paper
reminds me to concl e, and begging to be most grate-
fully and respectftu remembered to her, and to Sir
John and Lady Middleton, and the dear children, when
you chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,

I am, 802., 81c.

As soon as Elinor had ﬁnished it, she performed
what the concluded to be its writer’s real design, by

SENSE AND SENSIDILITY. “3

placing it in the hnndl of Mr- Jenninge, who read it
aloud with many comments of tatitfaction and pniee.

“ Very well indeed l—how pretu'ly the write: l—eye,
that wal quite pro r to let him be off if he would.
Thatwal uat like no .—-Poor Ioull I with I could

et him a iving with al my beam—She calls me deer
in Jennings, you lee. She is n good-hearted girl at
ever lived—Very well, won my Word. That nentenc:
iaveryprettilytumed. egyengillgonndeeeher
lure enou How attentive she in, to think of every-
bodyl— an); you, my dear, for Ihewing it me. It
in m pretty 5: letter at ever I saw, and does Lucy't
head and heart great credit."

Chintz: meat.

HE Min Duhwoode had now been rather more

than two months in town, and Marimne’a im-

‘ tience to be one increaaed every day. She

 Iighed r the air, the li rty, the quiet of the country;
Ind fencied that if anyplace could give her eue, Barton

' mmt do it. Elinor wu hardl lean anxioul than her-
Ielf for their removal, and o y so much lea bent on
in bein effected immediately, at that the was conscious
of the ‘ﬂicnltiet of so long a jaurney, which Marianne
could not be brought to acknowledge. She began,
hnwever, eerioualy to turn her thoughts toward: it:
accom liehment, and had already mentioned their withe-
to their kind hoetese, who reaitted them with all the
eloquence of her good-will, when a plan wan suggested,
which though detaining them from home yet I few
weeks longer. nppured w Elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. The Painters were to remove
to Cleveland about the end of March, for the Ear

II. H

"4 SENS! AND SENSIBILITY.

holiday” and Mn Jenningl, with both her ﬁ'ienda,
received a ve worm invitation from Charlotte to go
with them. hi- would not. in itself, have been
Iuﬁicient for the delicacy of Mine Daahwood;——htrt it
was enforced with so much real politeneu by Mr
Palmer himself, an, joined to the very great amend-
ment of hit manners awards them since her inner had
been known to be unhappy, induced her to accept it
with pleature.

When the told Marianne what the had done, how-
ever, her ﬁrst reply wu not very auspicious.

“ Cleveland ! ’ -—- she cried, with great agitation.
“ No, I cannot go to Cleveland.”

“ You forget,” aid Elinor gently, “that its duration
in not . . . . that it is not in the neighbourhood
of . . . ."

“ But it in in Somcrcctrhirc.—I cnnnot go into Somer-
ccuhirc.—'l‘hcrt-, when: I looked forward to going . . .
No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there.”

Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of over-
coming Inch feelings ;—¢hc only endeavoured to coun-
temct them by working on othen ;-— and reprencnted it,
therefore, an a measure which would ﬁx the time of her
renrming to that dear mother, whom the to much
wished to see, in a more eligible, more comfortable man-
ner, than any other plan could do, and perhapa without
any greater delay. me Cleveland, which was within
a few mile: of Bristol, the distance to Barton wag not
beyond one day, though a long day’n journey; and their
mother’r servant might eanl come there to attend
them down; and an there co d be no occasion for their
mying above a week at Cleveland, they might now he
at home in little more than three weelu’ time. A:
Marianne’r affection for her mother was sincere, it
mun triumph, with little diﬂiculty, over the imaginary
evil the had rtarted.

Sims: AND snusmu’rv. 115

Mrs Jennings was so far from being weary of her
guests, that she messed them vary earnestly to return
with her again In Cleveland. Elinor ms grateful
for the attention, but it could not alter their design;
and their modier’s concurrence being radii
everything relan've to their return was amn ' as far as
it could be ;—and Marianne found some re 'ef in draw-
ing u a statement of the hours that were yet In divide
her rorn Barton.

“ Ahl Colonel, I do not know what you and I
shall do without the Miss Dashwoods,”—was Mrs
Jennings's address to him when he ﬁrst called on her,
after their leaving her was sett.led——“ for they are quite
resolved upon omg home from the Palmers ;—nnd how
forlorn we shjl be, when I come back i—Lord! we
shall sit and pe at one another as dull as two cats."

Perha rs Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous
sketch 0 their future ennui, to provoke him to make
that offer which might give himself an escape from it—
and if so, she had soon afterwards good reason to drink
her object gained; for, on Elinor’s moving to the
window to mke more ex ’tiously the dimensions of
n rint which she was gomg to co y for her friend, he
foiiowed her to it with a look 0 pam'cular meaning,
and convened with her there for several minutes. The
eﬂ'ect of this discourse on the lady too, could not eecape
her observation ; for though the w too honourable to
listen, and had even changed her seat on purpose that
she mi ht not hear, to one close by the planoforte on
which rinnne was playing, she could not k herself
from seeing that Elinor changed colour, atten ed with
agitation, and was too intent on what he said, to pursue
her employment—Still farther in conﬁrmation of her

In the interval of Marianne’s turning from one
lesson to another, some words of the Colonel’s inevitably
reached her ear, in ,which he seemed to be apologising

H6 SINSI AND SENSIBILITY.

for the hardness of his house. This let the nutter
beyond a doubt. She wondered indeed at hie thinking
it necessary to do no ;-—but supposed it to be the taper
etiquette. What Elinor said in reply the co d not
diuingniah, but jud ed from the motion of her lip. that
the did not think I I any material objection ;—snd Mrs
Jennings commended her eart n'her r being so honest.
They then talked on for/a few minutes longer without
her catching a syllable, when another lucky top in
Marianne’a erformance brought her these words in the
Colonel’s m voice—

“ I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."

Astonished and nhockcd at so unlover-like o Ipeech,
she was almost ready to cry out, “ Lord! what rhould
hinder it! "—hut checking her desire, conﬁned herself
to thin silent ejaculation— V

“ This ll very strange l—Inrc he need not wait to be
older.”

This delay on the Colonel’s side, however, did not
seem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the
least; for on their breakin up the conference soon
afterwardn, and moving diﬂgrent ways, Mn Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and in a voice which
showed her to feel what she said-—

“i shall always think myself very much obliged to

on.’

y' Mrs Jennings was delighted with her gmtitude, and
on! wondered, that after hearing such a sentence, the
Co one] should be able to take leave of them, as he
immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go
without making her any reply l—She had not thought
her old friend could have made so indifferent a suitor. .

What had really paused between them was to this
eli'ecb—

“ l have heard," said he, with great companion, “ of
the injustice your friend Mr Femrs has suffered from

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY- I l 7

his famil 3 for if I understand the matter right, he has
been entirely cast off by them for persevenng in his
engagement with u very deserving young woman.—
Have I been rightly informed ?——Is it so?
Elinor told him that it was.
“ The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty," he replied, with
great feelin , " of dividing, or attempting to divide, two
ng peop e long amched to each other, is terrible ,—
Femn does not know what she may be doing—
whnt she may drive her son to. I have seen Mr
Ferrars two or three times in Harley-street, and am
much pleased with him. He is not a young man with
whom one can be intimately acquainted in s short time,
but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for his
own sake, and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.
I under-sand that he intends to take orders. Will you
be so good as to tell him that the living of Delaford,
now just vacant, as I am informed by this day’s post,
is his, if he think it worth his acceptance ;-——bnt dial,
perhaps, so unfortunately circumstanccd as he is now, it
may be nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it
were more valuablc.——It is n rectory, but a small one;
the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than
200 unds per annum, and though it is certainly capl-
ble 0 improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as to
aford him a very comfortable income. Such as it is,
however, my lesson in presenn'n him to it will be
ver§ great. ray assure him of it. '
linor’s.asmnlshment at this commission could hardly
hsve been greater, had the Colonel been really making
her an offer of his hand. The prefennent, which only
two da s before she had considered as hopeless for
Edwrmz was already provided to enable him to many;
-—nnd the, of all people in thewor|d, was ﬁxed on to
benow itl—Her emotion was such as Mrs Jennings
had attributed to a very different cause g—bnt whstever

118 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y.

minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might have a
share in that emotion, her esteem for the general be-
nevolence, and her gratitude for the 'cular ﬁ'iend-
ship, which together rompted Colone Brandon to this
act, were strongly ell, and warmly expressed. She
thanked him for it with all her hem, spoke of
Edward’s principles and disposition with that praise
which she knew them to deserve, Ind promised to
undertake the commission with pleasure, if it were
reall his wish to put oﬁ‘ no agreeable on oﬁice to
no er. But, at the same time, she could not help
thian that no one could so well perform it at him-
self. t was an oliice, in short, from ,which, unwilling
to give Edward the pain of receiving an obligndon from
ber, the would have been very glad to be spared her-
self ;-—but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal
delicac declining it likewise, still seemed so desirous
of its 'ng given through her means, that she would
not on any account make farther 0 position. Edward,
she believed, was still in town, an fortunately she had
heard his Iddrces from Miss Steele. She could under-
take therefore to infomi him of it in the course of the
day. After this had been settled, Colonel Brandon
began to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour; and tlms it wu
that he mentioned with regret, that the house wu
small and indilTerent;—an evil which Elinor, as Mrs
Jennings had supposed her to do, made very light of,
at least as far as regarded its size. ,

“The smallness of the house," said the, “ I cannot
imagine my inconvenience to them, for it will be in
pro rtion to their family and income."

y which the Colonel was surprised to ﬁnd that (be
Wu considering their mania e an the certain conse-
quence of the relentation; or he did not suppose it
possible that elaford living could supply such an

y‘-

ansr. AND snusrnxu-rv. {'19

income as ande in their style of life would vermin
to settle on—und e uid so.

“This little rectory can do no more than make Mr
Ferraro comfortable Is a bachelor; it cannot enable
him to marry. I am sorry to my that my patronage
end: with thin; and my inherent is hardly more ex-
tenn've. If, however, by any unforeeeen chance it
should be in my power to serve him further, I must
think very differently of him from whatI now do, if
Iain not ureadyta beueeful to him then.ul sin-
cerely wish I could beat present. What I urn now
doing indeed Iccms nothing at Ill, since it can advance
him no little toward: what must be hit” principal, his
only object of hap "new. Hi: marriage mun still be a
dirunt good ;—at east I am afraid it cannot take place
ve noon.”

uch was the Ientence which, when misunderstood,
so jultly oﬂ'endcd the delicate feelingu of Mre Jennings;
but after this narration of what really passed between
Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they Rood at the
window, the gratitude expreued by the latter on their
parting may pcrhapr appear, in general, not leu reason-
ably excited, nor less properly worded, than if it ind
arioen from an offer of marriage.

chum: it.

’ " ELL, Min Duhw " nid Mn Jennin
ugaciously uniling, as loan as the gen e-
- man hsd withdnwn, “I do not nk you
what the Colonel ha. been ﬂying to you; for though,
upon my honour, I .triedto keep out of hearing, I
could not help catching enough to understand his
bushels. And I more you I never wan better

120 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

pleated in my life, and I Willi you joy of it with all
my heart"

“ Thank you, ma’am," aid Elinor. “ It i: I matter
of great joy to me; and I feel the goodnetl of Colonel
Brandon moat sentibly. There are not many men who
would act as he has done. Few people have to com-

'omte a heart! I never was more atoniehed in
my life.”

“Lord! my dear, you are ve modest! I on't
the lean astonished at it in the wor d, for I have often
thought, of late. there was nothing more likely to
happen."

“ You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel'e
geneml benevolence; but at lean you could not foresee
that the oppommit would so ve noon occur.”

“ lSiportunity! ’ repeated rs Jenningt—“ 0h!
35 to at, when a man ha. once made up hie mind In
web a thing, oonxchow or other he will Ioon ﬁnd an
opportunity. Well, my dear, I with you joy of it
again and again; and if ever there war a happy couple
in the world, I think I shall won know where to look

- for them."

“ You mean on go to Delaford after them, I
mppoae," said Elinor, with a faint Irnile.

“Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. And u to the
house being a bad one, I do not know what the
Colonel would be at, for it in as good a one as ever I
saw.”

“ He ke ofitn being out ofr ‘r.”

“Wellzmand whose fault is that; why don't he
repair it P—who ahould do it but himself? ”

They were interrupted by the servant’l coming in,
to announce the carriage being at the door; and Mn
Jennings, immediate] preparing to go, laid—

“Well, my dear, must be gone before I have had
half my talk out. But, however, we may have it all

SENSE AND SENSIEILITV. 12!

over in the evening, for we shall be quite alone. I do

not uh you to go with me, for I dare lay your mind in

too full of the matter to care for company; and beide,

you must long to tell your Iieter all about it.”

begMarianne had left the room before the conversation
an.

“ Certainly, ma’am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but

> I shall not mention it at present to anybody else.”

“ Oh l very well," mid Mn Jenningn, rather die-
appointed. “ Then you would not have me tell it
Lucy, for I think of going as far at Holbom 00-day.”

“No, ma’am, not even Lucy, if you please. One
day’s delay will not he ve material; and till I have
written to Mr Ferraro, I think it ought not to be men-
tioned to Anybody else. I lhall do (be: directly. Itio
of imgomce that no time should be lost with him, for
he will, of count, have much to do relative to his
ordination.”

This ech at lint puzzled Mr. Jenninge exceed-
ingly. y Mr Ferraro was to be written to about it
in ouch a hurry she could not immediately com rehend.
A few momenu' reﬂection, however, produc a very

‘ happéiden, and the exclaimed—

“ h,hol Iundemnd you. Mr Ferrari is to be
the man. Well, so much the better for him. A , to
belure,he mun be ordained in readineu; and am
.verygladm ﬁnd thingl are so forward between you.
But, my deer, in not thin rather out of character!
Should not the Polonel write'himeelf? Sure, he in
the r n. '

light dmt quite under-land the beginning of Mn
Jenninge’l lpeech; neither did Ihc think it worth inquiring
into; and therefore only replied to in conclurion.

“ Colonel Brandon is co delicate a man, that he rather
wished any one to announce hie intention: to Mr F errarl
than himeelf.”

122 SEES]! AND SENSIBILITY.

“And so you are forced to do it. Well, Ibo: is an

odd kind of delicacy! However, I will not diwurb
ou stein her rin to write . You know

an (ooncErns £3: good-bye), my dear. I hf;

not heard of anything to please me so well since Charlotte

was brought to bed."

And away she went, but retuming again in a
moment— -

“ I have been thinking of Betty’s sister, my dear.
Ishould be very glad to get her so good a mistress.
But whether she would do for a lady’s maid, I am sure
I can’t tell. She is an excellent housemaid, and works
very well at her needle. However, you will think of
all that at your leisure.” '

" Certainly, ma’am,” replied Elinor, not hearing much
of what she said, and more anxious to he alone than to
he mistress of the subjch

How she should begin—how she should expreu her-
self in her note to Edward was now all her concern.
The Iarticular circumstances between them made a
diilicu ty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but she equally
feared to say too much or too little, and t deliberating
over her paper, with the n in her hand, till broken in
on the entrance of E ward himself.

e hnd met Mm .lennin s at the door in her way to
the carriage, us he came to cave his farewell curd ; and
the, after apologising for not returning herself, had
obliged him to enter h saying that Min Dashwood
was above, and wan to speak with him on Very
particular business.

Elinor had just been congratulating herself in the
midst of her perplexity, that however difﬁcult it might
be to express herself properly by letter, it was at least
preferable to giving the information by word of mouth,
when her visitor entered, to force her upon this greatest

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 123

exertion of all. Her astonishment and confirsion were
very great on his so sudden appearance. She had not
seen him before since his engagement became public,
and therefore not since his knowing her to be soquainted
with it; which, with the consciousness of. what she had
been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made
her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
He too was much distressed, and they sat down together
in a most promising state of embarrassment—Whether
he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming
into the room, he could not recollect; but determining
to he on the safe side, he made his :1 logy in form us
soon as he could say anything, other In 'ng a chair.

“ Mrs Jennings told me,” said he, “ that you wished
to speak with me, at least I understood her so—or I
certainly should not have intruded on you in such a
manner ; though, at the some time, I should have been
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you
And your sister; especially as it will most likely be some
time—4t is not probable that I should soon have the
pleasure of meeting you again. I go to Oxford to-
marrow."

“ You would not have gone, however," said Elinor,
recovering herself, and determined to get over what she
so much dreaded as soon as possible, “ without receiv- '
ing our good wishes, even if we had not been able to
give them in person. Mrs Jennings was quite right in
what she said. I have something of consequence to
inform you of, which I was on the point of communi-
cating by paper. I am charged with a most agreeable
office (breathing rather faster than usual on she spoke).
Colonel Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago,
has desired me to say, that, understanding you mean to
take orders, he has great pleasure in offering you the
living of Delafnrd, now 'ust vacant, and onl wishes it
were more valuable. A w me to congm you on

124 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

having no reepectahle and well-judging a friend, and to
join in hie with that the living—4t u about two hundred
I-year—were much more considerable, and such as
might better enable you w—u might be more than a
temporary accommodation to yourself—ouch, in thort,
u might establish Ill your views of htppinesl."

What Edward felt, n he could not any it himelf, it
cannot be expected that any one else Ihould lay it for
him. He [noted all the astonishment which ouch unex-
pected, which such unthought-of inforrnan'on could not
fail of excitin ; but he said only these two words—-

“ Colonel rundon ! ”

“ Yea,” continued Elinor, gathering more renolution.
a tome of the worst was over; " Colonel Brandon
meanc it as a testimony of his concern for what has
lately .for the cruel situation in which the un-
justiﬁa lc conduCt of your family has placed you—a
concern which, I am cure, Marianne, mylelf, and Ill your
friend. must share; and likewise as a proof of his chigh
esteem for your general chamter, and his parti ar
approbation of your behaviour on the preterit occasion."

“Colonel Brandon give me a living! —Can it

'hle?"
“The unkindneu of your own relations has made

you astonished to ﬁnd friendshi anywhere.”

“ No,” replied he, with In den conscioulness, “not
to ﬁnd it in you ,- for I cannot be ignorant that to you,
to your goodness, I owe it all. I feel it—[ would
expreu it if I could—but, as you well know, I am no
orator.”

“ You are very much mistaken. I do nature you that
you owe it entirel , at least almost entirely, to your own
merit, and Colone Brandon’s discemment of it. I have
had no hand in it. I did not even know, till I under-
stood his design, that the living was vacant ; nor had it
ever occurred to me that he might have Inch 3 living in

SENSE AND SEHSMLITY. [as

his As a friend ofmine,ofmyfsrnil ,hemay
amps—indeed I know he but, still greater p ensure in

towing it ; but, upon my word, you owe nothing to
my solicitation."

Truth obliged her to acknowledge some mull share
in the action ; but she was It the same time so unwilling
to appear as the benefach’ess of Edward, that she acknow-
ledged it with hesitation; which probably contributed
to ﬁx that suspicion in his mind which had recently
entered it. For a short time he sat deep in thought,
after Elinor had ceased to speak; at last, as if it were
rather an effort, he said—

“ Colonel Brandon seems A man of great worth and

tability. I have slways heard him spoken of as
m3: and your brother, I know, esteems him highly.
He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners
perfectly the gentleman.”
. “ Indeed,” replied Elinor, “ I believe that you will
find him, on farther acquaintance, all that you have
heard him to be; and u youwill be suchverynear
neighbours (for I undermnd the parsonage is almost
close to the mansion-house), it is particular y important
that he should be all this.”

Edward made no answer ; but when she had turned
away her head, gave her a look so serious, so earnest,
so nncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter
with the distance between the parsonageand the mansion-
house much greater.

“ Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St James's-
street,” said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.

Elinor told him the number of the house.

“I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks
which you will not allow me to give you; toassure
him ﬁrst he has made me a very—an exceedingly happy
man.

Elinor did not offer to detain him ; and they parted,

:26 sans: AND snusxan-v.

withsveryeamestassuraneeon bersideof herunoeas—
in; good wishes for his happiness in everychsnge of
situation that might befall him ; on In}, with rather an
attempt to return the me good-will, than the power of
expressing it.

“ When I see him again," said Elinor to herself, Is
the door shut him out, “I shall see him the husband of

Lucy."
And with this pleasin anticipation, she sat down to
reconsider the the words, and endeavour to

comprehend all the feelings of Edward; and, of course,
to reﬂect on her own with discontent.

When Mrs Jennings came home, though she returned
from seeing people whom she had never seen before,
and of whom therefore she must have a gut deal to
say, her mind was so much more occupied by the im-
portant secret in her possession, than by anything else,
that she reverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared.

“Well, my dear,” she cried, “I sent u up the
young man. Did not I do right .’—An I mppose
you had no great dilliculty.—-You did not ﬁnd him very
unwilling to accept your proposal 2”

“ No, ma’am; that was not very likely.”

“Well, and how soon will he be ready i—For it

seems all to depend upon that.”
‘ "Really," id Elinor, “I know so little of these
kind of forms; that I can hardly even conjecture ss to
the time, or the preparation necessary; but I suppose
two or three months will complete his ordimtion.’

“ Two or three months?” cried Mn Jennings;
“ Lord! my dear, how calmly you talk of itl and can
the Colonel wait two or three months! Lord bless
me !—-I am nure it would ut me quite out of patience.
—And though one would very glad to do a kindness
by poor Mr F erran, I do think it is not word: while to
wait two or three months for him. Sure, somebody

SENSE AND SENSIBIHTY. v 127

else might be found that would do u well—somebody
that is in order: al y."

“ My dear ma’am,’ said Elinor, “what can you be
thian of i—Why, Colonel Brandon’s only object is
to beo use to Mr Ferrari."

“ Lord bless you, my dear l-—Sure you do not mean
to persuade me that the Colonel only marries you for
the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr Femrsl ”

The deception could not continue after this; and an
explanation immediately took place, by which both
gained considerable amusement for the moment, without
an material loss of ha iness to either, for Mrs Jennings
mexchnngcd one arm of delight for another, and

' without forfeiting her expectation of the lint.

“Aye, aye, the ' ge is but a-unall one," said
she, after the first em}; of surprise and Intiafaction
was over, “and very likely may be out of repair; but to
hat a man a loguing, as I thought, for-a house that
to my knowl ge has ﬁve sitting-rooms on the ground-
lloor, and, I think the house-k r told me, could make
upﬁfteen bedsl—And to you to that had been used to
live in Barton Cottage! It secde quite ridiculous.—
But, my clear, we must touch up the Colonel to do
something to the parsonage, and make it comfortable
for them, before Lucy goes to it.”

“But Colonel Brandon doe: not seem to have any

‘ ides of the livind being enough to allow them to

I,

;%e Colonel lo I ninny, my dear; because he has
two thousand a-year himself, he thinks that nobody
else can many on lea. Take my word for it, that, if
I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Delaford Parson-
age before Michaelmas; and I am, sure I shan’t go if

Lucy en’t there."
E 'nor was quite out of her opinion, no to the prob- \Q

ability of their not waiting for anything more.

us sens: um msmurv.

Chapter $1,].

DWARD having arried hit thankt to Colonel
Brandon, proceeded with his 'nett to Lucy;
and such war the excels of it y the time he

reached Bartlen’t Buildingt. that the was tble to nature
Mn Jennings, who called on her again the next day
with her congratulations, that the had never teen him
in such spirit: before in her life.

Her own happiness, and her own tpiriu, were at
leatt very certain; and the ‘oined Mrt Jenningt moot
heartily in her expectation 0 their being all comfortably
together in Delaford Partonage before Mich-elm So
far wat the, at the tame time, from any hackwardnett
to give Elinor that credit which Edward would give
her, that the spoke of her friendship for them both with
the most grateful warmth, was ready to own all tha'r
obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on Miss Dashwood's rt, either preterit
or future, would ever urn-prise her, or the believed her
capable of doing anythin in the world for thote the
really valued. As for olonel Brandon, the was not
only ready to worthip him at a saint, but was moreover
tnin anxious that he should be treated at one in all
worldly concerns; anxious that his tithes thould be
raised to the moon; and secretly resolved to avail
herself at Delaford, as far as the postthy could, of hit
tervanu, hiv carriage, his cows, and hit poult%.

It was now above a week since John atth
had called in Berkeley-street, and at tince that time
no notice had been taken by them of his wife’s indis-
poaition, beyond one verbal inqui , Elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a vitit.—- his was an obligation,
however, which not only opposed her own inclination,
but which had not the attittance of any encouragement

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. [29

from her companions. Marianne, not contented with
aboolutel refusing to go henell', was very urgent to
prevent er ister‘s going at all; and Mrs Jennings,
though her carriage was alway; at Elinor’s service, so
very much disliked Mn John aehwood, that not even
her curiosity to pee how she looked after the late dis-
covery, nor her strong dctire to affront her by taking
Edward’l part, could overcome her unwillingness to be
in her company again. The consequence was, that
Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit, for which no
one could really have less inclination, and to run the
risk of a téteeis-téu: with a woman whom neither of the
others had so much reason to dislike.

Mr! Duhwood was denied; but before the carria
could turn from the house, her husband accidents] y .
came out. He expressed great pleasure in meeting
Elinor, told her that he had been going to all in
Berkeley-street, and assuring her that Fanny would be

glad to lee her, invited her to come in. '
hey walked up stain into the drawing-room—No-
body was there.

“ Fanny is in her own room, I suppose,” said he ;—
“ I will go to her presently, for I am sure she will not
have the least objection in the world to seeing you—very
far from it indeed. Now especially there cannot be—
but however, on and Marianne were :1ny great
fnvouritelt— hy would not Marinnne come?”

Elinor made whet excuse she could for her.

a I am not sorry to Ice you alone,” he replied, “ for
Ihaveagooddealtosaytoyou. Thislivingof
Colonel Brandon’Hnn it be two l—has he really
given it to Edward l—I heard it yenerday by chance,
and was coming to you on purpose to inquire farther

'nbout it.”

“ It in tly true.—Colonel Brandon has given the

living of Hold to Edvard.”

II. I

130 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.

“ Really l—Well, this is very astonishing !——-no
relationship l—no connexion between them l—end now
that livings fetch such a price l—what was the value of
thi- ? ll

“ About two hundred a—year."

“ Very well—and for the next pretentstion to a living
of that value—m posing the late incumbent to have
been old and sic y and likel to vacate it soon—he
might have got, I dare say— urteen hundred pounds.
And how came he not to have settled that matter beibre
this person’s death i—Now indeed it would be too late
to sell it, but a man of Colonel Brandon’s sense !—I
wonder he should be so improvident in a point of such
common, such natuml concern !——Well, I am convinced
that there is a vnst deal of inconsistency in almost every
human chsmcter. I suppose, however—0n recollection
——-that the case may robably be Ibis. Edward is only
to hold the living til the person to whom the Colonel
has really sold the presentation is old enough to take it.
—— e, aye, that is the fact, depend upon It."

E inor contradicted it, however, very positively; and
by relating that she had herself been emplo ed in con-
veyin the oﬁ'er from Colonel Brandon to ward, and
tb re must understand the terms on which it was
given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

“ It is tmly astonishing! "—he cried, after
what she said—“ what could be the Colonel’s motive ? '

“A very simple one—to be ofuse to Mr Femn."

“Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be,
Edward is a very lucky man! You will not mention
the mauer to Faun , however; for though I have broke
it to her, and she it mtly well, she will not like
to hear it much talked of."

Elinor had some difﬁculty here to refrain from
observing, that the thought Fanny might have home
with compocure an acquisition of wealth to her brother,

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY. 13!

by which neither the nor her child could be poniny
impoveriahed.

“ Mrs Ferraro,” added he, lowering his voice to the
tone becoming so important a “ know; nothing
about it at present, and I believe it will be best to keep
it entirely concealed from her as long an my be.—When
the marriage takes place, I fear she must hear of it
all."

“ But wh' should such precaution be used i—Thongb
it is not to supposed that Mrs Fenars can have the
smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son hae money
enough to live upon,——for [but must be quite out of the
question ; yet wh , after her late behaviour, is she supponed
to feel at all? he has done with her son, she hasput
him of? for ever, and has made all those over whom she
had any inﬂuence cast him off likewise.’ Surely, aﬁer
doing on, she cannot be imagined liable to any impres-
sion of eormw or of joy on his account—she cannot be
interested in anything that befalls him. She would not
be an weak as to throw away the comfort of a child, and

retain the anxiety of a parent! ”

“ Ahl Elinor," said John, “your reasoning is very

, but it is founded on ignorance of human nature.
hen Edward’s unha match takes place, depend
upon it his mother will el as much as if she had never
discarded him; and therefore every circurmtance that
may accelerate that dreadful event. must be concealed
from her on much as possible. Mrs Fenan can never
forget that Edward in her Ion."
' “You surprise me; I ahould think it must nearly
have escaped her memory by Ibi: time."

“You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs Fennrs is one
of the most affectionate mothers in the worl ”

Elinor wu silent.

“ We think am,” said Mr Dashwood, after a short
pauee, “ of Rohrt’: marrying Miss Morton.”

132 SENSE AND SENSIBILILY.

Elinor, milling at the grave and deciive importance
of her brother’s tone, calmly replied—~—

“ The lady, I euppoee, has no choice in the affair."

“Choice l—how do u mean t"

“ I only mean, that cuppote from your manner of
Taking, It mutt be the lame to Mill Morton whether
an: marry Edward or Robert.”

“Certainly, there can be no dill'crcncc; for Robert
will now to all intents and yurpoeee be considered an the
eldeut son; and an to anything elte, they are both very
agreeable young men—LI do not know that one in
superior to the other.”

Elinor said no more, and John was aleo for a than
time silent. Hie reﬂections ended thun—

“Of one thing, my dear sister,” kindly taking her
hand, and aking in an awful whiaper, “ I may auure
you: and will do it, because I know it must gra '
you. I have good reamn to think—indeed I have It
from the heat authority, or I should not repeat it, for
otherwise it would be very wrong to uy anything about
it—but I have it‘from the very heat authority—not that
I ever precisely heard MI'I Ferraro lay it henelf, but her
daughter tﬁd, and I have it from her—«That, in short,
whatever objection. there might be against a certain—a
cemin connexion—you understand rue—it would have
been far preferable to her, it would not have her
half the vexation that ill: duet. I wan exceedineg
pleated to hear that Mn F mare coneidered it in that
light—4 very gratifying circurmtanCe, you know, to up
all. ‘ It would have been beyond companiaon,’ ahe aid,
“the lean evil of the two, and she would be glad to
compound now for nothing wom.’ But, however, all
that in quite out of the queetion—not to be thought of
or mentioned; an to any attachment, you' know—it
never could he—all that u gone by. But I thought I
would jun tell you of this, became I knew how much

SENSE AND SENSXBILITY. [33

it must please you. Not that you have any mson to
regret, my dear Elinor. There is no doubt of your
doing exceedineg well—quite as well, or better, per-
haps, all thin I considered. Has Colonel Brandon been
with you la y i”

Ehnor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity
and raiee her self-importance, to agitate her nerves and
ﬁll her mind ; and she was therefore glad to be ﬂed
from the necessity of saying much in reply hersel , and
from the danger of hearing anything more from her
brother, by the entmnce of Mr obert Ferraro. After
a few moments’ chnt,.lohn Dmihwood, recollecting that
Fanny was yet uninformed of his sister being there,
quitted the room in nest of her; and Elinor was left
to improve her acquaintance with Robertl who, by the
gay unconcern, the ha py self-complacency of his manner
while enjoying so u air a division of his mother's love
and liberality, to the prejudice of his banished brother,
earned only by his own dissipated course of life, and that
brother‘s integrity, was conﬁrming her most unfavourable
opinion of his head and heart

They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves,
before he began to speak of Edward; for he too had
heard of the living, and was very inquisitive on the
subject. Elinor repeated the particular: of it, as she had
given them to John, and their effect on Robert, though
very different, was not less striking than it had been on
bins. He laughed moat immoderately. The idea of
Edward’s bein a clergyman, and living in a tmall par-
sonage-house, iverted him beyond measure; and when
to that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward
reading nyers in a white surplice, and publishing the
banns 0 marriage between John Smith and Mary Brown,
he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.

- Elinor, while she waited in silence, and immovable
gravity, the conclusion of such folly, could not remain

I34 SENSE AND SEISIBILH'V.

her eyelfrom being ﬁxed on him with a look that Ipoke
all the contempt it excited. It war a look, however,
very well bestowed, liar it relieved her own feelingnand
gave no intelligence to him. He wu recalled from wit
to wildnm, not by any reproofof hen, but by hi. own
Ieueibility.

“We may treat it as a joke," said he at lut,
recovering from the affected laugh which had coneider-
ably lengthened out the genuine gaier of the moment—
“ but, u n my soul, it is a moat Ierioua buaineu. Poor
Edw I he in mined for ever. I an exme sorry
for it—fcr I know him to be a very good-hearted
creature; at well meaning a fellow, perhaps, as any in
the world. You must not judge of him, Min I)th-
wood, from your alight acquaintance. Poor Edward!
Hie manners are certainly not the happieet in nature.
But we are not all born, you know, with the lame
powero— the came address. Poor fellowl to Ice him
In a circle of atrangereL—m be cure it we! pitiable
enough l—but, upon my roul, I believe he ban on good
a heart at any in the kingdom; and I declare and
protest to you I never wan no rhocked in my life, a
when it all burst forth. I could not believe it. M
mother was the lint person who told me of it, and
feeling myself called on to act with reaolutiun, im-
mediately aid to her, ‘ M dear madam, I do not know
what on may intend to 0 on the occuion. but u for
myselg, I mutt ray, that if Edward doel marry thi-
yonng woman, I never will ace him again.’ That wan
what I laid immediately,——I wan moat uncommonly
checked indeed l—Poor Edwardl—he hat done for
himself completely E—chut himaelf out for ever from all
decent society l—but an I directly raid to my mother, I
am not in the lean rurprieed at it; from his style of
education it was always to be expected. My poor
mother was half frantic."

mar. Arm sensrnrurv. r35

“Haveyoueverleenthelndyi”

“ Yea, once; while the was staying in this home. I
happened to drop in for ten minutes; and I saw quite
enough of her. The mere-st awkward country girl,
without Iter or elegance, and nlmoot without beauty.
I remember her perfectly. Justtheldndol'girlI
ahould suppose likely to captivate poor Edwsrrl. I
olfered immediatel ,u soonu rn mother related the
affair to me,w kto him myuelfﬁnd dissuade him
from the lunch; butitwatoolntetLa-J fmrnd,todo
anything, for nnluckily, I was not in the way at ﬁrst,
and knew nothing of it till after the breach had taken

lace, when it was not for me, you know, to interfere.

t had I been infomed of it a few hour- earlier, I
think it in most probable that something might have
been hit on. I certainly should have resented it to
Edwardin u very strong light. ‘My eur fellow,’ I
Ihould have laid, 'conlider what you are doing. You
are making a molt diegracefnl connexion, and such I
one an your family are unanimous in dilapproving.’ I
cannot hel drinking, in short, that means might have
been foundiI But now it is all too late. He rnult be
carved, you know; that in certain 3 abtolutcly med."

He had settled this point with gm! composure,
when the entrance of Mrs John Dashwood put an end
to the ruhject. But though :5: never «Poke of it out of
her own funily, Elinor could lee itl Inﬂuence on her
mind, in the Iomething like confusion of countenance
with which ehe entered, Ind an attempt at cordinlity in
he behaviour to herself. She even yroceeded to fur
u to be conceer to ﬁnd that Elinor and her ﬁner
wereloloonrolenvetown,u|l)elnrdh toeee
more of them ; an exertion in which her h nd, who
amended her into the room, and hung enunoured over
her acoentl, seemed to distinguish everything that was
most nﬁ'ectiomte end graceful.

r36 SENS! 'urn smsrern.

than: $13]-

NE other short call in Harley-meet, in which
Elinor received her brother’e congratulation. on
their tmvellin no Fur towardr Barton without

any expense, and on éolonel Brandon’s being to follow
them to Clare-land in a day or two, completed the
intercoune of the brother and llle in town; and a
faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of
all thing: war: the most unlikely to occur, with a more
warm, though len public assurance, from John to Elinor
of the ram titude with which he ohould come m In
her at ml, was all that foretold any meeting in
the country.

It amuaed her to oboerve that all her friendl leaned
determined to send her to Delaford; a place in which,
ofall other-I, she would now least chute to vilit or wish
to reside; for not only was it connidered on her ﬁrture
home by her brother and Mn Jennings, but even Lucy,
when they parted, gave her a pmedng invitation to viit
her there.

Very early in April, and tolerath early in the day,
the two parties from Hanover-Iquare and Berkeley-
rtreet, act out from their rerpective hon-lea, to meet by
a pointment on the road. For the convenience of

harlottc and her child, they were to be more than
two day: on their journ , and Mr Palmer, travelling
more ex 'tiously with olonel Brandon, wan to join
them at leveland noon after their arrival.

Marianne, few a had been her hours of comfort in
London, and eager at Ihe had long been to quit it,
could not. when it came to the int, bid adieu to the
house in which the had for the at time enjoyed tho-e
hopes and that conﬁdence in Willoughhy, which were

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. I37

now extinguished for ever, without great pain. Nor
could she leave the place in which Willoughby re-
mained in new engagements, and new schemes,
in which a could have no share. without shedding
man tears.
linor’s, satisfaction at the moment of removal, was
more positive. She had no such object for her linger-
ing thoughts to ﬁx on, she left no cmture behind from
whom it would give her a moment’s regret to be divided
for ever, she was pleased to be free herself from the
mention of Lucy’s friendship, she was grateful for

'nging her sister away unseen by Willoughhy since

his marriage, and she looked forward with hope to
what a few months of tranquillity at Barton mi ht do
towards restoring Marianne’s peace of mind, con-
ﬁrming her own.
- Their journey was safely performed. The second
day brought them into the cherished, or the prohibited
county of Somerset, for as such was it dwelt on by
turns in Marianne’s imagination; and in the foreman
of the third they drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland was a spacious, modem-built house, situated
on a sloping lawn. It had no park, but the pleasure-
gmunds were tolerath extensive; and like every other
place of the same degree of importance, it had its open
shrubbery, and closer wood-walk; a road of smooth
gravel winding round a lantation, led to the front; the
lawn was dotted over wrth timber; the house itself was
under the guardianship of the ﬁr, the mountain-ash, and
the acacia, and a dual: screen of them altogether, in-
terspersed with tall Lombardy poplars, shut out the
oﬁices. .

Marianne entered the house with an heart swelling
with emotion from the consciousness of being only
ei hty miles From Barton, and not thirty from Combe

gun; and before she had been ﬁve minutes within

I38 SENSE AND SENSlBlLITV.

its walls, while the «here were busily helping Charlotte
lhew her child to the house-keeper, the quitted it
stealing away throu h the winding Ihmbberiel, now jun
beginmng to be in uty, to gain a dime: eminence;
where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wandering
over a wide me: of country to the southeast, could
fondiy rest on the ﬂirthcst ridge of hills in the horizon,
and army that from their summits Combo Magoo might
be seen.

In such moments of precious, of invaluable ,
Ihe rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland; and
as the returned by a different circuit to the house,
feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty, of
wandering from lace to place in free and luxurious
solitude, she resoved to spend almost every hour of
every day while she remained with the Palmen, in the
indulgence of such solita rambles.

She returned just in time to join the other: as they
quitted the house, on an excursion through its more
immediate premises; and the rent of the morning was
easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen
garden, examining the bloom upon its walll, and
listening to the gardener's lamentatiom upon blighn,
—in dawdling through the green-house, where the lots
of her favourite lants, unwarin exposed, and ni
by the lingering root, raised the laughter of Char one,
ﬁlml. in visiting her poultry-yard, where in the dis-
appointed hopes of her daily-maid, by hens fonalting
their nests, or being stolen by a fox, or in the rapid
decease of a promising young brood, she found fresh
sources of merriment.

The morning was ﬁne and dry, and Marianne, in
her plan of employment abroad, had not calculated Ear
an change of weather during their stay at Cleveland.

ith great surprise, therefore, did she ﬁnd herself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after

sznsrt run) msrnru'n. :39

dinner. She had depended on a twilight walk to the
Grecian temple, and perhaya all over the grounds, and
an evening merely cold or damp would not lave
deterred her from it; but a hen and aettled rain
even :17: could not fancy dry or peanut weather for
walking.

Their waa small, and the houn quietly
away. re Palmer had her child, and re Inning:
her carpet-work; they talked of the frienda they had
left behind, arranged Lad Middleton’s en gementl, I
and wondered whether r Palmer are?l Colonel
Brandon would get further than Reading that night.
Elinor, however little concerned in it, joined in their
dixouree, and Marianne, who had the knack of finding
her way in every house to the library, however it might
be avoided by the family in general, soon procured
heraelfa hook.

Nothing was wanting on Mn Palmer’a ride, that
constant and friendly good humour could do, to malt!
them feel themaelvel welcome. The ones: and
heartinesu of her manner more than amned or that want
of recollech'on and elegance, which made her often
deﬁcient in the for-ma of politeneu; her kindncu, re-
commended by so pretty a face, was engaging; her
folly, though evident, war not ditguating because it war
not'conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every-
thin but. her laugh.

he two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very
late dinner, affording a pleaaant enlargement of the
party, and a very welcome variety to their convenation,
which along morning of the time continued rain had
reduced very low.

Elinor had econ so little of Mr Palmer, and in that
little had teen oomuch variety in his address to herriater'
and henelf, that she knew not what to expect to find
him in In: own family. She found him, however, per-

140 SENSE AND SENSIBILm.

fectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his vililorl,
and only occasionally mde to his wife and her mother;
she found him very capable of being a pleasant com-
panion, and only revented from being so always, by
too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much superior
to piople in general, as he must feel himlelf to be
to re Jennings and Charlotte. For the nest of
his character and habits, they were marked, as far as
Elinor could rceive, with no traits at all unusual
in his sex an time of life. He was nice in his
eating, uncertain in his hours ; fond of his child, though
affecting to slight it; and idled away the mornings at
billiards, which ought to have been devoted to busineu.
She liked him, however, u n the whole; much better
than she had expected, an in her heart was not sorry
that she could like him no more ; not sorry to be
driven b the observation of his cpicurism, his selﬁsh-
ness, an his conceit, to rest with complacency on the
remembrance of Edward’s generous temper, limple
taste, and dili'ident feelings.

Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, the
now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who
had been into Donetshire lately; and who, treating her
at once as the disinterest friend of Mr Ferraro, and
the kind conﬁdante of himself, talked to her a great deal
of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deﬁciencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards re-
moving them. His behaviour tube in this as well as
in every other particular. his open pleasure in meeting
her after an absence of only ten days, his radians to
converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify Mrs Jenningl’r percussion of his
attachment, and would have been enough, erhape, had
not Elinor still, as from the ﬁrst, believed arianne his
real favourite, to make her suspect it herself. But as it
was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head,

 

 

,,.«//z.=./4M 2' ' max m' a

u x.,-. m

SENSE AND SINSXBIUTY. I41

exoeﬁby Mn Jenningl’l tuggedon ; and the could not
help lieving her-ell" the nicest observer of the two ;
the watched hie eyes, while Mn Jenningr thought only
'of hit behaviour; and while hi: lock! of anxioun solici-
tude on Marianne’l feeling in her head and throat the
beginning of a heavy cold, became unexpreued
‘words, entirely escaped the latter lady’e nheervation, .1
could discover in them the quick feelings and needles:
alarm of a lover.

Two delightful twilight walks on the third and
fourth evening: of her being there, not merely on the
dry gravel of the thruhbcry, but all over the grounds,
Ind especially in the moat dittant no of them, where
there wu uomething more of wilgzeu than in the rent,
where the trees were the oldeat, and the gran wan the
longest and wettest, hade by the still greater
imprudence of sitting in her wet shoe- and mocking;—
given Murianne a cold to violent, al though for a day
or two triﬂed with or denied, would force itself b in-
creaning nilment on the concern of everybody, an the
notice of herself. Pretcri tiono poured in from all
quarterl, and as usual were all’declined. Though heavy
and feverish, with a Pain in her limbs, a cough, and a
tore throat, a good night’s rett was to cure her entirely ;
and it was with dilﬁculty that Elinor prevailed on her,
when she went to bed, to try one or two of the aimplelt
of remedies.

chum: 51333.

ARIANNE got up the next morning at her
 ulual time; to every inquiry replied that the
Wu better, and tried to prove herself to, by
engaging in her «customary employmento. But a day

143 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

in timing Ihivering over the fire with a hook in
herhmdwlhrl'lcghuihe was mm read,or in lying,
wary and i on I I0 ' not apeak much in
favour of her amendment; and when, at lat, the went
urly to bed, more and more inditpoeed, Colonel Bran-
don war only amnithed it her litter’t composure, who
though attending and main her the wholedn , again
Mnrinnne'u inclination, and Icing proper icinel on
her at night, muted like Mll'ianne to the ceminty end
eﬂiucy of sleep, and felt no reel alarm.

A very redu- ond fevetinh night, however, die—
a pointed the expectation of both; mdwhen '
after perliating in rising, conith henelf unable to Ii!
up, and returned voluntarilyto her bed, Elinor was very
ready to adopt Mn Jenningt’l advice, of ending for the
Palmen’ apothecary.

He came, examined hit patient, and though encourag-
ing Mist Duhwood to expect that a very few days
would restore her liner to health, yet by pronouncing
her dinorderto have a putrid tendency, and allow-in the
word "ink-coon" to pan: his lips, gave irritant raglan“
to Mn Palmer on her baby’s account. Mn Jenningu,
who had been inclined from the ﬁrst to think Muimne’t
complaint more terioul than Elinor, now looked very
g: on Mr Harris’l report, and conﬁrming Charlotte a

and caution, upped the neceuity of her immediate
removal with her in not 5 and Mr Palmer, though treat-
ing their npprehcmionl an idle, found the anxiety and
importunity of his wife too great to beVIithItood. Her
departure therefore war ﬁxed on; and within on hour
after Mr HarriI’I In-ival, she set off, with her little boy
and his nurte, for the house of a near relation of Mr
Palmer’s. who lived a few mile. on the other tide of
Bath; whither her husband promited, at her earnest
entrenty, to join her in a day or two; and whither the
war almost equally urgent with her mother to accom-

SENSE AND SENSXBIHTV. .143

y her. Mre Jennings, however, with a kindneal of
ﬁn which made Elinor rally love her, declared her
retolution of not nirring from Cleveland an long In
Marianne remained ill. and of endeavouring, by her own
attentive can. to cup ly to her the lace of the mother
the had taken her m; and Einor found her on
every occalion a moat willing and active hel mate,
doaimua to there in all her fatigue, and often, her
better ex 'en'ce in nurein of material une.

Poor Etienne, langui and low from the nature of
her malady, and feeling heraelf universally ill, could no
longer ho that to-morrow would ﬁnd her recovered;
and thei ea of what to-morrow would have produced,
but for this unlucky illneu, made every ailment more
revere; for on that day they were to have begun their
journey home, and, attended the whole way by a aervant
of Mn Jennings, were to have taken their mother by
In rise on the following forenoon. The little that ahe

'aai , wan all in larnentation of thin inevitable delay;
though Elinor tried to nine her cpirite, and make her
believe, as the the really believed herself, that it would
be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no alteration in the
ante of the patient; she Ceminl was not better, and
except that there wan no amen ment, did not a
worne. Their party was now ﬁrther reduced ; for Mr
Palmer, though very unwilling to go, as well from real
humanity and good-nature, as from a dialike of appearb
ing to be frightened away by hill wife, was persuaded at
lat by Colonel Brandon, to perform his promise of ’
following her; and while he vIu preparing to go,
Colonel Brandon him-elf, with I much greater exer-
tion, be to talk of going likewite. Here, however,
the kin new of Mr- Jenningeinterpoeed moat acceptably;
for to lend the Colonel away while his love wan in lo
much uneaeineu on her liner‘e account, would be to

r44 sens: AND susrnru-rv.

'nthanhmhdxethonghgofeverycomfnrt; and
more telling him at once that hit sta at Clevdand
walnecatarytohertlﬂthatshelhoul wanthilnto
play at piquet of an evening while Mill Daalwood was
above with her liter, &c., the urged him to strongly to
remain, thathe,whowasgratifyingtheﬁntwiahofhil
own heart by a compliance, could not long even afar:
to dcmur; especially as Mrs Jenningt’t entreny wan
warmly acmnded by Mr Palmer, who seemed to feel
a relief to himself in leaving behind him a penon to
well able to assist or advise Min Daahwood in any
emergence.

Marianne war of course kept in ignorance of all'theee
arrangements. She knew not that ahe had been the
means of sending the owner: of Cleveland away. in about
Ieven days from the time of their arrival. It gave her
no surprile that the law nothing of Mn Palmer! and
as it gave her likewise no concern, the never mentioned

her name.

Two days passed away from the time of Mr Palmer'r
departure, an her situation continued, with little varia-
tion,the name. Mr Harris, who attended her day,
still talked hold] of a speedy recovery, and Min uh-
wood was equally sanguine ; but the expectation of the
others was by no mean: so cheerful. Mn Jennings
had determined very early in the aeiaure that Mari-
anne would never get over it, and Colonel Brandon,
who wan chieﬂy of use in listening to Mn Jenninga'a
forebodingr, war not in a state of mind to rein
their inﬂuence. He tried to moon himqu out
of fear: which the diﬂ‘erent judgment of the npothe-
cary seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of
each day in which he was left entirely alone were but
too favourable for the admission of every melancholy
idea, and he could not expel from his mind the per-
suasion that he thould tee Marianne no more.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY- 145

On the morning of the third day, however, the
goom’yeanticipations of both were nlmott done away;

r w n Mr Han-is arrived, he declared hia patient
materially better. Her pulee was much stronger and
every symptom more favounble than on the preceding
visit. Elinor, conﬁrmed in every latent hope, wan all
cheerfulnesa; rejoicing that in her etten to her mother,
the had pursued her own judgment rather than her
friend’s, in making very light of the indispnsition which
delayed them at Cleveland, and almost ﬁxing on the
time when Marianne would be able to travel.

But the day did not close so suspiciously as it began.
Towards the evenin Marianne became ill again, grow-
ing more heavy, res ess, and uncomfortable than before.
Her sister, however, rtill aangnine, was willing to attri-
bute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
hnviug let up to haveher bed made; and carefully

‘ administering the cordial: prescribed, saw her with mis-

faction rink at last into a slumber, from which the
expected the most beneﬁcial effects. Herdeep, though
not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a con-
siderable time; and anxious to observe the result of it
herself, she resolved to sit with her during the whole of
it; Mn Jennings, knowing nothing of any change in
the patient, went unusually early to bed; her maid, who
was one of the principal nursel, was recreating herself
in the hounekeeper’r room, and Elinor remained alone
with Mnrianne.

The repose of the latter became more and more dia-
tnrbed; and her sister, who watched with unremitting
attention her continual change of posture, and heard the
frequent but inaniculate sounds of complaint which
pcasedherli was almost wishing to muse herfrom
to painful a umber when Marianne, snddenl awakened
by some accidental noise in the house, tuned haltily up,
and, with feverish wildness, cried out-—

n. K

I46 SENSE AND SENSlBle.

“II mama coming?"

r “Not yet," replied the other, conceding her terror,
end animg Marianne to lie down nglin; “hut-howl"
be here I hope, before it in long. It in n great way,
you know, from hence to Barton.

“But she mult not go round by London," cried
Marianne, in the lame hurried manner. “I uhall never
Ice her, if the goes to London."

Elinor eived with alarm that the wa- not quite
henelf, an while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt
her pulse. It wu lower and quicker than even and
Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her alarm
increaeed to rapidly, at to determine her on reading
inmotly for Mr Harris, and deepatching a manger ta
Barton for her mother. To contult with Colonel
Brandon on the best means of effhcting the latter, was
a thou t which immediawa followed the resolution of
it! munce; and as soon an she had rung u the
maid to take her place by her sister, she hastened wn
to the drawing-room, where she knew he was generally
to he found at a much later hour than at preterit.

It vm no time for Imitation. Her fan and her
dillicultiee were immediame before him. Her fears,
he had no courage, no conﬁdence to attempt the re-
moval of ;-—he listened to them in silent deepondenCe;
-but her diflicultiel were irutantly obviated, for with I
rendinen that Ieerned to speak the occasion, and the
Iervice prearranged in his mind, he offered hinuelf u
the meraenger who should fetch Mn Dnhwood.
Elinor made no resimnce that was not euily overcome.
She dunked him with a brief, though fervent gratitude,
and while he went to hurry olf hie oerth with a
nteenlfe to Mr Harris, and an order for pan-honee
direc , Ill: wrote a few line: to her mother. '

The comfort of such a friend at that moment an
Colonel Brandon—of Inch a companion for her mother,

SH AND SINSIBILITY. 147

—how tefull was it feltl—ooom ionwhose' -
ment wﬁd guzle, whose atrendnnoeparlrlrust relieveluffd
whoee friendship might sooth her l--as for u the shock
of such a summons ran/d be lessened to her, hit presence,
his nrannen, hie usimnoe, would lessen it.

He, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with
all the ﬁrmness of a collected mind, made every neces-
sary arrangement with the utmott despatch, and calcu-
lated with exactness the dine in which she might look
for hie return. Not a moment was lost in delay of any
kind. The horses arrived, even before they were ex-
pected, and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand
with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken too
low to reach her ear, hurried into the It
'wu then about twelve o’clock, and she returned to her

siner's a t to wait for the arrival of the apothe-
cary, to watch by her the rent of the night. It
wan a night of almost equal ruii'erlug to both. Hour
after hour passed aw: in eleeplees pain and delirium on
Marianne's ride, an in the most cruel anxiety on
Elinor's, before Mr Harris appeared. Her apprehen-
sions once railed, paid by their excees for all her fonner
eecurity, and the servant who at up with her, for she
would not allow Mn Jenningl to be called, only
tortured her more, by hints of what her had

alwn than t.

hg'ianne’s ideas were still, at intervals, ﬁxed inco-
herently on her mother, and whenever she mentioned
her name, it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor,
who, maching hernelf for having triﬂed withso man
days mum, and wretched for some immediate relie ,
fancied that all relief might soon he in vain, that every-
thing had been delayed too long and pictured to her-elf
her euﬁ'ering mother, arriving too late to see thia darling
child. or to see her rational.

She was on the point of sending again for Mr Harris,

r48 sues: AND smsrnxurv.

or if be could not come, for some other advice, when
the former— but not till after ﬁve o’clock—-arrived.
Hie opinion, however, made tome little amendl for hie
dela , for though acknowledging a very unexpected and
unp eaeant alteration in hie patient, he would not allow
the danger to be material, and talked of the relief which
n frceh mode of treatment mutt procure,vlith a con-
ﬁdence which, in a loner degree, we communicated to
Elinor. He promiecd to call again, in the come of
three or four honrl, and left both ,the paint and her
anxioul attendant more compoeed thanhehad found them.

With etrong concern, and with man reproachee for
not being called to their aid, did Mn enmnga hear in
the morning of what had patted. Her former appre-
hemiooa, now with greater moon restored, left her no
doubt of the event ;—and though trying to Ipcak corn-
fort to Elinor, her conviction of her Iittet’t danger
would not allow her to offer the comfort of hope.
Her heart was really grieved. The rapid decay, the
early death of a girl I0 young, so lovely as Marianne,
mutt have struck a let: interencd person with concern.
On Mn Jennin a’e companion she had .other claims.
She had been for three month her companion, was
still under her care, and the was known to have been
greatly injured, and long unhappy. The dietreu of her
liner too, particularlya favounte, wan before her ;——and
no for their mother, when Mrs Jenninga considered that
Marianne might probably be to bar what Charlotte van
to hereelf, her Iympathy in ber miferinge was very
Iincere. .

Mr Harris wan punctual in hie second vitit ;—but he
came to be dinppointed in his hope. of what the lut
would produce. Hll medicine: had failed g—the fever
wu unabated ; and Marianne only more quiet—not
more hemlf+remained in an heavy an: r. Elinor
catching all, and more than all, his fear: to a moment,

SENSE AND snusrnxu'rv. I49

propoeed to call in farther advice, But he judged it
unneoelu ; he had still aomething more to try, come
fresh appicau'on, of whose suceeu he wu almolt u
conﬁdent on the Int, and his vilit concluded with en-
couraging insurances which reached the ear, but could
not enter the hem of Mice Dnahwood. She wan calm, .
except when Ihe thought of her mother, but the was
almost hopeleu; and in this «ate she continued till
noon, scarcely stirring from her sister's bed, her thoughts
wandering from one image of grief, one sull‘ering fnend
to another, and her spirit: oppressed to the utmost by
the conan of Mrs Jennings, who acmpled not to
attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the
many weeka of previous indispoaition which Marianne’s
disappointment had brought on. Elinor felt all the
reuonableness ofthe idea, and it gave freeh mieeryto
her reﬂection. \

About noon, however,‘ the began —— but with a
caution, I dread of some dilappomtment, which for
some time kept her silent, even to her friend—to fancy,
to hope she could perceive a alight amendment in her
ﬁlter I pulse ;—-she waited, watched, examined it again
and again ;-—and at Int, with an agitation more difﬁcult
to bury under exterior calmness than all her foregoing
distress, ventured to communicate her hopes. Mn
Jenninga, though forced on examination to acknow-
ledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young ﬁ-iend
from indulging a thought of it! continuance; and
Elinor, conning over every in'unetion afflict-rust, told herb
self likewiae not to hope. ut it was too late. Hope
had already entered ; and feeling all in anxious ﬂutter,
the bent over her sister to wntch—ehe hardly knew for
what. Half an hour passed away, and the favounble
symptom yet blessed her. Others even arose to conﬁrm
it. Her breath, her skin, her ii all ﬂattered Elinor
with sign! of amendment, an Marianne ﬁxed her

150 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

2e: on her with a ntloual' though gaze.

nxiety and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees,
and left her no moment 0 tranquillity till the arrival of
Mr Harrie at four o’clock ;—when hie aneurancea, hie
felicitatiom on a recovery in her lint even surpa-ing
hit expectation, gave her conﬁdence, comfort, and turn

of ' .

{iiirianne was in every respect materially better, and
he declared her entirely out of danger. Mn Jenningl,
perhap- Iatieﬁed with the partial juttiﬁcation of her
orebodingl which had been found in their late alarm,
allowed hemlf to trust in his judgment, and admitted
with unfeigned joy, and noon with unequivocal cheer-
fulneta, the probability of an entire recovery.

Elinor could not be cheerful. Her joy wu of a
different kind, and led to anythin rather than to gniety.
Marianne rcttnrcd to life, health, rienda, and to her doct-
in mother, was an idea to ﬁll her hean with mutations
o exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude;
uhut it led to no outward demonstration of joy, no
words, no trnileu. All within Elinor‘a breast wa-
ntitfaction, tilent and Itmng.

She continued by the side of her sitter with little in-
tenniuion the whole afternoon, calming every fear,
Iatilfying every inquiry of her enfeebled opirltl, rupplyin
every tuccour, and watching almost every look ancgl
every breath. The pouibility of a relapse would, of
courae, in some momenta, occur to remind her of what
anxiety wat—hut when the saw on her frequent and
minute examination, that every tymptom of recovery
continued, and raw Maliianne at six o’cloték, rink into a

uiet, steady, and to al a arance com omble Il
ghe Iilenced every doubt. PP: up,
- The time was now drawing on when Colonel Bran-
don might be expected back. At ten o'clock, the
trulted, or at least not much later, her mother would

I
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 151

be relieved from the dreadful an in which she
mun. now be travelling towards them. The Colonel
tooi——perhaps scarcely less an object of pity l——Ohl
how slow was the progress of time which yet kept then:
in i orance !

t seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly
asleep, she joined Mrs Jennings in the drawing-room to
tea. Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears, and
of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating much ;—
and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feel-
ings of content as she brought to it, was particularly
welcome. Mrs Jennings would have persuaded her at
its conclusion to take some rest before her mother’s
arrival, and allow bar to take her place by Marianne;
but Elinor had no sense of fau'gue, no capability of sleep
at that mom: about her, and she was not to he
sway from her sister an unnee insant. rs
Jennings therefore attending her up min into the sick
chamber, to satisfy harberseli that all continued right,
left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and
retired to her own room to write letters and sleep.

The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared
round the house, and the min bent against the windows;
but Elinor all happiness within, regarded it not. Mari-
anne slept through every blast, and the travellers——
they had a rich reward in store, for every present in-
convenlcnce.

The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor
would have been convinced that at that moment she
heard a carriage driving u to the house ; and so strong
was the rsuasion that s M in spite of the alarm
irnpossihi 'ty of their being already come, that she moved
into the ad oining dressing-closet and o ned a window-
shutter, tn satisﬁed of the truth.
that her ears had not deceived her.
of a carriage were immediately in view.

he inmntl saw
The ﬂaring ps
By their un-

a“
B
K
5
E
a:-
a
8V
E
8
8'

almuulhamolnenl. 'I‘heknovledgeofvhtha
~muhtrmunbefedinguthean'ugempeduthc
door,——-ofher¢hwht——lnr dmd—perlnpohu '!
—-andofwhat:khadtomll!——withuch know
itvaimpou'bletobecalm. Alldntmnainedmbe
dmwutobeupaedy;anddtnfommyingonlytiﬂ
hliuveMnJmningl’amaidwithhu-‘m,
Ihehunieddownuain.
Theh‘micinthevenilnlc,ulhepanedalongan
innerlobbyﬂmmdherthattheywaeallud ind:
home. She rushed forwards toward: the wing.
mom—«he cumin—and aw only Wiﬂoughby.

Chum: £1,317.

LINOR, Inning back with a lack of ham nth:
light or him, obeyed the an: impulle of her hurt
in tuning innantl to quit the mom, and her

hand wan alrady on the ink, whzn in action um um-
pended by his haltin advancing, and saying, in a voice
rather of command than an lication—

“ Mi- Danhwood, for f an hour—for ten minim:-
-—I entreat you to my."

u No, sir," «he replicd win; ﬁrmneu, “I an.“ no:
my. Your bluineu cannot be with nu. The :nanu,
I luppon, forgot to tell you that Mr Palmer was not in
the home.”

“Had they told me,” he cried with vehemcnce.
“that Mr Palmer and all his relation: were at the devil,

SENS! AND Sl‘NSlBlLlTY. 153

it would not have turned me from the door. My
bulineu in with you, and only you.”

“With rnel "—in the unmet amazement—“well,
Iir—he uick—and if you cam—leer violent."

“Sit wn, and I will be both.”

She helitnted; nhe lmew not whet to do. The poe-
‘Iihility of Colonel Brandon'e arriving and ﬁnding him
there, came across her. But she had promired to hear
him, and her curiosity no lees than her honour was
en ed. Aﬂer a moment’s recollection, therefore,
coﬁuding that pmdence required diepntch, and that
her acquiescence would beat promote it, she walked
uilently tode the table and sat down. He took the
oppoute chair, and for half a minute not: word wae
laid by either.

“ Pray be quick, air,” raid Elinor impatiently—“ I
have no time to ”

He was ﬁtting in an attitude of deep medihn'on, end
netned not to hear her.

“Your liner,” said he, with abruptneu, a moment
afterwards—“in out of danger. I heard it from the
Iemnt. God he praisedl—But in it trucl—ie it really
true I, ’l

Elinor would not' speak. He repeated the inquiry
with yet ter eagerness.

“ For 'I sake tell me, it she out of danger, or in
the not P ”

“ We hope she is.”

He [‘00: u , and walked across the room.

“Had I own an much half an hour ago—But
Iince I am here "—apeaking with a forced vivacity at
he returned to his oest—“ what doe: it tignify i—For
once, Min Dnhwood—it will be the lat time, perha
—let we be cheerﬁil wgether.—-I am in a line mood or
grainy—Tell me honestly "—a deeper glow over-
Ipreading hie cheekn—“ do you think me meet a have
or a fool 2 "

[54 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Elinor looked at him with grater milbnunt than
ever. She begun to think that he mun he in liquor;
—-the strangeness of luch u vilit, and of such moi-men,
neemed no otherwine intelligible; and with thit impru-
tion, the immediately roce, toying——

“Mr Willoughby, I advile you at present to return
to Combo. I am not It leilune to remain with you
longer. Whatever your holiness may be with me, it
will be better recollected and explained to-morrow.”

“ I undemand you," he replied, with an expreuive
mile, and a voice perfectly calm. “You, I am ve
drunk. A pint of porter with mycold bcefat Mar-
borough wan enough to overlet me.”

“At Marlborough! ” cried Elinor, more and more
at a loss to undemnd what he would be at.

" Yen—l left London this morning at eight o’clock,
and the only ten minutes I luch upcnt out of my chain
Iince that time procured Inc a nuni:heon‘I at Marl-
borough."

The medium of his manor, and the intelligence of
his eye as he lyoke, canvincin Elinor. that. whatever
other unpardonable folly might ring him to Cleveland,
he wan not brought there by intoxication, the laid, after
a moment’a recollection.

“ Mr Willoughby, you 01435! to feel, and I certainly
(Io—that after what has passed—your coming here in
this manner, and forcing yourself v‘uron my notice, re-
quires a very particular excuse. hat in it that you
mean by it ? ”

“ I mean," said he, with Ieriouo energy, “ if I can,to
make you hate me one degree lem than you do now. I
mean to offer some kind of explanation, some kind of
apology, for the pan—to open my whole heart to you,
and by convincing you, that though I have been alwayl

“A piece of victunlt eaten between mule—"Johnlon’l
Di . y

sense sun sunsmu'rv. x 5 5

s blockhem‘l, I have not been always I rascal, to obtain
something like in 'veness from MHrom your sister,”

“ Is this the reason of your coming ? ”

“ U n my soul it is,"—\vas his answer, with a
warm which brou ht Ill the former Willough to
her remembrance, an in spite of herself made her '11]:
him sincere.

“ If that is all, you may be satisﬁed already,—-for
Marianne does—she has long lbrgiven you."

“Has she! "—he cried, in the same eager tone.—
“Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have
done it. But she shall forgive me again, and on more
reasonable grounds. Now, will you listean me?”

Elinor bowed her assent.

" I do not know,” said he, after a pause of expecta-
tion on her side, and thoughtfulness on his own,—“ how
you: may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister,
or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me.
~Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,—it is
worth the trial, however, and you shall hr everything.
When I ﬁrst became intimate in your family, I had no
other intention, no other view in the soqumntanoe than
to my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remain
in ‘evonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done
before. Your sister’s lovely person and interesu'ng man-
ners could not but please me; and her behaviour to me,
almost from the ﬁrst, was of a kind—It is astonishing,
when I reﬂect on what I was, and what the was, that
my heart should have been so insensihle l—But at ﬁrst,
I must confess, my vanity only was elevated by it.
Careleos of her happiness, thinking only of my own
amusement, giving way to feelings which I had always
been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured,
by every means in my power, to make myself pleasing to
her, without any design of returning her affection.”

Miss Dashwood at this point, turning her eyes on

156 szusn AND snusmu'rv.
him with the most angry contempt, stopped him, by

in —-

y“ It is hardly worth while, Mr Will , for you
to relate, or for me to listen an longer. uch a begin—
ning as this cannot be follow by anything. Do not
let me be pained by hearing anything more on the sub-
‘ec‘.)l s
1 “ I insist on your hearing the whole of it,” he replied.
“ My fortune was never large, and I had always been
expensive, always in the habit of associating with peoer
of better income than mytelf. Every year since my
comin of age, or even before, I believe, had added to
my d ; and though the death of my old cousin, Mrs
Smith, was to set me free, yet that event being uncer-
tain, and iny far distant, it had been for some time
my intention to re-establish in circumstances by marry-
ing a woman of fortune. o attach myself to your
sister, therefore, was not a thing to thought ofi—and
with a meanness, selﬁshness, cruelty—which no indig-
nant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, Miss Dash-
wood, can ever reprobate too much—I was acting in
this manner, trying to engage her regard, without a
thought of renaming it. But one thing my be said for
me, even in that horrid state of selﬁsh vani , I did not
know the extent of the injury I medila , because I
did not [but know what it was to love. But have 1
ever known it l—Well may it be doubted; for, had I
really loved, could I have sacriﬁced my feelings to
vanity, to avarice ?—or, what is more, could I have
sacriﬁced hers E—But I have done it. To avoid I
com rative goverty, which her affection and her society
wo d have eprived of all its horrors, I have, by raising
myself to afﬂuence, lost everything that could make it a
blessing.”

“ You did then,” said Elinor, a little softened,
“ believe yourself at one time attached to her.”

SENS! AND SWSIBIW- I
“ To have ruined such attractions, to have withstood
Inch tendernessl—Is there a man on earth who could
have done it l—Yea, I found mylelf, by insensihle
degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours
of my life were what I «pent with her, when I felt my
intentions were strictly honourable, and m feelings
blamelees. Even Men, however, when fully etermined
on paying my addresoes to her, I allowed mylelf moot
improper to put off, from day to day, the moment of
doing it, rom an unwillingness to enter into an engage-
ment while m circumstances were so greatly embar-
rused. I not reaaon here—nor will I Mp for
you to expatiate on the absurdity, and the worst than
uheurdity, of scrupling to engage my faith where my
honour was ahead hound. he event has proved, that
I was a cunning 00], providing with great circumspec-
tion for a possible 0 rtunity of making myself con-
'hle and wretch for ever. At last, however, my
reeo ution wan taken, and I had determined, as noon as
I could engage her alone, to justify the attention- I had
so invariath paid her, and openly assure her of an alfec-
tion which I had already taken such pains to display.
But in the interim—in the interim of the very few hours
that were to before I could have an opportunity of
making with her in private—a circumstance occurred-—
an unlucky circumstance, to min all my resolution, and
with it all my comfort. A discovery took lace,”—
here he hesitated and looked down.-“ Mrs £mith had
mehow or other been informed, I imagine by some
distant relation, whose intereet it w to rive me of
her favour, of an aﬁ‘nir, a connexion—but need not
explain myself farther," he added, looking at her with
a heightened colour and an inquiring eye, “your parti-
V cular intimacyuyou have probably heard the whole
story long a .”
“ I bye," returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and

t/

:58 suns: um susmtm.

hardeningherhemonewagaintauyeompuu'onfor
him,“Ihavehearditall. And howyouwiilexphin
awn any of yourgnilt in that dreadﬁil hntiueu, I
confess and my cowrehenlion.”

“ R r," cried illoughby, “ from whom you
received the account. Could it he an impartial one?
I acknowledge that her nituation and her character ought
to have been rt-qxrctul by me. I do not mean to jultify
mylclf, but at the lame time cannot leave you to luppoce
that I have nothing to urge,-—that became Ihc wan
injured, Jhe was irreproachnble; and because I Via! a
libertine, :5: mun. he a saint. If the violence of her
pea-ions, the weakneu of her understanding—I do not
mean, however, to defend mysele Her aﬂ'ection for
me deserved better treatment, and I often, with great
elf-reproach, recal the undcmcsa which, for a vc
uhort time, had the power of creating any retum.
Willi—I heartily with it had never been. But I have
injured more than herself ; and I have injured one
who-e affection for me (may I say it 2) was mrcely less
warm than here, and whose mind—Oh! how inﬁnitely
luperior ! ”

“ Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate
girl—I must say it, unplannt to me an the diacuuion of
such a oubject may well be—your indifference is no
apology for your cruel neglect of her. Do not think
yourself excused by any weakneu, any natural defect of
understanding on her ride, in the wanton cruelty no
evident on youn. You molt have known, that while
you were enjoying yourself in Devonthire, pursuing flesh
cchemee, always gay, always haypy, the wan reduced to
the extremest indigence."

“But, u n my soul, I did not know it,” he warmly
replied; “ did not recollect that I had omitted to give
her my direction; and common-sense might have told
her how to ﬁnd it out.”

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY- [59

“Well, sir, and what said Mrs Smith i”

“ She taxed mewith the oﬂ'ence, nt once, and my con-
fusion ma be guessed. The purity of her life, the for-
rmlity 0 her notions, her i drince of the world—-
everything was against me. he matter itself I could
not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it.
She was reviously disposed, I believe, to doubt the
morality o my conduct in general, and was moreover
discontented with the ve little attendee, the very little
pom'on of my time that hid bestowed on her, in my
present visit. In short, it ended in a total breach. By
one measure I might have saved myself. In the hei ht
of her morality, good woman! she oﬁ'ered to forgive
the if I would marry Eliza. That could not be--—
and was formally dismissed from her favour and her

. house. The night following this affair—I was to go the
next morning—was spent me in deliberating on what
my future conduct should . The struggle was great
———but it ended too soon. My affection for Marianne,
my thorough conviction of her atnchment to nae—it
was all insullicient to outweigh that dread of poverty, or
get the better of those false ideas of the necessity of
riches, which I was natural] inclined to feel, and ex-
pensive society had incre . I had reason to believe
myself secure of my present wife, if I chose to address
her, and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else
in common prudence remained for me to do. An heavy
scene however awaited me, before I could leave Devon-
shire; I was engaged to dine with you on that very day,
some apology was therefore necessary for my breaking
the engagement. But whether I should write this
a lo , or deliver it in person, was 3 int of long

te. To see Marianne, I felt woul be dreadful,
and I even doubted whether I could see her again, and
keep to my resolution. In that point, however, I under-
valued my own magnanimity, as the event declared: for

160 am: All) sustain“,

I went,I aw her,and awherntilerable,and leﬁher
miau'able—andlel’ther,ho]in nevertoaeeher ' ”

“Wh did you call,Mr illoughhyl” lid ' ,
rep ‘5‘; “a note would have lowered every
yurpme hywaeitnecemrytocall?”

“It wan neceenryto my own pride. I could not
bear to leave the country in I manner that might lead
you, or the rest of the neighbourhood, to aurpect any
part of what had really [ranted between Mn Smith and
myaelf, and I resolved therefore on calling at the cottage,
in my way to Honiton. The light of your dear sister,
however, was really dreadful; and to heighten the
nutter, I found her alone. You were all gone, I do
not know where. I had left her only the evening before,
to fully, I0 ﬁrmly retolved within myaelf on doing right!
A few houn were to have engaged her to me for ever;
and I remember how happy, how y were my spiriu, u
I walked from the cottage to A cnham, satisﬁed with
nay-elf, delighted with everybodyl But in our last
interview of friendship, I approached her with a acme
of guilt that almon took from me the power of dia-
acmbling. Her normw, her dinppoinunent, her
regret, when I told her, that I was obliged to leave
Devomhire no immediately—I never thall ﬁarget it;
united, too, with such reliance, and: conﬁdence in me!
OGod! whatan hard-heartean I wall"

They were both silent for a few momenta. Elinor
lint lte.

“ id you tell her that you thould soon return 2"

“ I do not know what I told her," he replied, im-
patiently; “less than was due to the put, beyond a
doubt, and in all likelihood much more than wu
justiﬁed by the future. I cannot think of it—it won’t
do. Then come your dear mother to torture me
farther, with all her kindness and conﬁdence. Thank
Heaven! it dd torture me. I was miserable. Min

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. l6!

Duhwood, ou cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gimmeto ookbackoumyownmioery. Iowemh
ugrudge to myrelfforthe rtu “.mﬂyfollyofmy
own heart, that all my post lingering- under it are onl
triumph and exultation no me now. Well, I went, 1e
allthatIloved,and Went tothoeeto whom,athe|t,1
was only indifferent. My jo to town—travelling
with my own horses, and ﬁreman no tediouuly—no
creature to speak to—my own reﬂecﬁoru l0 cheerful—
when I looked forward ev ing no inviting l—when
I looked back at Barton, e picture no nothing!—
oh l—it wu a blessed journey."

He ﬂopped. ‘ -

“Well, Iir,” said Elinor, who, though pitying him,
grew impatient for hi1 departure, “ and thin in all i”

“ All l—no—have you forgot what pieced in town?
That inﬁmoul letter l . Did Ihe show it you i ”

“ Yet, I our every note that need."

“ When the lint of here reac ed me (an it immedi-
ately did, for I was in town the whole time), what I
felt io—in the common plume, not to be expreued; in
a more dmple one—perhaps too Iimplc to nine my
emotion—my feelings were very, very painful. Every
line, every word wan—in the luckneyed which
their dear writer, were she here, would forb‘ a dagger
to my heart. To know that Marianne was in town
W in the name language—a thunderbolt. Thunder-
bolt: Ind daggen!——-what a reproof would the have
given me l—her mte, her opinions—I believe they are
better known to me than my own, and I m sure they
ere dearer."

Elinor’l heart, which had undergone many change:
in the coune of thin extraordinary convemrion, we:
now softened again; yet lhe felt it her duty to check
ouch idea in her companion :- the Inn

"This it not right, Mr Willoughhy. - Remember

u. L

:6: sense AND sensmu'rv.

diet on hurried. Relate only what in
eonmyezuee you think neneuary for me to hear.” you,

“Marianne'lnote,hymuringmethetlwu nil]:-
dnrtoheruin fonnerdnyh—thuinqite ofthe
many,mlnyweelu wehod been Iepented,lhe m u
nonttlnt in her own feeling! and In full of ﬁlth in the
connuncy of mine u ever, Awakened all my mane.
I any awakened, beau-e time and London, buineu Ind
diupntion had in some meawre uieted it, and I had
been growing I line hardened villain, fancying mynelf
indifferent to her, and churing to fan: that the too
mutt have become indifferent to me; king to Inde
of our pant attachment II a mere idle, triﬂing bnninea,
ﬁngging'u'p my nhoulden in proof of it. being It}, and

enem eve ram: 1, overcoming ev on e,
necretlygnyinlgydgv and then, ' I shall glldt‘yl
to hear the in well married.’ ‘But thi- note made me
know mylelf better. I felt that the wu inﬁnitely
dearer to me thnn any other woman in the world, and
that I was using her infamouely. But everything we
then jult eettled between Mill Grey and me, To
retreat wan impollihle. All that I had to do, van to
Avoid you both. I sent no anewer to Marianne,
intending by that meant to preserve mynelf from her
further notice; and for tame time I me even deter-
mined not to call in Berkeley-meet: but at lat,
judging it wiaer to nﬂ'ect the air of a cool, common
acquainnnCe than anything clue, I watched you all ufely
out of the home one morning, and left my name.”

“ W-tched nu out of the houeel ”

“ Even Io. You would be turpriled to hear how
often I wntched you, how often I was on the point of
felling in'with you. I have entered many a nhop to
Ivoid your light, at the carriage drove by. Lodging an
I did In Bond Street, there wn hardly a dayin which
I did not latch I glimpse of one or other of you; and

suns: AND SINSlBle. 163

nothing but the most conmnt watchfulness on in side,
amost invariablypreuiling dedreto onto your
si ht, could have sepented us so long. avoided the
Nfiddletons us much as possible, as well as everybody
else who was likely to prove an ac unintnnce in common.
Not swnre of their being in town, owever, I blundered
on Sir John, I believe, the ﬁrst day of his coming,
and the day after I called at Mrs Jennings’s. He
askedme to a party, a dance nthishoueeinthe
evening. Had he not told me as an inducement that
you and your sister were to be there, I should have
felt it too certain it thing to trust In If near him.
The next morning brought soother rt note from
Mnrinnne—atill affectionate, morn, nrtless, conﬁd-
ing—everything thnt could e wry conduct most
hateful. I could not answer it. I tried, but could not
frame a sentence. But I thought of her, I believe,
e moment of the day. Iflw can pity me, Mist
D wood, pity my situation as it was (but. With my
head and heart full of your sister, I was forced to play
the happy lover to another womanl Those three or
four weeks were worse than all. Well, at last, a I
need not tell u were forced on me: and wlnt 1
sweet ﬁgure cut Awhatsn evening of agony it wael
Murianne, heautiﬁnl as an angel, on one side, calling me
' Willoughhy in such I tone l—O Codi—holding out
her hand to me, aking me for an explanation with those
hew-itchin eyes ﬁxed in such speaking solicitude on my
(one! Sophia. jealousasthe devil,on the other
hand, looking Ill that was—— Well, it does not signify;
it in over now. Such-an evening! I run may from
usllsssoon as I could.hut not heforeIhad seen
uianne’s sweet face as white as death. Tbal wns
thehu,|utlook Ieverhadofher—the last mannerin
which she appeared to me. It was a horrid sight! Yet
'whenlrhoughtofher to-dayasrenllydying,itwns n

I 64 suns: Ann SENSIBILITV.

kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly
how the would a]: r to time who raw her lat in thin
world. She was fore me, conttantly before me, u I
travelled, in the lame look and hue."

A rhort pauae of mutual droughtfulneu unneeded.
Willoughby, ﬁm muting himaelf, broke it thun—

“Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your twister
is certainly better, certainly out of danger?”

“ We are allured of it. '

" Your poor mother too l—doting on Marianne! "

“ But the letter, Mr Willoughhy, your own letter;
have on anything to my about that?’

“fee, yes, {but in 'cular. Your deter wrote to
me again, you know, e very next morning. You nw'
what ahe raid. I was breakfasting at the Elli-om’;
and' her letter, with name others, was brought to me
then from my lodgings. It happened to mtch Sophia’a
eye before it caught mine; and its size, the ele-
gance of the paper, the handwriting, altogether in.
mediame gave her a mapicion. Some vague report
had reached her before of my attachment to tome

oung lady in Devomhire, and what had paced within
er obeervation the preceding evming had marked
who the young lady um, and made her more jealoua
than ever. Atfecting that air of playfulneu, therefore,
which ll delightful in a woman one lover. the opened
the letter directly, and read its contents. She war well
paid for her impudence. She read what made her
wretched. Her wretchedneu I could have home, but
her pension—her malice——at all eventl it rnuat be
"append. And in short, what do you think of my
wife’r ater of letter-writing i—delicate, tender, truly

feminine—was it not i”
" Your wifel—the letter war in your own hand-

wnun ."
“Y‘ea, but I had only the credit of Iervilely

sursr: AND autumn-n. r65

mhoentenceeulwuhnmedtoyut myrnmeto.
Theoriginalwuall hernwn,her own hnpyy thought!
and gentle diction. But what could Idzlo 31-13:: m
en everythin in prepnnuon' , the y
mam hiking like a fool. Preparation l—dayl
—In honen word-,her moneywu neceunry to me,
Indinariunu'onlikzminﬁnnyt‘hlingwudtﬁbe donngto
preventnrupmre. nd rer ,what ' itl' ' to
rnychaneter in theopinionofMu-ianneandherfriendn,
in what Ian ge my nnvwer wu couchedl‘ It moat
have been on ytoone end. Myhuaineu was todeclare
m If n noundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or
a [utter war of little i finance. ‘ I am ruined for
ever in their opinion,’ nai I to mynelf; ‘ I am shut out
for ever from their Iociety; they alread think me an
“Principled fellow, this letter will on y make them
thrnk me a blaekguard one.’ Such were my reanonin
II, in a sort dimer-amendment, I copied mywifea
words, and p with the lent relic: of Marianne.
Her three notes—unluckin they were all in my pocket-
book, or I lhould have denied their exietence, Ind
honrded them for ever; I was forced to put them up,
and could not even kiu them. And the lock of hair—
thnttoolhudalwayvcarﬁedahout rneinthererne
pocket-hook, which was now aearched b Madam with
the moat ' ingrntiating vimlence,—the ear lock—all,
memento wan torn from me."

“You are very wrong, Mr Willoughby, blame-
Ible,” raid Elinor, while her voice, in spite o henelf,
betrayed her companion“: emotion; “ you ought not
to lpeak in thin way, either of Mrs Willoughhy or my
inter. - You have made our own choice. It war not
forced on you. Your wife ha a claim to your lite-
neu, to your t, at lea-t. She mun he nmchzd to
you,onhewo dnothavemarriedyau. Totreather
with unkindneu, to oped: of her tlightingly, in no atone-

166 suns: AND smslnru'rv.

mthnrianne,norennIeuppoeeitnreliefto your
own conscience.”

“Do not talk to me of m wife," mid he, with A
heavy nigh. “She does not eeerve your companion.
She knew I had no legend for her when we nun-led.
Well, married we were, and came down to Combe
Magna to be happy, and afterwarde returned to town
to be gr . And, now do you pity me, Mile Duhwood 2
or have Iaidall thin to no purpose! Am I—he it
only one degree—am Ile- guilty in youropinion than I
wan before? M intentions were not nlvnyu wrong.
Have I explain away any of my iltl”

"Yet, you have certalny remov eomething—e
little. You have proved younelf, on the whole, leer
faulty than I had believed ou. You have proved your
heart lea wicked, much eu wicked. But I hardly
know—the misery that you have inﬂicted—1 hardly
knomwlhnt could have made it worse.”

“ i u tto ur liner, when their re-
covered, wliZt me beenyolelling you? Let me be a
little li htened too in her opinion as well u in youn-
Ynu teﬁ me that the has forgiven mellread . Let me
be able to fancy that a better knowledge 0 my heart,
and of my present feelinge, will drew from her a more
pponuneoue, more naturnl, more gentle, leu digniﬁed
orgiveneu. Tell her of my misery and my penitence,
tell her that my heart wan never inconetant to her, and

if you will, that It thie moment the in dearer to me than
ever.”

u I will tell her all that in neceuary to what may
comparatively be called your juetiﬁeation. But you
have not explained to me the particular remn of your
coming now, nor how you heard of her illneu.”

“ Last night, in Dmry-lane lobby, I ran agninlt Sir
John Middleton, and when he saw who I was for the
ﬁrst time then: two month!) he Ipoke to me. hat he

SINSI AND smlmu'rv. I67

hadcutmeeveraincemymaniageﬂhadoeen without
Iurpriae or mentment. Now, however, hia good-
natured, honeot, atupid Ioul, full of indignation againlt
me, and concern for your sister, could not reliat the
temptation of telling me what he knew ought to,tho h
probably he did not think it would, vex me horrib y.
AI bluntly n he could a it, therefore, he told me
that Marianne Duhw was dying of a putrid fever at
Cleveland—a letter that morning received from Mrl
Jenning- declared her danger moot imminent— the
Palmer: all gone oil" in a fright, kc. I was too‘much
Ihocked to be able to pan mylelf all u ineemible, even
to the unditoemin Sir John. Hit heart wu nﬂened
in Ieeingrnine vu er; and so much of hit ill-will waa
done awny, that when we parted, he almost Ihook Inc
the hand. while he reminded me of an old promioe
ut a pointer uppy. What I felt on hearing that
your timer wan ymg—and dying, too, believing me the
ten villain upon earth,|comin haﬁng me in he?
momenta—for how could I te what horrid pro-
jects might not have been imputed l—Ou I we
sure would represent me an capable of anyt 'ng. What
I felt waa dreadfull My resolution wan coon made,
and at eight o’clock thin morning I was in my caniage.
Now you know all."
Elinor made no answer. Her thought: were
- silently fixed on the irreparable injury which too arly
nu independence and in come uent habit: of idlenelc,
diuipataonmnd luxury, had e in the mind, the charac-
ter, the ha ‘neu, o a man who, to every advantage of
per-on talenta, united a diupoaition naturally 2H:
and honett, and ' a feeling, aﬁ'ectionate temper.
world had'made him exmvnglnt Ind vain; extran-
$nce and vanity had made him cold-heartedanduelﬁlb.
anity, while oeekhipg in own guilty triumph at the ex-
pense of another, involved him in a real attachment.

168 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

which exu-svagsnce, or at lent its oﬁ'npring necessity, had
required to be sacriﬁced. Each faulty yropensity, in lend-
ing him to evil, had led him likewiseto punishment The
machment from which against honour, against feeling,
against every better intent! he had outwardly torn himeelf,
now, when no longer allowable, governed every thought ;
and the connexion, for the sake of which he had, with
little sample, left her sister to misery, was likely to prove
awuree of unhappiness to himself of aﬁlr more incurable
nature. From a reverie of this kind she wan recalled It
the end of some minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing
himeelf from a reverie at least nally punﬁil, started up
in ration for going. and

“ ere is no use in staying here; I must he of."

"Are you ing hack to town?"

“No ; to be Magoo. I have business there;
from thence totown in a d: or two. Good-bye."

He held out his hand. he could not refuse to give
him here ; he preseed it with affection.

“ And youdo think oomething better ofme than you
did?” said he, letting it fall, and leaning again: the
mantelpiece, as if forgetting he was to go.

Elinor assured him that she did; that she forgave,
pitied him, wished him well—was even interested in
his happiness—and added some gentle counsel an to the
hehavronr most likely to promote it His answer was
not very encoura 'ng. '

“ Al to that, ’ said he, “ I must rub through the
world as well as I can. Domestic happineu is out of
the question. If, however, I am allowed to think that

and yours feel an interest in my fate and acu'ous,

v it may he the meme—it may put me on my guard—e1:

least, it may be something to live for. Marianne, to be

sure, is lost to me for ever. Were I even, by any
bland chance, at liberty sgain—"

Elinor stopped him with a reproof.

ms: AND smsrnrm'v. :69

“Well,” he lied, “once more -b e. I dull
now I“ anrdplive in dmdofongogimt?”

“ hat you mean r"

“ Your liner'a marriage.”

“You are very She can never be more lost
to you than nhe in now.

“ But the will be gained by eorne one elle. And if
that come one Ihould be the very he whom, of all
:‘hers, Lela: benr— But I will not slay go

m o compum' nate -w' , y
liming that whereyfmhave molt inju I an lew-
for 've. Good-bye; Godblenn you!”

ndwithﬂruewordghedmoetnnaucohhermm.

than: $117.

LINOR, for some time after he left her, for some

time even alter the and of his carria had

died away, remained too much opp by I

crowd of ideal, widely diﬁeﬁng in themelvee, but of

which ndneu w the genenl result, to think even of
her «inter.

Willonghby—he whom only hnlf-an-honr ago she had
ahhorred an the mom. worthleu of men—Willoughhy,
in spite of all his faults, excimd a degree of commreera-
tion for the sufferings produced by them, which made
her drink of him at now separated for mr from her
fmily with n undemeu, a regret, rather in pruportinn,
u Ihe anon acknowledged within heneIl', to hit wishe-
thln to hip meriu. She felt that hil inﬂuence over her
mind was heightened by circumetancee which ought not
in reuon to have weight; by that pemn of unenrnrmn 
attraction—that open, affectionate, and lively manner
which itwu no meritto pone-11nd by that still

170 SINSI AND SENSIBILITY.

srdent love for Mnrisnne, which it was not even innit»
cent to indulge. But she felt that it was so, long, long
before she could feel his inﬂuence less.

When at last ill: returned to the uncomcious Mari-
anne, she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long
and sweet a sleep to the extent of her hoyee. Elinor’u
hart want full. The pant, the recent, the future-
Willoughby’s visit, Marianne’s urfgty, and her mother’s
expected arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation
of Epiﬁts which kept of every indication of fatigue, and.
ma e her only fearful of betraying hernelf to her sister.
Short was the time, however, in which that fear could
affect her, for within half-an-hour after Willoughby'e
laving the home, she was again called down-mire by
the sound of another carriage. Eager to save her
mother from every unnecessary moment’s horrible luv
pence, she ran immediately into the hall, and reached
the outward dour just in time to receive and mpport
her as she entered it.

Mrs Duhwood, whoee terror as they drew near the
house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne’l
being no more, had no voice to inquire after her, no
voice even for Elinor; but :be, waiting neither for
ealutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;
—-and her mother, catching it with all her usual '
warmth, was in a moment as much overcome by her
happiness as‘ she had been before by her fears. She
was supported into the drawing-room between her
daughter and her friend: and there, ahedding tears of
joy, though still unable to speak, embraced Elinor again
nod again, turning from her at intervals to pres. Colonel
Bnndon’e hand, with a look which spoke at once her
gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with henelf
In the bliu of the moment. He shared it, however, in
e silence even gmter than her own.

As soon as Mrs Duhwood had recovered herself, to

SENSE AND SINSIDILITY. l7!

lee Marianne was. herﬁnt deire; and in two minutee
ahe wet with her beloved child, rendered dearer to her
than ever by aheence, unhnppineee, and danger. Elinor‘e
delight, as ahe saw what each felt in the meetin Was
only checked by an appnheneion of its robbing ari-
anne of further eleep: but Mrs Duhwood could be
calm, could be even rudent, when the life of a child
wa- at ﬂake, and arianne, satisﬁed in knowing her
mother wan near her, and conscious of being too weak
for convenation, eubmitted readily to the eilence and
uiet prescribed by every nuree around her. Mn
wood would it up with her all night, and Elinor,
in compliance with her rnother’l entreat , ‘went to bed.
But the rent, which one night entirely Ileeplesa and
many hour. of the moat wearing anxrety seemed to
make uirite, was lee t or? irritation of irita.
Willourg‘lilsy, “poor Willhughhy,’ at she now nl owed
herself to call him, was constantly in her thou htt; the
would not but have heard his vindication for e world,
and now blamed, now uitted herself, for having
judged him so harshly he re. But her promiee of
relating it to her titter wna invarinbl painful. She 
dreaded the performance of it, dread what it: effect
on Marianne might be; doubted whether, after ouch an
explanation, ahe could ever be happy with another, and
for a moment, wished Willoughby a widower; then
remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved henelf, felt
that to bi: suffering: and bi: constancy, far more than
to hit rival’a, the reward of her eister was due, and
wished anything rather than Mrt Willoughhy'l death.
The thock of Colonel Brandon’s errand at Barton
hld been much softened to Mrs Dnhwood by her own
mi:- alann; for so great we her uneuineet nbout
' ne, that the had alreIdy determined to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any
farther intelligence, and had so far Ietxled her journey

[1! sun All) mun.

hel'orehiaarrinLdmdaeCueye'eredlenexpeeted
mymmfenehlﬂarpreteny,uhermother
wuwillingtnrakqherwheretherenrightheinfecﬁoo.

Marianne continued to mdeveryday,and the
brilliant cheer-follie- of Mn Dadawood’e look- Ind
qiﬁupovdhermbguhnputedlydedaredh-
Idﬁaneofthehappienwornenrntheworld. Elinor
uddwthardndmhndmwwirne-iuprooﬁ,
withomaometinuvoodu-ingvhethahermherem
recollectedEdnn‘l. ButMnDaath-uingm

the men account of her own dinppoinunent
which linor had In: her, was led any the
exuberance of joy to think only of what in-

craaeiL Manannewaaruomd wherfrnmndanger
inwhich,nalhenovbegan In feel,her own milaken
wmt in encouraging rhe unfortunate amchmeot to

illoughby had contributed to plaoc her; and. in her
recovery ehe had yet another room: of joy unthought
ofby Elinor. hm thul imparted to her, an noon an
any opportunity of private conference between them
occu

“At Int we are alone. M Elinor, you do not

et know all my happiness. lonel Brandon lover
' nne; he ha told me no himeelf.”

Her daughter, feeling by mrm both planned and
pained, Ill'plllcd and not urprieed, we: all clear
mention. '

“You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should
wonder at your compome now. Had I not down In
wieh for any ponible good to my family, I ehould have
ﬁxed on Colonel Brandon’e marrying one of you a the
object um delinhle. And I believe Marianne will be
lllemoethappywithhirnofthetwo."

Elinor W3! half inclined to aak her moon for think-
ing .0, because tieﬁed that none founded on an in-
partial consideration of their age, characters, or feelings,

SENS! All!) SBNlBlLlTV. 173

could be given—but her mother 1mm always he
ended "my by her on any inaerenin
nibjecgendthereforednmdol'aninquiryuhe pan-e5
it all with a cmile. l

"Heopenaedhinwhoehanto Inc yenerda awe
mulled. It came out quite nnnwnrec, nitey unde-'
Iignedly. I, you my well believe, co d talk of
nothing but my child ;-he could not conceal his dic—
true; I I“: that it equalled my own, Ind he, perhap,
thinking Hut mm fnendlhip, II the world now goes,
would not co wean I sympathy—or rather not
thinking at ell, I mppoee—grving Way to irredctible
feelings, made me ac uainted with his came-t, tender,
conunnt affection for arinnne. He he loved her, my
Elinor, ever ince the ﬁrst moment of seeing her."

Here, however, Elinor perceived, not the language,
not the fedonl of Colonel Brandon, but the natural
«unhelliehnﬁlentc of her mother’a active fancy, which
f'ahianed everything delightﬁxl to her, a it chooe.

“Hit regard for her, inﬁnitely outpacing anything
that Willoughby ever felt or feigned, a much more
warm, u more sincere or constant—whichever we are
to all it—hac mhcimd through all the knowledge of
dear Marianne'e unhappy prepoecucion for that worth-
len young maul—and without nelﬁihneu—without
encounging n l—could he have seen her happy
with another? nch a noble mindl—luch openneu,
Inch incerity l—no one can be deceived in Liar. ’

“Colonel Bundon’n character,” aid Elinor, “u an
excellent man, in well enabliahed."

“I know it in,” r7>lied her mother neriaurly, " or
aﬁermhnwnming, should bet-he lantoencounge
such nﬂ'eetion, or even to he placed by it. But hie
coming for me as he did, with Incl] active, inch rend
friendtlnpﬁcenoughto provehimoneofthewnnhien

of men.’

~v

174 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ Hie character, however," answered Elinor, “doel
not rent on one act of kindness, towhich hilaﬂ'ection
for Marianne. were humanity out of the cue, would
have prompted him. To Mn Jennings, to the Middle-

Vtona, he had been long nnd intimately known; they

ually love and respect him: and even my knowledge

" 0 him, though lately acquired, in very condderable,

and to highly do I value and esteem him, that if Mari-
anne can be happy with him, I shall be a ready u
younelf to think our connexion the greamt hleuin to
no in the world. What anawer did you give him i id

u allow him to he ?"

“Oh! my love, could not then talk of hope to
him or to myself. Marianne might at that moment he
d 'ng. But he did not ask for hope or encouragement.

in was an involun conﬁdence, an i reuihle
eﬂ'ulion to a nothing dandy—not on appliation to a
patent. Yet after a time I 15:! ca , for at lint I was
quite overcome, that if the lived, as truated the night,
my greatest happineu would lie in promotin their
marriage; and lmce our arrival, since our delightful
necurity, I have repeated it to him more ﬁlll , have
given him every couragement in my power. ime, a
very little time, I tell him, will do everything ;-—Mari-
anne’a heart in not to be wanted for ever on auch a man
an Willoughby. His own meritl must won secure it.”

" To judge from the Colonel’s lpirite, however, you
have not yet made him equally sanguine.”

“No. He thinks Marianne’a affection too deeply
rooted for any change in it under a great length of
time, and even on posing her heart again free, in too
diiﬁdent of him to believe, that with ouch a differ-
euce of age and di ‘tion, he could ever attach her.
There, however, he I: quite mistaken. Hi! age in only
I0 much beyond here as to he an advantage, an to make
hit character and principle: ﬁxed; and hit diapouition,

sense AND suuerurv. x 75

Iamwellnonvinoedﬁremtly the very one to nuke
yonrl'rter .Andhirpenan,hilmnneutoo,
nrenllinhie vonr. Myparu'eli doelnothlindme;
 heceminlyinootrohundnomcu illoughby; but,»
the nine time, there in Iomething much more pleating
in hie countenance. There wu alny I numbing, if
you remember, in Willoughby’r eye: at timee, which I
did not like.” '

Elinor could not remember it; but her mother,
without waiting for her ﬂuent, continued—

“And his mannerl. the Colonel’s mannen, on not
only more pleasing to me than Willoughby'a ever were,
blatheynreofn kindl well know to he more solidi
emailing to Marianne. Their gentleneer, their genuine
attention to other people, and their manly unmidied
implieity, ir rnuch more accorth with her real die-
Poution, than the livelineu, often artiﬁcial, end often
ill-timed, of the other. I m V cure myeelf, that
had Willoughby turned out or real y amiable :- he in.
yroved him-elf the contrary, Marianne would yet never
barebeenuohaplaywithbim,udrewill bewith
Colonel and“; d3 Sh “id

She er uterco not uitelree
with berm her diluent wu not hand, an therein".-
guve no offence. .

“ At Dehford, Ihe will be within an distance of
35’" “mi Minn“? ifih. if "mi "

mogul: In 'it, r earititn

' ’ theremcenzinl ymw! he lame mull bx
or cottage close by, that we d suit I)! quite at well :0
our pie-en: duration."

Poor Elinor! here wu I new echeme for getting her
to Delafordl but her irit WII etubhorn.

“Hiefomme tool ratmytirneoflife,you know,
everybody cam about that; and though I neither know, -
nor delire to know, what it really in, I am lure it mun
be 1 good one."

I76 SENSE AND SENS“!le-

Hele wereinterrupted dicenu-an'oeofa
thirdpeni?sod Elinorwrthdrezym think it all over
in rivate,towishucoeutoherfriend,andyet,in
wishing it, to feel s pang for Willonghhy.

Chapter i191.

ARIANNE’S illness, though weakening in its
kind, had not been long enough to make her
recovery slow; and with youth, natural etrength,

and her mother’s presence in aid, it proceeded so
monthly u to enable her to remove, within four day-
after the arrival of the latter, into Mn Palmer‘a dren-
ing-room. When there, at her own particular request,
for she wn impatient to pour forth her thanks to him
for fetching her motlwr, Colonel Brandon was invited
to vin't her.

Hie emotion in entering the room, in seeing her altered
looks, and in receiving the pale hand which she im-
mediately held out to him, was such an in Elinor’s
conjecture, mun arise from eomething more than his
affection for Marianne. or the consciousness of its being
known to others; and she soon discovered in his melan-
choly eye and varying complexion an he looked at her
sister, the probable recnnence of many pan scenes of
misery to hia mind, brought back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza almdy acknowledged,
and now strengthened by the hollow eye, the sickly
skin, the re of reclining weakness, and the warm
acknowl gment of peculiar obligation.

Mrs Dachwood, not less watchful of what passed
than her daughter, but with a mind very differently
inﬂuenced, and therefbre watching to very dilferent
effect, saw nothing in the Colonel’s behaviour but what

ms: Aim melanin. 117

true from the moat Iimple and «If-evident Ienntionn,

while in the eetione and word: of Marion: the per-
lienelftothinktlutunnethingmredungnti-

de already dawned.

. At the end of another day or two, Marianne glowing

mth ironger every twelve hourl, Mn Duhwood.
urge! equal]

8

y by her own and her daughmr’e withee,
whikofremovingtoBmon. Onbermeuum
depmded thoee of her two friend” Mn leaning: could
not quit Cleveland during the Dashwoodn’ my, and
Colonel Brandon wu noon brought by their united
reqnagtooomiderhiaownabodedmeueqully
determinate, if not equally indispennble.‘ At hi- and
Mn Jenninge'l united request in return, Mn Duh-
woodwuprevailedanmncceptthemeof Iii-carriage
on her journey back, for the better accommodation of
her lick child; and the Colonel, at the joint invitation
of Mn Dnhwood and Mn Jennings, whose active
good-nature made her friendly and hospitable for ouier
people In well it herself, engaged with pleume to
redeem it by I vilit It the comge, in the couree of I
few'weekl.

The dny of upnmtion and re arrived; and
Mlﬁlnne,nﬂernking|opnrti nrnndlen enede
leave of Mn Jenninge—one no earnestly gr: ul, to full
of respect and kind Vilth u nemed due to her own
hart from a necret acknowledgment of put inottention
—-and bidding Colonel Brandon farewel with the
oordiality of a friend, war carefully assisted by him into
the carnage, of which he neemed anxiom that the
ehould engrou at least half. Mn Duhv‘lood and
Elinor then followed, and the other! were left by them-
Ielvegtoulkofthemvellergandfeel their owndul-
new, all Mn Jennings wan ummoned to her chin to
takeoomfort in the gouipofhermaidfortheloll
of her two young oompamona; and Colonel Bnndon

n. M

m .m.. .hmhhmm m m m." m.,.m..m w mm

W a“ m Wm“ Qummmmmmmm
. .m “ﬁn”? “mmmmﬁmmmmgmmﬁ “M
m .. unit Hf thmwm Mama.

a m; «.3 am. m "mmmmmmmmmmm
m m “TEN.” mm” mm m mm mmwﬂm n
 NEW.REM.memmwmmm
m mammmammmgmmmmmmwmmmm

. um AND mermnrrr. I79

pun-ed umy without the mnemt of a unile. Alter
dinner, ohewouldtry her ' forte. She wentto it;
bntthemtuiconwhich eyeﬁmreetedwuan
Sperm, procured for her by Willoughby, conﬁning Iome
their ﬁvourite duetl, Ind bearing on in outh leaf
her own nlme in hi: hundwriting. That would not do.
She Ibook her heed, put the mulic tide, and, after run-
ning over the keys for I minute, complained of feeble-
neu in her Eugen, and cloned the inunrrnent again;
declaring. however, with ﬁnnneu or she did no, that the
Ihould in ﬁrm practice much.
The next mornin produced no abatement in these
lymptomr. n the contrary, with' a mind and
body Illlte strengthened by rent, the looked and spoke
with more genuine 'rit, Intici ting the leuure‘of
Margaret'r return, an talking the dear (Emily party
which would then be reamed, of their mutual pumitl
and cheernt Iociety an the only happiness worth I wilh.
“ When the weather in uettled, and I have recovered
my strength," laid the, “ we will take long walla
together every day. We will walk to the farm at the
ed of the down, and see how the children go on ; we
wilglewalk to Sir John’l new plantation: at Barton Cross,
and the Abbeyland; and we will often go to the old
ruin: of the Prio , and try to tmee its foundation: an
far no we Ire wd they once ruched. I know we
dull be happy. I know the summer will Jr: happily
away. I mean never to be later in rising. n nix, and
from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment
between mulic Ind reading. I have formed my pin,
'and am determined to enter on I course of nerioue mdy.
Our own library in too well known to me to he moi-ted
. to for mything nd mere amusement. But there
ue‘mlny workawe worth reading at the Park; and
there are other: of more modern production which I
' know' I an borrow of Colonel Brandon. By reading

mans-Iranian.

180

ix hour: a , I dial] ' in the ounne of a
:ellzvernonth a Eli-t,“ of which I now
fed Inyeelf to want."

Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated no
noblyaathia;thoughnnilingtoaeethenmeuger
ﬁncywhiehhadheenludinghertotheexu'emeof
languidindolenoe and aelﬁah «piningnowatwork in
introducing excee- into a theme of arch rational
employment and virtuoua aelf-oontroul. Her nnile,
however, changed to a nigh when the remembered that
her promise to Willmghhy was yet nnﬁilﬁlled, and
feared-Inhadthattn communicatewhich mightagnin
maenlethenﬁndofMaﬁnngand ruin atleaa ﬁt I
. Willing
thereforetodelaytheevilhour,lhereaolvednowaittill
her litter't health were more eecure, before ahe anointed
it. But the reaolution was made only to be broken. -

Marianne had been two or three day: at home, before
the weather was line enough for an invalid like her-elf
to venture out. But at ha a aoft, genial morning
a as might the daughter’s wiahea
ammmther’a oonﬁdeneefnrsd Mananne,‘ leaning on
Elinor‘e arm, was authorised to walk at long as she could
without fatigue, in the lane before the house.

The inert net out at a pace alow an the feebleneu of
Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried Iince her ill-
neu required ;—and they had advanced only an far
beyond the home auto admit a full view of the hill,
the important hill behind, when, ul'n with her e 9’
turned towards it, Marianne cal y ' -- ’2',

“There, exactly there ”-——pointing with one hand,
“on that ro'ecting mound—there I fell; and there I
(int saw i oughby.”

Her voice Inn]: with the word, but preaently reviving,
she added—

“ I am thankful to ﬁnd that I can look with to little

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 18:

Bin on ﬁre wl—Ihnll we ever ulk on that abject,
linor?"-—-heaiutingly it w uid.—-“ Or will it he
mgl—I ranqu ofiz now,l hopga Iooght to

Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.

“ Al for re " aid Marianne, “ I have done wich
duguferu is concerned. I donotmuntonlk
no you of what my feeling: have been for lu'rn, but what
they are now. At present,“ I could he utieficd on one
point—ill could be allowed tothinklhlthewunot
delay: satin a pm, not alwnyr deceiving me ;—-hut
there-1U! could he alluredthn he nevervm no
«my wioked u my fear: have aometimeu fancied him,
Iinee the Rory of that unfortunate girl—”

She ﬂopped. Elinor joyfully tenured her word: I:
the lowered——

“ If you could be named of Lint, you diink you
lhould he ."

“ Yer. y peace of mind is doubly involved in it;
-—for not. only in it horrible to amped a penon, who he
been what 5: ha been to In, of lunch deigng—bu:
what mun it make me to upper myself? What in a
duration like mine, but a moot shamefully ungurded
afectian could expone me 00—"

“ How then." asked her dam, “ would you Iccoun:
for his behaviour ? ”

“I would on pone hirn,—-Oh! how ladly would I

him, 0 y ﬁckle—very, very lic e."
' r'uid no more. She wan debating within her-
, ull'on the eligibility of beginning her nary directly, or
postponing it till Mnrienne were in monger humu—
Ind diey crept on for a few minucea in uilence.

' “ I In: not wilhing him mo much good," aid
Maﬁanneltlntwkhn nigh. “when Iwinhhil secret
reﬂection: my be 'no more unplunnl dun my own.
He will ull'er enough in them." '

182 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y.

“ Do you compare your conduct with his! "

“No. I compare it with what it ought to lave
beenrloompmitwithyoun." '

“ Our situationl have borne little reeernblnnce.”

“ They have home more than our conduct. Do
not, my deem: Elinor, let your kindness defend what I
know your judgment must censure. My illnens ha-
mnde me think—it has given me lei-ire Ind calmne-
for serious recollection. Long before I was enough
recovered to talk,l was perfectly able to reﬂect. I
considered the put: I saw in my own behaviour, since
the beginning of our acquaintance with him lut sutumn,
nothing but I series of imprudence towards myself, and
want of kindness to otherv. I saw that my own feel-
ings had pre red my suﬂ'erings. and that my went of
fortitude undJear them had almost led me to the ve.
My illness, I well knew, had been entirely broug on
by myself, by such negligence of my own health Is I
felt even at the time to be wrong. Had I died, it
would have been eelfodeltruction. I did not know my
danger till the danger was removed ; but with enchl'eel-
ings as theee reﬂections gave me, I wonder It my re-
covery,—wonder that the very eagerneu of my desire to
live, to have time for atonement to In God, and to
you all, did not kill me at once. Had died, in what
peculiar mire should I have left you,my num,myfrid,
my sister !— on, who had seen all the fretful lelﬁsh-
ncu of my latter days; who had known all the mur-
mnrings of my harm—How nhould I have lived in
your remembrancel—My mother too! How could
you have consoled her Eil cannot express my own ab-
horrence of myself. Whenever I looked toward: the

t. I saw some duty neglected, or some failing indulged.

verybody Ieemed Injured by me. The kindneu, the
nnceuing kindness of Mn Jenningr, I had repaid with
ungrateful contempt. To the Middletons, the Palmer‘s,

' sense AND SENSIBILITV. 183

theSteelegtoevery common uqmintaneeeven,lhni
been inwlent and unjult; withanhearthardenedlgainlt
their meriu, and n temper irritated by their very atten-
tion. To John, to Fanny, —- yes, even to them,
litrleutheydeserve,l had given let! than their due.
But yarn—you above all, Above my mother, had bean
wronged me. I, and only I, knew your been and
its sorrowv; yet, to what did it inﬂuence mei—not to
any compassion that could beneﬁt you or myself. Your
examplewasbefore me: butto what avail? Was I
more considerate of you and your comfort? Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by
taking any part in tho: ofﬁce: of general ‘00 hisanee
or particular gratitude which you had hitherto left
to dischng alone? No ;-—not less when I knewyuuto
be unhappy, than when I had believed you at ease, did
I turn away from every exertion of duty or friendship ;
scarce] allowed sorrow to exist but with me, regretun
only I‘val heart which deserted and wronged me, on
leaving for whom I professed an unbounded affec-
tion, to miserable for mynke."

Here ceasedthe rapid ﬂow of her self-reproving spirit ;
sod Elinor, impatient to aoothe, though too honest to
Better, gave her instantly that praise and III which
her frankness and her mun-idon so we deserved.
Marianne pressed her hand and replied—

“You are very good. The future must bemy roof.
I havelaiddownmyplan, and ifIamca leof
adhering to it, my feelings Ihall be gonmed and my
temper Improved. They shall no longer worry others,
nor torture myself. I shall now live solely for my
femily. You, my mother, end ergaret, mint hence-
ﬁmhbealltheworldtome; youwilleharemyoﬁec-
done entirer between you. From you, from my home,
I slut“ never again have the smallest incitement to
move a and if I do mix in other society, it will only be to

184 sense AND SENSIBILITY.

show that my spirit in humbled, my been amended, and
that I can practise the civilities, the lesser duties of life,
with gentlenees and forheerance. As for Willoughby,
tonytlntlshsll soon orthatllhallevu'forget him,
would be idle. Hie remembrance no be overcome by
no change of circummneu or opinion. But it shallhe
regulated, it shell be checked by religion, by reason, by
constant employment.”

She paused, and added in a lower voice, “ If I could
but know ln': heart, everything would become euy."

Elinor, who had now been some time reﬂecting on
the propriety or impropriety of Ipeedil hoarding her
nitration, wrthout feeling at all nearer '
ﬁrst. heard this; and perceiving that u reﬂecu'on did
nothing, resolution must do all, soon found her-elf lend-
ing to the fact.

She mansged the recital, as she hoped, with nddrese;
prepared her anxious listener with caution; related
simpl and honestly the chief inte on which Wil-
loughhy unded hu apology; id justice to his repentn
ante, an softened only hit protestations of present It.~
gnn‘l. Marianne said not a word; she trembled, her
eyes were ﬁxed on the ground, and her li became
whiter than even sickness had left them. thuullnd
inquirieo Ipnng up from her heart, but the dared not
urge one. She caught every syllable with panting
eagerneu; her hand, unknowingly to hereelf, closely
pruned her lieter’s, and team covered her Chet-kl.

Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards
home; and till they renched the door of the cottage,
easily conjecturing what her curiosity must be, though
no question wan suffered to speak it, allied of nothing
but Willoughby, and their convcmtion together wu
carefully minute in every particular of lpeech And look,
where minuteoeea could be lifer indulged. AI coon
as they entered the house, Marianne, with a kite of

SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y. r85

gratitude, and these two words just articulate through
her «an “Tell mums," Eilthdrewmﬁdzm her litter nod
walked slowl upsum.’ 'nor w not attempt to
disturb I Iolitride so Runnable u what the now sought;
Ind with a mind anxiously preqmnging in result, and
a recolulion of reviving the Iuhject tgain uhould
Merianne fail ro do it, she turned Into the parlour to
ﬁllﬁl her purring injunction.

Chum: 51/933.

RS DASHWOOD did not hear unmoved
the vindication of her former favourite. She
rejoiced in his being cleared from some part

of his imputed guilt; Ihe was sorry for him; she
wilhed him happy. But the feelings of the past could
not be recalled. Nothing could restore bun with a
faith unbroken—a character unblemished, to Marianne.
Nothing could do away the knowledge of what the
latter had mﬁ‘ered through his menu, nor remove the
guilt of hit conduct toward: Eliza. Nothing could
replace him, therefore in her former «teem, nor injure
the intereot of Colonel Brandon.
Had Mn Dashwood, like her daughter, heard
' Willoughby’s story from himself—had Ihe witneued
his distress, and been under the inﬂuence of hi: counte-
nance and hi: manner, it ll probable that her compassion
~ would haw been greater. But it wan neither in
Elinor‘l power, nor in her wish, to rouse such feeling:
in mother, by her mailed explmation, u had at lint
been called forth in herself. Reﬂection had given
column. to her judgment, and whered her own opinion
of Willoughhy’s delem; she wished, therefore, to
declare only the Iimple truth, and lay open ouch facts

“Ichagmﬁefmm—Ihtﬁﬁnotmldmthis
moming—lhvemhuniexactly'htlviledm
bur." Formmnhervoiceulongbm.
.mvuinghadﬁdnmmmgmalm
Mbefue:“1mmpufeulyuﬁﬁed. I'iitfu
nochange. Immﬂbvebecnhppywithhim,
qumwhu-Imhnmm
thin. I diould have Ind no conﬁnes, mm.
Nuhingmddlundoneitanymmy feeling-3’

“Ihow it-lhavig”aiedhamther. “
withamoflibudne ' ! Withom'huhd
Ioinjundthcpaceo thedarmofourﬁicndgand
duebenofmen? NwmyMaﬁamMmahnn
mbemadehppybyuchanun! Hal-Mlle
with: con-deuce, would lave felt I" that the
moduoeofhuhunhndwghmhu felt."

Marianne sighed, ma mud—“l rich RI- no
change.”

“You miderthem," aid Elinor, "exactly
a a good mind and a nound undermnding mun
coniderit;andldannyyoupuuive,uvdlu

sens: AND SENSIBILITV. :87

mylelf, not only in thin, but in my other
mnoee, mm enough to be oonvinoed tint your
marriage mutt have involved you in mnny certain
trouqu end dinppointmente in which you would have
beenpooriylu mdbylnull'ection, on him ide,much
lea cert-in. you married, you mun hive been
tiny: poor. Hi: expendveneu in Icknowledged even
byhimlelhandhirwholeconductdeclamthueelf-
denial in a word hardly undemood by him. His
demands and your inexperience together on a mall,
mall income, must have brought on dintreuea Whig
would not be the 1m grievom to you from having been
entirely unknown and unthou ht of before. row Ienue
of honour and honesty woufd have led u. I know,
when uware of your Iituation, to attempt the economy
thutwould 1 ar to you poulible; Ind perhape, u long
a your fm lry retrenched only on your own comfort,
you might have been whered to pnctile it, but beyond
that—and how little could the utmost of your angle
magment do to amp the ruin which had begun before
your marriage 2—beyond I501, had you endeavoured,
however reauonably, to abridge bi: enjoymenu, in it not
to be feared, that inmd o prevailing on feeling- on
tellieh to consent to it, you would have lessened your
own inﬂuence on his heart, Ind made him regret
the connexion which had involved him in ouch
difﬁculties 2 ”

Marianne’e lips quivered, and she repeated the word
“Selﬁsh?” in a tone that implied “Do you really
think him Ielﬁlh?”

“The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor, “ from
the ' ningtotheendofdieaﬂ'air,huheengmunded
on It won eelﬁuhne- which lint. made him
qort with your affection—which aﬁerwnrdl, when hie

~ own were any made him delay the conl'enion of it,
. Indwhichﬁ ycuriod him from Barron. Hieown

r88 sense Arm snusrnru-rv.

ur' mentorhinown eueuvu in everyparticultrhia

' principle." ‘ ‘

"tieverytrue.
ﬁjm’l

“At present,” continued Elinor, “he regretl what
he ha: done. And why doer he regret it? Beanie
he ﬁnd: it has not onlwered toward: himlelf. It in:
not made him happy. His circumnancel are now un-
ernbarraaud—he sullen from no evil of that kind, and
he think. only that he han married a woman of I let:
amiable temper than younelf. But doe- it thence
follow that, had he married you, he would have been
ha py? The inconvenienoel would have been diﬁ'erenr.

e would then have auﬁered under the pecuniary dio-
treuel which, becaunethey are removed, he now reckon.
in nothing. He would have had a wife of whooe
temper he could make no complaint, but he would have
been always neceaIitouo—alwaya poor; and probably
would noon have learnt to rank the innumerable com-
foru of a clear mate and good income not far more
importance, even to domestic happineu, than the mere ‘
temper of a wife.

“ I have not a doubt of it," mid Murinnne;
gand’ I have nothing to regret—nothing but my own

all . ’

‘yRather say your mother's impmdence, my child,”
aid Mr- Daahwood; “sh mun be anrwcrable.”

Marianne would not let her proceed; and Elinor,
satisﬁed that each felt their own error, wilhed to avoid
an survey of the past that might weaken her aiwer'a
Iprriu; Ihe therefore, pureuing the lint subject, immedi-
ately continued—

“ One ohaemtion may, I think, be fairly drawn from
the whole of the story—that all Willoughby'a difﬁculties
have arisen from the lint offence against virtue, in hit
behaviour to Eliza Williamt. That crime ha been

sens: m mommy. r89

theoriginofeveryleuerone,nndofallhilpment
dimontento."

Marianne auented mootfeelinglytodxeremrk; and
her mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel
Brandon's injuriel and meriu, warm as friendehip Ind
delign could nnitedly dictate. Her daughter did not
look, however, a if much of it were hard by her.
> Elinor, accordin to her ex lion, aw on the two
or three following in that nrianne did not continue
to gnin Itrength u the had done; but while her resolu-
tion w umbdned, and she ttill tried to up r cheer-
ﬁll Ind my, her eieter could Infer trult to effect of
time upon her health. '

"rig-m returned, and the fornin were a 'n Ill
to each other, agnin guiedy Iettled It not-
tage, and if not panning therr unlal nudiel with quite
so mud: vigour u when they ﬁm came to Barton, It
least planing a vigoroue precaution of them in future.

Elmor grew impatient for Iome tidingn of Edward.
She had henrd nothing of him Iince her leaving Lon-
don, nothing new of bin plane, nothing certain even of
hil present abode. Some letters had passed between
her and her brother, in consequence of Marianne’l ill-
neu; and in the ﬁrst of John’a, there had been this
untence :-—-“ We know nothing of our unfortunate
Edward, and can make no enquiriel on Io prohibited 3
eubject, but conclude him to he still at Oxford; " which
wu all the intelligence of Edward aﬁ'orded her by the
correepondence, for his name wae not even mennoned
in any of the eucceeding letten. She wan not doomed,
however, to belong in ignorance of hie memrea.

Their mm-eernnt had been tent one morning to
Exeter on hulineu; and when, a: he waited at table.
he had ratiﬁed the inquiries of hie mimeu no to the
event of his emnd, thi- wao hie voluntary communion-
lion——

190 Slim: Arm smsrnru'n.
“I luxpoie know m’am, that Mr Femrs in
married. you ’

Marianne gnve a violent Jun. ﬁxed her eye upon
Elinor, now her turning pale, Ind fell back in her chair in
hynericn. Mn Danhwood, whoee no she numered
the eervnnt’s inquiry, had- intuitive y taken the some
direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor‘s counte-
nance how much the mall mﬂ'ered, Ind in A moment
nfterwardn, alike dimmed y Mnrianne’s situation, knew
not on which child to beetow her principal mention.

The servant, who now only that Mine Mnrilnne wan
taken ill, had senee mough to call one of the maids.
who, with Mn Duhwood’s Nuance, lupponed her
into the other room. By‘what time, Marianne wu
rather better, and her mother leaving her to the care of
Margaret end the maid, returned to Elinor, who though
still much disordered, had so far recovered the use of
her reason and voice It to be just beginning an in uiry
of Thom“ an to the source of his intelligence. quI
Dsshwood immediately took all that trouble on behalf:
and Elinor had the beneﬁt of the information without
the exertion of seeking it.

“ Who told you that Mr F errarl war married,
Thoma ? ”

“I see Mr Femrs mylelf, rm’arn, thin morning in
Exeter, and his lady too, Miss Steele as wet. They
was no ing in l chaiee at the door of the New London
Inn, a went there with a message from Sally at the
Park to her brother, who is one of the whys. ‘1
Ihnppened to look upaIIWent thee 'se,nndso
I we directlyitwal the youngest in Steele; no I
took of? my hat, and she knew me and called to me,
and in uired after you, ma’am, and the young ladies,
especiain Mis- Marianne, and bid me I should give her
compliments and Mr Ferrari’s, their heat compliment.
and service, and how sorry they was they had not time

\k

SENS! AND SENSINLITY. 1’9!

wcomeonandlee ou—huttheywuina reathurry
to o forwards, for they will going further own for a
li e while—but hownever, when they come back, they ’d
make me to come and nee you."

“ But did she tell you she was married, Thomae? "

“ Yes, mn’anlt She smiled, and laid how the had
changed her name since Ihe was in these parts. She
was alwa a v affable and free- ken n lad ,
'and’yeryyhivilgeyhaved. So, I made0 free th
o .

J ’2‘ Wu Mr Ferraru in the carriage with her ? ”

“ Yes, nui’am, I just see him leaning hack in it, but
he did not look up ;—he never wan a gentleman much
for talkin .”

Elinor I heart could ealily account for his not putting
hirmelf forward; and Mrs Daohwood probably found
the earne explanation.

“ Wu there no one else in the carriage ? ”

“ No, ma’am, only they two.”

“Do you know where they came from ? "

“They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy—-
Mr: F errars told me.”

“ And are going further westward ? "

“ Yes, mn’am—-but not to hide long. They will
soon he back again, and then they’d be cure and call
here.’

Mrs Duhwood now loode at her daughter; but
Elinor knew better than to expect them. She recog-
nised the whole of Lucy in the manage, and was very
conﬁdent that Edward would never come near them.
She observed, in a low voice, to her mother, that
they were probably going down to Mr l’ratt’l, near
1’] month.

homn’u intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked
a. if she wished to hear more.
“ Did you see them off before you ame away I "

192 SINSB AND SWSIBILITY.

“ No, ma’am—the horses was just coming out, but
I could not hide any longer; I was afraid of being
late.”

“ Did Mrs Ferran look well 2”

“ Yes, ma’am, she said how she was very well; and
to my mind she was always a very handsome young
lady—and she seemed vastly contented."

Mrs Dashwnod could think of no other question, and
Thomas and the table-cloth, now alike needless, were
soon after dismissed. Marianne had almdy sent to
say that she should eat nothing more ; Mrs Dashwood's
and Elinor's appetites were equally lost, and Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much
uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced, so
much reason as they had often had to be careless of
the meals, she had never been obliged to go without her
dinner heﬁire.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and
Mrs Dashwood and Elinor were left to themselves, they
remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfiilne-
and silence. Mrs Dashwood feared to hazard any
remark, and ventured not to offer consolation. She
now found that she had erred in relying on Elinor’s re-
presentation of herself; and justly concluded that. every-
thing had been expressly softened at the time, to spare
her from an increase of unhappiness, suffering as she
then had suffered for Marianne. She found that she
had been misled by the careful, the considerate attention
of her daughter, to think the attachment, which once
she had so well understood; much slighter in reality than
she had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved
to be. She feared that under this persuasion she had
been unjust, inattentive—nay. almost unkind to her
Elinor:—that Marianne’s aﬂliction, because more ac-
knowledged, more immediately before her, had too
much engrossed her tenderness, and led her away to

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 193

forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suﬂ‘erisg
almost as much, certainly with less self-provocation, a
grater fortitude.

Chapter ﬁll-13]).

LINOR new found the difference between the
expectation of an unpleasant event, however
cermin the mind m be told to consider it, and

certainty itself. She now ound, that in spite of herself,
she had always admitted a hope, while Edward remained
single, that something would occur to prevent his marry-
ing Lucy; that some resolution of his own, some
mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity
of establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the
happiness of all. But he was now married, and she
condemned her heart for the lurking ﬂattery which so
much heightened the pain ofthe intelligence.

That he should be married so soon, before (as she
imagined) he could be in orders, and consequently
before he could be in possession of the living, surprised
her a little at ﬁrst. But she soon saw how likely it
was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste
tosecure him, should overlook everything but the risk
of delay. They were married, married in town, and
now hastening down to her uncle’s. What had Edward
felt on being within four miles of Barton, on seeing her
mother’s servant, on hearing Lucy’s message!

They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Dela-
{ord,—Delaford, that place in which so much conspired
to give her an interest—which she wished to be ac-
quainted with, and yet desired to avoid. She saw them
in an instant in their parsonage-house ; saw in Lucy the
active, conniving manager, uniting at once a desire of
smart appearance with the utmost frugality, and ashamed

H. N

[94 SENSE AND SENSIBHJTV.

to he mapected of half Mr economical practice: ;-—
punuing her own intern in every thou ht, owning the
favour of Colonel Bmmlon, of Mn enningt, and of
every wealthy friend. In Edward, she knew not what
the aw, nor what the wished to seq—ham or un-
happy—nothing planed her ;—she hunted away her
head from every sketch of him.

L'Ilinor ﬂuttered herself that some one of their con-
nexions in London would write to them to announce
the event, and give farther particulars; but day after day
passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings. Though
uncertain that any one were to blame, the found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or
indolent.

“ When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma’arn 2 ”
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her
mind to have something going on.

“ I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather
expect to see, than to hear from him again. I mostly
pressed his coming to us, and should not be surprised to
see him walk in to-day or to-morrow, or any day.”

This was gaining something, something to look for-
ward to. Colonel Brandon rum! have some information

to we.

glean:er had the so determined it, when the ﬁgure d
a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window. He
stopped at their gate. It was it gentleman, it was
Colonel Brandon himself. Now she should hear more;
—and she trembled in expectation of it. But—it was
not Colonel Brandonuneither his air, nor his height.
Were it possible, she should say it must be Edward.
She looked again. He had just dilmounted;—ehe
could not he mistaken—4t wax Edward. She moved
away and sat down. “He comes from Mr Pratt’s
purposely to see us. I will be calm; 1 will be mistress
of myself.’ '

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. [95

In a moment, she perceived that the othen were
likewise aware of the mistake. She saw her mother
and Marianne change colour; saw them look at herself,
and whisper a few sentences to each other. She would
have given the world to be able to speak—and to make
them understand that she hoped no coolness, no slight,
would appear in their behaviour to him ;——but she had
no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their own
discretion.

Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in
silence for the appearance of their visitor. His footsteps
were heard along the gravel path; in a moment he was
in the passage, and in another he was before them.

His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too
happy, even for Elinor. His complexion was white
with agitation, and he looked as it fearful of his rec
lion, and conscious that he merited no kind one. rs
Dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted, to the
wishes of that daughter by whom the then meant, in the
warmth of her heart, to be guided in everything, met him
with a look of forced complacency, gave him her hand,
and wished him joy.

He coloured, and atammcrcd out an unintelligible
reply. Elinor’s lips had moved with her mother’s, and
when the moment of action was over, she wished that
the had shaken hands with him too. But it was then
too late, and with a countenance meaning to be open,
she sat down again and talked of the weather.

Marianne had retratcd as much as possible out of
sight, to conceal her distress; and Margaret, under-
standing tome part, but not the whole, of the case,
thought it incumbent on her to he digniﬁed, and there-
fore took a seat as far from him as she could, and
maintained a ata'ict silence.

When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of
the season, a very awful pause took place. It was put

196 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

an end to by Mn Daahwood, who felt obliged to hope
that he had left Mrs Fen-are very well. In a hurried
manner, he replied in the allirmative.

Another pause.

Elinor, resolving to exert herself, though fearing the
sound of her own voice, now said—

“ In Mr: Ferrari; at Languaple 2"

“ At Longsuiple! "——he replied, with an air of
surprise. “ No, my mother il in town.”

“ I meant," id Elinor, taking up some work from
the table, “ to inquire after Mu Edward Ferrari.”

She dared not look up ;-—but her mother and
Marianne both turned their eyes on him. He coloured,
seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and, after some
hesitation said——

" Perhaps you mean—my brother—you mean Mre—
Mre Rain-I Fermnt”

“ Mn Robert Ferrara ! ”-—was repeated by Marianne
and her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement;
-—and though Elinor could not speak, even [per eyes
were ﬁxed on him with the same impatient wonder.
He rose from his seat and walked to the window,
apparently from not knowing what to do; took up a
Pair of scissara that lay there, and while spoiling both
them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces an
he tpoke, said, in an hurried voice——

“ Perhaps you do not know—you may not have
hcanl that my brother is lately married «0—40 the
youngest—t0 Miss Lucy Steele.”

His words were echoed with unspeakable altonith-
ment by all but Elinor, who eat with her head leaning
over her work, in a atate of such agitation as made her
hard! know where the was.

“ ea,” said he, “they were married last week and
are now at Dawliah.”

Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out of

SENSB AID smrnmn. 19‘]

theroom,endu|oonudredoorwcloud,buminto
team of ' y, which It in: she thought would never
oeue. dward, who had till then looked anywhere
rither than at her, now her hurry nwny, and perhnpe aw
-—or even hard—her motion; for immediately after-
ward- he fell into a reverie, which no remnrkl, no
inquiriee, no affectionate addreu of Mn Duhwood
could penetrate, and at lat, widqu saying a word,
quitted the room, and wnllied out toward: the village,
leaving the other- in the greatest moniehment Ind

lexity on a change in hie situation so wonderful
an no sudden—a. perplexity which they had no mean:
of leuening but by their own conjecture;

Cheater $135.

NACCOUNTABLE, however, an the circum-
erzncee of l'lll release might a or to the whole
family, it was certain that Edward was free;

and to what purpoee that freedom would be employed
wu euily predetermined by all; for after experiencing
the blessings of an: imprudent engagement, contracted
without his mother’s consent, as he had already done
for more than four years, nothing less could be expected
of him in the failure of lbat, than the immediate
connection of another.

Hie errand at Barton, in fact, we a I'm le one. It
won only to all: Elinor to marry him ; an considering
that he was not altogether inexperienced in Inch a
question, it might be strange that he ehould feel an
uncomfortable in the present one n he renlly did, so
much in need of encouragement and freeh air.

How soon he had walked him-elf into the proper
renolution however, how noon an opportunity of uter-

198 ms: Aim SINSIBILITY.

dinghmcnnedinwhtminnerheexpnuedhimaelﬁ
and how he W received, need not be particularly told.
Thiaonl needbe uid:—thatwhentbeyallntdownto
table at our o’clock, about three hours after hi- arrival,
he had oecured hi! lady, engaged her We ml,
and wu not only in the rapturou- profusion of the
lover, but in the‘reality of realm and truth, one of the
lmppiut of men. Hie lituation indeed we more than
commonly joyful. He had more than the ordinary
triumph of accepted love to well his heart, and nine
hit lpxriu. He wan released, without any reproach to
himself, from an entanglement which had long formed
hia mieery, from a woman whom he had long cased to
love—and elevated at once to that security with another,
which he must have thought of almolt with despair, an
noon at he had learnt to consider it with denim. He
wan brought, not from doubt or tulpenae, but from
mine to ha 'neu ;-—and the chan e we a l
Ipokeryn in tuchnangenuine, ﬂowing, grn cheering-eel):
at his friend: had never witnessed in him before.

Hit hurt was now open to Elinor~nll it: weakneuea,
all itl error: confessed, and his ﬁrst boyish attachment
to Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of
twent -four.

“ r: wan a foolith, idle inclination on my side,” laid
he, “ the connequenee of ignorance of the world—and
want of employment. Had my mother given me come
active profeuion when I was removed at eighteen from
the care of Mr Pratt, I think—nay, I am sure, it
would never have happened; for, though I left Long-
ttaple with what I thought, at the time, a moat uncon-
qnerable preference for his niece, yet hadI then had
any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me
at a dietance from her for a few monthl, I should very
Ioon have outgrown the fancied attachment, eapeciall
by mixing more with the world, an in such a cane

sense AND sensrmnm. x99

mun have done. But inttead of having anything to do
-—-inatead of having any profusion chosen for me, or
being allowed to chuse any myself, I returned home to
he omnle idle ; and for the tint twelvemonth after-
warda, him: even the nominal employment which
belonging to the university would have given me, for I
war not entered at Oxford till I waa nineteen. I had
therefore nothing in the world to do. but to fancy my-
self in love; and at m mother did not make my home
in every respect com enable—as I had no friend, no
companion in my brother, and dialiked new acquaintance,
it was not unnatural for me to be very often at Long-
staple, where I alwayn felt myself at home, and was
alwaye lure of a welcome; and accordingly I apent the
tent part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen.
my a everything that wan amiable and oblig-
ing. 8 ewuprettytoo—at leaetI thought some;
and I had seen l0 little of other women, that I could
make no comporiunm, and tee no defects. Considering
everything, therefore, I hope, foolish as our engagement
wu, foolish an it has rinoe in every way been proved,
it wan not at the time an unnatural, or an inexcunhle '
piece of folly."

The change which a few hours had wrought in the
mind: and the happineat of the Dashwoods was Inch—-
no grab—an promised them all the satisfaction of a
lleepless night. Mr: Daehwood, too happy to he cant
fumble, knew not how to love Edward nor praise
Elinor enough—how to be enough thankful for hi!
releale without wounding his delicacy, nor how at one
to give them leiaure for unmtrained convcmtion to-
pther, and yet enjoy, as the wiahed, the light and
society of both.

Marianne could speak ber happineu only by tears.
Comparison- would occur, regreu would urine; and
herj , though sincere as her love for her llm, was of
a kin to give her neither spirits nor language. '

20° SIRS! All!) SIISIBILm.

ButElinor,howueb¢rﬁ.-elingltohedeoeﬁhed?
From the moment of Inning that Lucy wan untried
tonnother,thatEdwardwa-ﬁee,wthem?nllleontof
hia‘ " gtheho chhhadnimutly o wed,
duejmrythingpl; mme but mnquil. But when‘
tluaeeoudmomenthad panned—whenme
doubt, every Iolicitude mud—competed her ima-
tion with what to lately it lad been—law him honour-
ath relented from hu former engagement—aw him
inmntly pmliting by the release, to address henell' and
declareanaﬂ'ectionutender,aacomtantulhehad
emmppowditmbe—drcwaoppmlhewu
overcome by her own felicity ; and happily u
iedxehumanmindtobeeailyﬁmilmiaedwithnuy
change for the better, it required Jewel-a! hour! to giVe
IedntL-ueu to her Ipiriu, or any degree of tranquillity to
her heart.

Edwardwaenowﬁxedat themuage ntleut Ru- a
week; for whatever other claim might be made on
him, it w impouible that lean than a week should be
given up to the enjoyment of Elinor'u company, or
euﬂice to lay half thatwal to be laid of thepan, the
Prenent, and the future; Ru though a very few houn

ent in the hard labour of incessant talking will

tch more uuhjecu than can really be in common
between any two rational creatures, yet with loven it in
diﬁ‘erent. Between that no subject it ﬁniehed, no com-
munication is even made, till it has been made at least
twenty times over.

Lucy’l man-lage, the uncealing and reasonable wonder
among them all, formed of coune one of the earliest
diICIllIlOnl of the lover-a; and Elinor'l particular
knowledge of each party made it appear to her, in
every view, as one of the met extraordinary and un-
accouutable circumntancu the had ever heard. How
they could be thmn together, and by what attrauion

“NS! AND SWIBIUTV. Io!

Robertoonldbednwn on to marry 1 girl ofwhoee
beauty the hnd her-elf heard him Ipeak without any
admiration—n girl too already engaged to hi- brother,
and on whoee account that brother had been thrown of
by his funil —-it won beyond her com rehenlion to
nuke out. {'0 her own heart it was a de ightful affair,
to her imagination it wu even I ridiculoul one; but
to :19! reason, her judgment, it W completely I
e.

ImlEdwnrd could only attempt an explanation by up-
poeing that perhapl at lint accidenth meeting, the
vanity of the one had been an worked on by the ﬂattery
of the other, a to lead by degrees to all the mu. Elinor
remembered what Robert had told her in Harley-street,
of hi: of what hit own mediation in hie
brother’l alfairl mi ht have done, ifnpplied to in time.
She tedittc dwanl. e

“ wa- exactly like Robert,” wan hie immediate
observation. “ And that,” he presently added, “ might
perinpu be in bi: head when the ac uaintance between
them lint be n. And Lucy pe ape at first might
think only 0 procuring hi: good oliicel in my favour.
Other delignl might afterward: urine."

How long it had been carrying on between them,
however, he was ﬁnally at a loss with henelf to make
out; for at 0on , where he had remained by choice
ever Iince his quitting London, he had had no mean. of
hearing of her but from herself, and her letten In the
very Ian. were neither less frequent nor lets affectionate
then me]. Not the mullet: minion, therefore, had
ever occurred to prepare him for what followed; and
when at In: it hunt on him in a letter from Lucy her-
Ielf, he had been for some time, he believed, half
utopilied between the wonder, the horror, and the jo ,
of ouch n deliverance. He .Put the letter into Elinor I

208 SENSE AND SIKSHIILITV.

“ Dun Sn,—-Being v mre I have long lost!
affection, I have thought";de at liberty to buys:
my own on another, and have no doubt of being a
happywithhim u I once need to think‘I might be
withyou; butIIeommuc tahandwhilethehart
rwaa another’l. Sincerely Will! you ha y in your
choice, nnd itlhnllnotbemyfnulti wenrenot.
always good friendl, u our near relationehip now when
proper. I can Iafely my I owe you no ill-will, end an
lure you will be too generoul to do “I any ill olﬁcee.
Your brother has gained my aﬁ'ectiono entirely, and u
we could not live without one another, we are just
returned from the altar, and are now on our way to
Dawlirh for a Few weeks, which plnce your door
brother he great curiority to see, but thought I would
lint trouble you with these few liner, and lhall alwayl
remain—Your rincere well-wither, friend, and litter,

“ Lucy Faun.

“Ihavelrurntnll ymwletterynnd will return your
pictm the ﬁnt rtunity. Plea: to destroy my
tor-owls; but the ring, with my hair, you are very
welcome to keep."

Elinor read and returned it without any comment.

“ I will not ask our opinion of it a a composition,"
Ilid Edward. “ or world: would not I have had a
letter of hen teen you in former dayl. In a inter it
in bad enough, but In a wife! How I have bluehed
over the page! of her writing! and I believe I may say
that tince the lint half-year of our foolish—business—
thil ll the only letter I ever received from her,of which
the eubmnce mademeany mmdeﬁrrthe defeCtofthe
nyle."

“However it may have come about,” said Elinor,
after a uoe, 4‘ they are certainly married. And your
mother brought on heroelf a moot. Iypmpriate pun-

am: AND msmLmr. 103

ilhlnent The she Iettled on Robert,
through resentment ogainet you, he put it in his power
tomkehiaownchoieeiandlhehuuunllyheen

' 3 one eon with a thounnd n-year, to do the very
deed which the di-‘nherited the. other for intending to
do. She will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, hy
Robert’l "paying Lucy than shewouldhaveheenby
your marrying her.” . '

“Shem” he morehurthy IAfMRohendwnylwu
herfsvourite. Shewiﬂhemmhunhyinlndon the
same principle will forgive him much sooner."

In what at: the affair stood at pregent between
them Edward knew not, for no communication with
anyofhisfunilyhsdyetheenattempted hyhirn. He
had quieted Oxford Within four-and-twenty hours after
Lucy's letter arrived, end with on] one object before
him, the nearest mad mBsrton, had no leisure to
form an echerne of conduct with which that road did
not the moat intimate connexion. He could do
nothing till he were assured of his fate with Min
Duhwood 3 end by his rapidity in eeeking that fate, it
in to be supposed, in 'te of the jealouny with which he
had once thought of clone! Bundon—in npite of the

with which he med his own deserts, and the
politeness with wlhich he talked of lhis doubts, lie did
notuponthewhoe,expectn cme rec tion. twss
hie business, however, to amt he rﬁdflnhd he said it
very prettily. What he might say on the subject a
twelvemonth sﬁer, must he re erred to the inuginntion
of huahnnda snd wives.

That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go of}
with s ﬂourieh of malice againlt him in her e by
Thom» was y clear to Elinor; and E ward
hinnell' now rou y enlightened on her character,
had no ecn?le in 'eving her ca le of the utmost
woe- o wanton ill-nature. hough hi: eye- had

204 SENSE AND SENSIBIU’I’Y.

been long opened, even before hit acquaintance twith
Elinor began, to her ignorance and a want of liberty in
tome of her opiniont, they had been egually impu by
him to her want of education; and till her lat: letter
reached him he had alwt believed hi:l to be a gel]-
ditpoeed, good-hearted gir , and thoroug y attach to
himtelf. Nothing but Inch :1 pertuation could have
prevented hit putting an end to an engagement which,
ong before the ditcovery of it laid him open to hit
mothth anger, had been 3 continual tource of ditquiet
and regret to him.

“I thought it my duty,” taid he, l“independent of
my feelingt, to give her the option of condoning the
engagement or not, when I war renounced by my mother,
and mod to all appearance without a friend in the world
to insist me. In Inch 3 tituation at that, where there
seemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any
living creature, how could I luppote, when the to
etrnettly, to wamrly intitted on sharing my fate, what-
ever it might be, that anything but the most ditinteretted
aﬁ‘ection was her-inducement? And even now, I can-
not comprehend on what motive the acted, or what
fancied advantage it could be to her, to be lettered to a
min for whom the had not the amallett regard, and
who had only two thousand poundt in the world. She
could not foretec that Colonel Brandon would give me I
livin ."

" 0, but the might tuppoee that tomething would
occur in your favour; that your own family might in
time relent. And at anyrate, the lost nothing by con-
tinuing the engagement, for the hat proved that it lettered
neither her inclination nor her actions. The connexion
was certainly a respectable one, and probably gained her
conﬁdention among her friendt; and if nothing more
advantageout occurred, it would be better for her to
marry you than he tingle.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 205

Edward was of course immediately convinced that
nothing could have been more natural than Lucy’s oon~
duct, nor more self-evident than the motive of it.

Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold
the impnrdcnoe which compliments themselves, for
having spent so much n'me with them at Norland, when
he molt. have felt his own inconMncy.

“Your behaviour was certainly very wrong,” said
she, “ because—to say nothing of my own conviction—
our relations were all led away by it to fancy and expect
WM, as you were [Len situated, could never be.”

He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart,
and a mistaken conﬁdence in the force of his engagement.

“ I was simple enough to think that, because my failb
wan plighted to another, there could be no danger in
my being with you ; and that the consciousness of my
engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred u
my honour. I felt that I admired you, but I told my-
sef it wan only friendship; and till I began to make
comparisons between yourself and Lucy, I did not
know how far I was got. After that, I cup se, I mu
wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, antixihc argu-
mentc with which I mooncilcd myself to the exlmdiency
of it were no better than these :—T he danger is my
own i I am doing no injury to anybody but myself."

Elinor smiled and shook her head.

Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's
being expected at the cottage, as he really wiahed not
only to be better acquainted with him, but to have an
oPportnnity of convincing him thathenolonger resented
hrl giving him the living of Delaford—“ Which at
present,” said he, “ after thank-so ungraciously delivered
as mine were on the occasion, he must think I have
never forgiven him for offering."

Now he felt maished himself that he had never yet
been to the place. But so little interest had he taken in

206 sense AND sensrsrurv.

the matter, that he owed all his knowledge of the house,
arden, and glebe, extent of the rilh, condition of the
and, and rate of the tithes, to linor herself, who had
heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard
it with so much attention as to beentirely mistress of the
sub'ect.
ne question after this onl remained undecided
between them, one diﬂiculty only was to be overcome.
They were brought together by mutual affection, with
the warmest zrp rrobation of their real friends; their
intimate knowl ge of each other seemed to make their
happiness certain—and they only wanted something to
live upon. Edward had two thousand pounds, and
Elinor one, which, with Delalhrd living, was all that
they could call their own; for it was rmpossible that
Mrs Dushwood should advance anything, and they were
neither of them quite enough in love to think that three
hundred and Mt months a year would supply them with
the comforts of ‘.

Edward was not entirely without hopes of some
favourable chan e in his mother towards him; and on
that he rested or the residue of their income. But
Elinor had no such dependance; for, since Edward
would still be unable to marry Miss Morton, and his
chusing herself had been spoken of in Mrs Fen-ars’s
ﬂattering language as only a lesser evil than his chusing
Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert’s olﬁmoc would -
serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny.

About four days after Edward's arrival, Colonel
Brandon appeared, to complete Mn Dashwood’s satis-
faction, an to give her the dignity of having, for the
lirrt time since her living at Barton, more company with
her than her house would hold. Edward was allowed
to retain the privilege of ﬁrst-comer, and Colonel Bran-
don therefore walked every night to his old quarters at
the Park ; from whence he usually returned in the

SINSE AND SIRSIBILITY. 307

morning, earl enough to interrupt the loven’ lint tite-
a-tétc before renkfut.

A three weelu’ reddeuce It Delaford, where, in hi-
evening hour: at lemhehadlittletodobuttocalen-
late the dieproportion between thirty-nix nod mm,
brought him to Barton in a tern r of mind which
needed all the improvement in Morrmne’e loch, all the
kindness of her welcome, and all the encourath of
her mother’- language, to make it cheerful. Among
ouch friend; however, and web ﬂattery, he did revive.
No rumour of Lucy’e marriage had yet reached him;
he knew nothing of what had paued, and the lint houn
of hit visit were consequently spent in hearing and in
wondering. Everything wan explained to him by Mn
Duhwood, and he found frelh moon to rejoice in
what he had done for Mr Femm, Iince eventually it
promoted the interen of Elinor. '

It would be needles to nay that the gentlemen 1d-
vanced in the good opinion of each other a they
advanced in each other‘l acquaintance, for it could not
be otherwiae. Their reoemblance in good Principle. and
good oerue, in dilpoeition end manner of thinking, would
probably have been sufﬁcient to unite them in friend-hip,
without any other attraction ; but their being in love with
two linen, and two listen fond of each other, made
that mutual regard inevitable and immediate, which might
otherwile have waited the eﬁ'ect of time and judgment.

' The letter- from town, which a few day- before
would have made every nerve in Elinor’e body thrill
with tramport, now arrived to be read with lea emotion
than mirth. Mn Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful

ale to vent her honett indignation ugainlt the jiltﬂg
' ,andpourforthhercompouiontowardlpoor
ward,who,nhewnuure,hadquitedoated uponthe

- worthleu huuey, and was now, by all accounts. nlmnet

bmken— , at Oxford—“I do think,” the con-

.208 SENS! AND SlNSlBlLlTY.

tinned, “nothingwaseveroaniedonsosly; foritwas
but two days before Lucy called and sat a couple of
hours with me. Not a soul suspected anything of the
matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul ! came crying
to me the day aﬁer, in a great fright for fear of
Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to get to Ply-
mouth; for Lucy, it seems, borrowed all her money
before she went off to be married, on pu , we sup—
pose, to make a shewwitluandpoor ancyhad not
seven shillings in the world ;—so I waa very glad to
give her ﬁve 'neas, to take her down to Exeter, where
she thinks o staying three or four weeks with Mrs
Burgess, in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the
doctor again. And I must say that Lucy’s crossness
not to take her along with them in the chaise, is worne
than all. Poor Mr Edward! I cannot t him out
of my head, but you mun send for him to anon, and
Miss Marianne moat try to comfort him.”

Mr Dashwood’s strains were more solemn. Mrs
Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women—poor
Fanny had suﬁ'ercd agonies of sensibility—and he con-
sidered the existence of each, under Inch a blow, with
grateful wonder. Robert’s offence was un
but Lucy’s was inﬁnitely worse. Neither 0 them was
ever again to be mentioned to Mrs Ferrari; and, even
if she might hemfter be induced to forgive her son, his
wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter, nor
be rmitted to aggesr in her presence. The secrecy
which every ing had~heen carried on between
them, was rationally treated as enormously heightening
the crime, because had any suspicion of It occurred on
the others, proper measures would have been taken to
prevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to join
with him in regretting that Luc ’s engagement with
Edward had not ratherlbeen fu lled, than that she
should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in
the family. He thus continued—

mu AND muniu‘rv. ’0’

“Mn Femn hu never yet mentioned Edwnrd’l
name, which due. not turprlle up but, to our gm:
utoniuhrnent. not a line he been received from him on
the occuion. Perhape, however, he is kept Iilent by
hi. fear of oﬂ‘endin and I Ihall therefore give him n
hint, by a line to 8xford,that hie litter and Iboth'
think a letter of proper mhmimion from him, addreued
perhapl to Fanny, and by her ehown to her mother,
might not be taken amine; for we all know the tender-
neu of Mn Ferran’e heart, and that the wiehee for
nothingeomuchutoheongoodtetmnwithher
children.”

Thin ngraph war of none im mnce to the proc-
pectl conduct of Edward. I determined him to
attempt a reconciliation, though not exnetly in the
manner pointed out by their brother and liner.

“A letter of proper enbmiuionl" repented he;
"would they have me beg my "Wan for
Rohen’l ingrntitude to benand breach 0 honourm
Inf—J can make no Iuhrniuion—I am grown neither
humblenor ' tbywhnt hupaued. Inmgrown
myhlppy, tthatwouldnotintereet. Iknowofno
mblniuwn that it proper for me to make.”

“ You may certainly uk to be forgiven,” laid Elinor,
“ became you have offended ;—and I should think you
might now venture so far as to profess tome concern for
having ever formed the engagement which drew on you
your mother‘a anger."

He agreed that he might.

J‘And whenehe huforgiven lumps: little
humility my be convenient w ’ e IC w edging e
Ieeond engagement, elmolt u imprudent in bar eyee u
the tint.” '

He had nothing to urge against it, but ltill ruined

' the idea of I letter of proper eubmiuion; and therefore,
to nukeituiermhimuhe declnred amuch gluta-

ll. 0

210 SENSE AND mSlBILlTY.

willingneu to make men emceuionlby word of mouth
than on per, it vm resolved that, innud of writing to
Fanny, e thould go to London, and nally entrent
hergood ofﬁces in hilfawur. “And ifdxey reallyda
inherent themeelvee," laid Marianne, in her new character
of onndour, “ in bringing about a reconciliation, I Ihall
think that even John and Funny Ire not entirely without
merit."

After a vilit on Colonel Bnndon’l ride of only three
or four dizzy; the two gentlemen quilted Barton to-
gether. hey were to go immediatel to Dehford,
that Edward might have tome persona knowledge of
hit future home, and utilt hie patron and friend in
deciding on what improvement! were needed to it y and
from thence, after mying there a couple of niglm he
wan to proceed on his journey to town.

Gib-om I. -

FTER a proper reeittanne on the port of Mn
A Ferraro, juntao violent and lo steady an to preterve
her from that reproach which ehe alwayl Ieerned
fearful of incurring. the reproach of being too amiable,
Edward was admitted to her preeence, and pronounced
to be again her Ion.
Her family had of late been exceedingly ﬂuctuating.
F or many year- of her life Ill: had had two ionl; but
the crime and annihilation of Edward, a few week:
ago, had robbed her of one; the similar Innihilation of
Robert had left her for n fortnéght without any; and
now, by the mimion of dward, the had one
again.
In Ipite of his being allowed one more to live, how-
ever, he did not feel the continuance of hi! exiltence

SINSE AND SENSIIIILITY. 2]!

more, till he hed‘ revealed hie preeentenga t; for
die of that drcummuce, he ﬁred might
give n ludden turn to his connitution, Ind carry him of
II rapidly In before. With a rehenlive caution there-
hre it won revealed, and was limned to with
unexpected ulmneu. Mn Ferrari at ﬁnt reuonubly
endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Mia Duh-
wood, by‘every argument in her power ;—told him, that
in Mice orton he would have a woman of higher rank
Ind larger fortune g—and enforced the attention by
ohlerving that Mi- Morton wet the dnughter of a
noblenun with thirty thou-and pounds, while Mia
Duhwood was only the daughter of a prime gentle-
man, with no more than llmr; but when the found
that. though perfectly admitan the truth of her d3)!!-
Ienmtion, he was by no mean Inclined to be gui by
it, the judged it wisest, from the experience of the
to submit—and therefore, after rueh an ungracimu elay
an die owed to her own dignity, and an aerved to prevent
every Iulpicion of good-Will, she iuued her decree of
content to the mamage of Edward and Elinor.

What the would engage to do towarde augmenting
tllrlelirbi'ncome wn next to be coneidered: and here it

'n a peered, that though Edward was now her
Bnl ton,Phe was no means her eldest; for while
R was inevitab y endowed with a thousand pounds
a ear, not the amalleet objection wu made Igaimt
E ward’e taking orders for the lake of two hundred
and lift at the utmost; nor we: anything promised
either r the preterit or in ﬁrture, beyond the ten
thoulnd pounde, which had been given wrth Funny.
. It wen In much, however, u was desired, and more
than we expected, by Edward and Elinor; end Mr-
Fernn her-elf, by her thuﬂling exculel, leemed the
onl n rurpriredﬁt her not giving more.
v 1th en income quite euﬂicieutto their went: thus

212 SENSE All) SHSIBILITY.

recurred to them, they had nothing to wait for after
Edwardwuin poueuion of the living, but the readi-
ness of the home, to which Colonel Brandon, with an
uger desire for the accommodation of Elinor, was mak-
ing conddenble in: rovemenu ; and Iﬁer waiting tome
time for their comp etion—after ex rieneing, an urual,
a thousand dimppointmenu and de aye, from the unu-
countahle dilator-ineu of the workman—Elinor, or
mail, broke through the lint positive resolution of not
marrying till everything was ready, and the ceremony
took place in Barton church arly in the autumn.

The ﬁnt month after their mania was spent with
their friend at the Mansion-home, rom whence they
could ruperintend the progreu of the Patronage, and
direct everything as they liked on the rpot; oould
chute pope", project ahrubberies, and invent a weep.
Mn Jennings r propheciee, though rather jumbled w~

ether, were chieﬂy fulﬁlled; for the war‘ able to visit:
ward and his wife in their Pamnage Michaelmas,
and the found in Elinor and her hulhan , a ll): reall
believed, one of the happieet [topples] in the worl
The had in fact nothing to wihh or, hurt the marriage
of golonel Brandon and Marianne, and rather better.
puturage for their cows.

T were virioed on their ﬁrlt settling by almoet Ill
their ationr and friends. Mn F emm came toi
the happiness which the war almost ashamed of having
authomed; and even the Dathwoode were at the
expenre of a journey from Suuex to do them honour.

“I will not any that I um die: pointed, my dear
liner," said John, at they were king together one
morning before the gate: of Delaford Home—“(bat
would be saying too much, for certainly you have been
one of the most. fortunate young women in the world,
as it in. But, I confeu, it would give me great pleasure
to call Colonel Brandon brother. Hit property here,

. Ell!!! AND SENSIBILITV. 213

hie place, hie houee, everything in end: le
and excellent condition! end hie wood-l heve-
not eeen euch timber anywhere in Doreetehire u
there ie now ﬂooding in Delaford Hanger! And
though, perhaps, Marianne may not eeern exactly the
pereon to attract him, yet I think it would altogetherbe
edvieeble for you to have them now frequently rtaying
with you, for u Colonel Brandon eeeme e greet deel at
home. nobody can tell whet rney happen—for, when

le are much thrown together, and see little of any-
melee—and it will alwaye be in your power to eet
her off to edvannge, end no forth; in rhort. you may
u well give her a chance—Yon underwmd me."

But though Mre Fen-are did come to eee them, and
alwaye treated them with the make-believe of decent
aﬂ'ection, they were never insulted by her real favour
and preference. T but was due to the folly of Robert,
and the cunning of hie wife ; and it wae earned bythem
before many rnonthe had pueed away. The eelﬁeh
eegaci of the latter, which had at ﬁrst drawn Robert
into e ecnpe, war the principal inetmment of hie
deliverance from it; for her reepcctful humility, aeeiduoue
attention, end endlcee ﬂatteriee, u eoon er the Imnllcet
ripening war given for their exerciee, reconciled Mre

err-are to hie choice, and re-eetahliehed him completely
in her favour.

The whole of Lucy’e behaviour in the affair, and
the proeperity which crowned it. therefore, may be held
forth u a moat encouraging inatancc of what en earneet,
an unceaeing attention to Elf-interest, however ite
progreee may he apparently obstructed, will do in
eecuring every advantage of fortune, with no other
eecriﬁce than that of time end conedenoe. When
Robert ﬁret nought her ac unintance, and private]
vieited her in Bartlett’e Bu'dinge, it we only
the view imputed to him by hie brother. He merely

214 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

meanttopertudehertogiveu theengagement; and

uthereeould be nothin to (genome but the nﬂ'ec-

tionofbnth,henatu yexpectedthatoneor two

interview would settle the matter. In that tint, how-

ever,andthatonly, he «reds—for though ucy noon
give him hope: that hi: eloquence would convince her in
the, another visit, another converlation, wu alwayI
wanted to produce this convicﬁon. Some doubt- alwa
lingered in her mind when they parted, which could o
be removed by another half-hour’r dieconne with hi . .
Hie attendance wu b thin means Iecured, and the rut
followed in courle. notead of talking of Edward,they
came gradually to talk only of-Rohem—a abject on
which he had alwaynmme to nythanonnnyother,and
inwhichtheaoonheu-ayedaninterertevenequaltohiu
own; and in short, it became epeedily evident to both,
that he had entirely mpplanted hie brother. He wan
proud of hi- honqueut, proud of tricking Edward, and
very proud of marrying privatel without hir mother's
coment. What immediawa fo owed in known. They
parted come month: in great ha pineal at anlinh; for
the had many relation- and ol ac uaintance to cut—-
and he drew reveral plant for magniﬁcent cottage”—
and from thence returning to town, procured the forgive-

 nets of Mr: Ferrare, by the simple expedient ofaaking it,
which, at Lucy’s instigation, wan adopted, The forgives
new at lint, Indeed, as was reamable, comprehended
only Robert; and Lu , who had owed hit mother no
duty, and therefore co d have nan-greeted none, rtill re-
mained come weeks longer unpardoned. But per-eru-
anoe in humilit of conduct, and rue-ages, in lelf-oon-
demnation for diobert‘l offence, and gratitude for the
unkindneu she was treated with, procured her‘in time
the. haughty notice which overcame her by  in
graciourneu, and led noon afterward; by rapid degrees.
to the higheot state of aﬂecn'on and inﬂuence. Lucy

SENSE AND smmurr. 215

hemmeunece-arytoMnFer-nmueitherkobertor
Fanny; and while Edward wu never cordially fo ‘ven
for having once intended to marry her, and nor,
though In ricr to her in fortune end birth, VIII
of an an Intruder, (be wan in cverytlu'ng oonli and
alwlye openly acknowledged, to be I favourite child.
They settled in town, received very liberal aaimnce
from Mn Femn, were on the beat terms imaginable
with the Dalhwoode, and aetting aeide the jealouliee end
ill-will continually rublilting between Funny and Lucy,
in which their huehande of course took a part, as well u
the f uent domertic disagreements between Robert and
Lucy emnlvel, nothing could exceed the harmony in
which th ell lived together.
What dward had done to forfeit the right of olden
eon, mi ht have puzzled many people to ﬁnd out; and
what ohert had done to eucceed to it, might have
puzzled them ntill more. It was an arrangement, how-
ever, justiﬁed in ita effects, if not in it: cause; for
nothing ever appeared in Robert’s ater of living, or of
talking, to give a uuepicion of hit regretting the extent of
hil income, as either leaving l'lll brother too little, or
bringing himself too much ;—-and if Edward might be
judged from the ready diecharge of hie dun'ea in every
m'cular, from an increaain attachment to hie wife and
'I home, and from the re cheerﬁrlneee of hie apiriu,
he might be euppooed no eta contented with hia lot, no ‘
lea free from' every wilh of an exchange.
Elinor’e marriage divided her at little from her femily
u could well be contrived, without rendering the cottage
at Barton entirely naeleu, for her mother and inter-
t much more than half their time with her. Mr-
nhwood was acting on motive- of policy as well an
pleasure in the frequency of her Vllltl at Delaford; for
her wish of bringing Marianne end Colonel Brandon
together was hardly lets cur-nest, though rather more

216 ms: AND 8311813111“.

MdmwhuJohnhndexpre-ed. Itwunaw
her darling object. Precioul a: war the company of her
daughter to her, she desired nothing to much u to give
upiucomtzmen' Hoher-vnluedfriendgnndto
tee Marianne at. the Marion-home me will,
the wiah of Edward and Elinor. They each 3i.
00mm end their own obligedonn, and Mnﬁanne, by
general con-em, wan to be the Ievmd ofnll. ‘ >

With such a oonfedency again-t her—with a know-
ledge no intimate of hie goodneu—with a conviction of
hi. fond attachment to hen-elf, which at last, though long
Ifter it w observable to everybody else' bum on her-—
what could she do?

Mnrianne Duhwood was ham to an exmordinery
face. She wu born to diacover the ﬁlnehood of her
own opinione, and to counteract, by her conduct, her
most favourite maxim. She was born to overcome an
eﬁ'eetion formedaolateinlifeuat mennemandwirh
no eentimenc superior to mung «teem and lively friend-
lhlp, voluntarily to give her hand to anothr l—ond I‘M
other,a manwho had suffered noleutlnnhenelfunder
the event of a former Henchman—whom, two yarn
before, the had connidered too old to be mnied,—In¢l
who still sought the constitutional safeguard of e ﬂannel
waistcoat! ~

But to it won. Inmad of falling e neriﬁce to an
irreeinible pardon, u once the had fondly ﬂattered her-
uelf with expecting-inﬂow of remaining even for ever
with her mother, and finding her only plenum in
retirement and study, u afterwards in her more calm
Ind sober judgment. ehe had determined on,—ahe found
herself, at nineteen, lubmibting to new attachment;
entering on new dutiee, placed in a new home, a wife,
the mistress of a family, and the troneu of a villlge.

Colonel Brandon was now u ppy an all thooe who
belt loved him believed he deserved no be ; —— in

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 217

Marianne he was consoled for every post nﬂiietion ,—
mind to minu-
tion, and his 'pirits to cheerfulnul: end that Mnrinnne
found her own haPpineel in forming hie, wal equlllythe
pemuainn and delight of each obterving friend. Mari-
anne oould never love by hnlves; and her whole been
became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, on it
had once been to Willoughby. .

Willoushby could not hear of her without a
Pong; an his punishment wan soon afterwards complete
in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs Smith, who, by
eating his marriage with a woman of character, In the
tonne of her clemency, gave him reason for believing,
that had he behaved with honour towards Marianne, he
might u once have been thpy‘and rich. That his
repentance of misconduct, which thou brought its own
ﬁnishment, was sincere, need not be doubted; nor that

.long thought of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of
Marianne with regret. But that he was for ever in-
conwlable—that he ﬂed from society, or contracted an
habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart,
must not be depended on—for he did neither. He
lived to exert, and frequently to enjoy himself. His
wife was not. always out of humour, nor his home
always uncomfortable! and in hit breed of horses and
dogs, and in sporting of eve kind, he found no incon-
niderable degree of domestic elicity.

For Marianne, however—in spite of his incivility in
surviving her lose—he always remined that decided

which interested him in ever thing that hefcll

her, and made her his occrct standnr of perfection in
woman; and nmnyn tiring beauty would be slightcd by
him in after days as bearing no comparison with Mrs
Brandon.

Mn Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the
cottage, without attempting a removal to Delafotd;

H, P

2:8 sans: AND snusmnmr.

Ind {om-maer for Sir John 'hnd Mn Jennings, when
Mariannewutakenfromdiem,Margamhad reachedan
age highly nimble for dma'ng, and not ineligible
for being to have n lover.

Between and Dehford, there wu that con-
m: communication which mug ﬁtnin Mon
would nannll dictate; and among the meriu and the
bppinmofEinor and Marianne, letit nm be ranked
u the lean conlidmble, that though then, and living
:1an within eight of each other, they could live with-
out digreemem. between themnelvea, or producing
coolnm between their hutnndu

Fnus.

TURN-"LI. AND smut, nun-n.1, muwm‘

A-,./"~<

This preservation photocapy was made
at Bookhb. Inc. in compliance with copyright law.
The paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO
23948—1992 (Permanence of Paper)

Austin 1995

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

—

Iallllll'r“

2044 024 596 mu

 

