HE family of Dashwood had been long settled
in Sussex. Their estate was large, and their
residence was at Norlnnd Park, in the centre of

their property, where for many generations they had
lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general
Food opinion of their surrounding acquaintance. The
ate owner of this estate was a single man, who lived
to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life had It conmnt companion and housekeeper in his
sister. But her death, which hnp ned ten years before
his own, produced a great alteration in his home; for '
to su ply her loss, he invited and received into his house
the filmin of his nephew, Mr Henry Duhwood, the
legal inheritnr of the Norland estate, and the person to
whom he intended to bequeath it. In the society of
his nephew and niece, and their children, the old
gentleman’s days were comfortably spent. His attach-
ment to them all increased. The constant attention of
Mr and Mrs Henry Dnshwood to his wishen, which
proceeded not merely from interest, but from goodness
of heart, gave him every degree of solid comfort which
his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a relish to his existence.

I. A

2 SENSE AND SENSIMLITY.

By a former marriage, Mr Henry Dashwood had
one son; b his present lady, three daughters. The
son, a stea y, table oung man, was amply pro-
vided for by the ortune 0 his mother, which had been
large, and half of which devolved on him on his coming
of age. By his own marriage, likewise, which happened
soon afterwards, he added to his wealth. To him,
therefore, the succession to the Norland estate was not
so really important as to his sisters; for their fortune,
independent of what might arise to them from their
father's inheriting that property, could be but small.
Their mother had nothing, and their father only seven
thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the remain-
ing moiety of his ﬁrst wife’s forum: was also secured to
her child, and he had only a life interest in it.

The old gentleman died; his will was read, and like
almost ev other will, gave as much disappointment as
plnsure. "lie was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateﬁtl,
as to leave his estate from his nephew ; but he left it to
him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest. Mr Dashwood had wished for it more for
the sake of his wife and daughters than for himself or
his son; but to his son, and his son’s son, a child of four
yars old, it was secured, in such a way, as to leave to
himself no power of providing for those who were most
dear to him, and who most needed a provision, by any
charge on the estate, or by any sale of its valuable
woods. The whole was tied up for the beneﬁt of this
child, who, in occasional visits with his father and
mother at Norhmd had so far gained on the affections
of his uncle, by such attractions as are by no means
unusual in children of two or three years old: an im-
perfect articulation, an came-st desire of having his own
way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as
to outweigh all the value of all the attention which, for
years, he had received from his neice and her daughters.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 3

He meant not to be unkind, however, and as a mark of
his aﬂ'ection for the three girls, he left them a thousand
unda a-piece.

Mr Dashwood's disappointment was at ﬁrst severe;
but his temper was cheerful and sanguine, and he might
reasonably hope to live many yearn, and by living econ-
omically, lay by a considerable sum from the produce of
an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. But the fortune, which had been so
tardy in coming, was his only one twelvemonth. He
survived his uncle no longer; and ten drumnd pounds,
including the late legacies, was all that remained for his
widow and daughters. '

His son was sent for, as soon as his danger was
know, and to him Mr Dashwood recommended, with
all the strength and urgency which illness could com-
mand, the interest of his mother—in-law and sisters.

Mr John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of
the rest of the family; but he was affected by a re-
commendation of such a nature at such a time, and
he promised to do everything in his power to make
them comfortable. His father was rendered easy by
such an assurance, and Mr John Dashwood had then
leisure to consider how much there might prudently be
in his power to do for them.

He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be
rather cold-heaned, and rather selﬁsh, is to be ill-
disposed: but he was, in general, well respected; for
he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties. Had he married a more amiable
woman, he might have been made still more respectable
than he was; he might even have been made amiable
himself; for he was very young when he married, and
very fond of his wife. But Mrs John Dashwood was
a strong caricature of himself; more narrow-minded
and selﬁsh.

4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated
within himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters
by the present of a thousand pounds a- iece. He then
really thought himself equal to it. he prospect of
four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother‘s fortune,
warmed his heart and made him feel capable of generosp
ity. “ Yes, he would give them three thousand pounds:
it would be liberal and handsome! It would be
enough to make them completely ea . Three thous-
and pounds! he could re so consi erable a sum with
little inconvenience.” e thought of it all day long,
and for many days successively, and he did not repent.

No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs
John Dashwood, without sending an notice of her
intention to her mother-in-law, arriv with her child
and their attendants. No one could dispute her right
to come; the house was her husband’s from the mm
ment of his father’s decease; but the indelicacy of her
conduct was so much the greater, and to a woman in
Mrs Dashwood’s situation, with only common feelings,
must have been highly unpleasing; but in her mind
there was a sense of honour to keen, a generosity so
romantic, that any offence of the kind, by whomsoever
given or received, was to her a source of immovable
disgust. Mrs John Dashwood had never been a favour-
ite with any of her husband's family : but she had had
no opportunity, till the present, of showing them with
how little attention to the comfort of other people she
could act when occasion required it.

So acutely did Mrs Dashwood feel this nngracious
behaviour, and so camestly did she despise her daughter-
in-law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she
would have (prim-d the house for ever, had not the
entreaty of her eldest girl induced her ﬁrst to reﬂect
on the propriety of going, and her own tender love for

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 5

all her three children determined her afterwards to
stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach with their
brother.

Elinor, this eldest daughter whose advice was so
effectual, possessed a strength of understanding, and
coolness of judgment, which qualiﬁed her, though only
nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and enabled
her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them
all, that eagerness of mind in Mn Dashwood which
must generally have led to imprudence. She had an
excellent heart; her disposition was affectionate, and
her feelings were strong: but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet
to learn, and which one of her sisters had resolved never
to be taught.

Marianne’s abilities were, in many respects, quite
equal to Elinor’s. She was sensible and clever, but
eager in everything; her sorrows, her joys, could have
no moderation. She was generous, amiable, interesting:
she was everything but prudent. The resemblance
between her and her mother was strikingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister’s
sensibility; but by Mrs Dashwood it was valued and
cherished. They encouraged each other now in the
violence of their afﬂiction. The agony of grief which
overpowered them at ﬁrst, was voluntarily renewed, was
sought for, was created again and againr They gave
themselves up wholly to their sorrow, seeking increase
of wretchedness in every reﬂection that could afford it,
and resolved against ever admitting consolation in
future. Elinor, too, was deeply afﬂicted; but still she
could struggle, she could exert herself. She could
consult with her brother, could receive her sister-in-law
on her arrival, and treat her with proper attention: and
could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion,
and encourage her to similar forbearance.

6 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Margaret, the other sister, was s good-humoured,
well-disposed girl; but as she had already imbibed a
good deal of Marianne's romance, without having much
of her sense; she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal
her sisters at a more advanced period of life.

Gibson: 33.

RS JOHN DASHWOOD now installed her-
self mistress of Norland; and her mother and
sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of

visitors. As such, however, they were treated by her
with quiet civility; and by her husband with as much
kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond him-
self, his wife, and their child. He really pressed them,
with some eamestness,to consider Norland as their home;
and, as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs Dashwood
as remaining there till she could accommodate herselfwith
a house in the neighbourhood, his invitation was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everything reminded
her of former delight, was exactly what suited her mind.
In seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more
cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that
sanguine expectation of happiness which is happinets
itself. But in sorrow she must be equally carried away
by her fancy, and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure
she was beyond alloy.

MI’S John Dasliwood did not at all approve of what
her husband intended to do for his sisters. To take
three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear
little boy, would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree. She begged him to think again on
the subject. How could he answer it to himself to rob
his child, and his only child too, of so large a sum?

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7

And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,
who were related to him only by half blood, which she
considered as no relationship at all, have on his gener-
osity to so large an amount? It was very well known
that no affection was ever su posed to exist between the
children of any man by dilirent maniages; and why
was he to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by
giving away all his money to his half-sisters ?

“It was my father’s last request to me,” replied
her husband, “that I should assist his widow and
daughters.”

“ He did not know what he was talking of, I dare
; ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.

ad he been in his right senses, he could not have
thought of such a thing as begging you to give away
half our fortune from ur own child.”

"hie did not atipu ate for any particular sum, my
dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terms,
to assist them, and make their situation more comlisrt-
able than it was in his power to do. Perhaps it would
have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself.
He could hardly suppose I should neglect them. But
as he required the promise, I could not do less than
give it: at least I thought so at the time. The pro-
mise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.
Something must be done for them whenever they leave
Norland and settle in a new home.”

“Well, then, [If something be done for them; but
that something need not be three thousand pounds.
Consider," she added, “ that when the money is once
parted with, it never can return. Your sisters will
marry, and‘ it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it could
ever be restored to our poor little bo . . . "

" Why, to be sure,” said her husband, very gravely,
“ that would make a rest dilTerence. The time may
come when Harry wil regret that so large a sum was

8 sense AND sensmu'rv.

parted with. If he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a vely convenient addition.”

" To be sure it would.’

“ Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties if the
sum were diminished one half. Five hundred pounds
would be a prodigious increase to their fortunes.’

“ Oh, beyond anything great! What brother on
earth would do half so much for his sisters, even if
really his sisters! And as it is . . . only half blood!
But on have such a generous spirit I "

“ would not wish to do anything mean,” he replied.
“ One had rather, on such occasions, do too much than
too little. No one, at least1 can think I have not done
enough for them: even themselves, they can hardly
expect more."

“There is no knowing what they may expect,” aid
the lady, “but we are not to think of their expectations :
the question is, what you can afford to do.”

“Certainly, and I think I may afford to give them
ﬁve hundred pounds a-piece. As it is, without any
addition of mine, they will each have above three
thousand pounds on their mother’s death : a very com-
fumble fortune for any young woman.”

“ To be sure it is: and, indeed, it strikes me that
they can want no addition at all. They will have ten
thousand pounds divided amongst them. If they marry,
they will be sure of doing well; and if they do not,
they may all live very comfortably together on the
interest of ten thousand pounds.”

“That is very tnse, and, therefore, I do not know
whether, upon the whole, it would not be more advisable
to do something for their mother while she lives rather
than for them; something of the annuity kind I mean.
My sisters would feel the good eilecta of it as well as
herself. A hundred a year would make them all
perfectly comfortable.”

SENSE AND SEMSHIHJTY. 9

His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her
consent to this plan.

“To be sure,” said she, “it is better than parting
with ﬁfteen hundred pounds at once. But then, if Mrs
Dashwood should live ﬁfteen years, we shall be com-
pletely taken in.”

“ F iftccn years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be
worth half that purchase."

“ Certainly not; but if you observe, ple always
live for ever when there is any annuity to paid them ;
and she is very stout and healthy, and hardly forty.
An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over
and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.
You are not aware of what you are doing. I have
known a great deal of the trouble of annuities; for my
mother was clogged with the payment of three to old
superannuated servants by my father’s will, and it is
amazing how disagreeable she found it. Twice every
year, these annuities were to be paid; and then there
was the trouble of getting it to them; and then one of
them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned
out to be no such thing. My mother was quite sick of
it. Her income was not her own, she said, with such
pfrpetual claims on it; and it was the more unkind in my

ther, because, otherwise, the money would have been
entirely at m mother’s disposal, without any restriction
whatever. t has given me such an abhorrence of
annuities, that 1 am sure I would not in myself down
to the payment of one for all the worltli”

“ It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr
Dashwood, “to have those kind of yearly drains on
one’s income. One’s fortune, as your mother justly
says, in no! one’s own. To be tied down to the
regular payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by
no means desirable: it takes away one’s independence."

“Undoubtedly; and, after all, you have no thanks

I O SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

for it. They thinlt themselves secure, you do no more
than what is expected, and it raises no gratitude at all.
If I were you, whatever! did should be done at my
own discretion entirely. [would not bind myself to
allow them anything yearly. It may be very incon-
venient some years to spare a hundred, or even ﬁfty
pounds, from our own expenses.”

“I believe you are right, my love; it will be better
that there should be no annuity in the case; whatever
I may give them occasionally will be of far greater
assistance than a yearly allowance, because they would
only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a
larger income, and would not be sixpenee the richer for
it at the end of the year. It will certainly be much
the best way. A present of ﬁfty pounds, now and
then, will prevent their ever being distressed for money,
and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to
my father."

"To be sure it will. Indeed, to my the truth, I am
convinced within myself, that your father had no idea
of your giving them any money at all. The assistance
he thought of, I dare say, was only such as might be
reasonably expected of you ; for instance, such as look-
ing out for a comfortable small house for them, helping
them to move their things, and sending them presents
of fish and game, and so forth, whenever they are in
season. I ’ll lay my life that he meant nothing further;
indeed, it. would be very strange and unreasonable if he
did. Do but consider, my dear Mr Dashwood, how
excessively comfortable your mother-in-Iaw and her
daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand
pounds, besides the thousand pounds belonging to each
of the girls, which brings them in ﬁfty pounds a-ywr
a-piccc, and, of course, they will pay their mother for
their board out of it. Altogether, they will have ﬁve
hundred n-yenr nmongn them, and what on earth can

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTV. ll

four women want for more than that? They will live
so cheap! Their housekeeping will be nothing at all.
They will have no can'iage, no horses, and hardly any
servants; they will keep no company, and can have no
expenses of any kind! Only conceive how comfortable
they will be! Five hundred 3—year! I am sure I
cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and as
to your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think
of it. They will be much more able to give you
something."

“ Upon in word," said Mr Dashwood, “I believe
you are pe ctly right. My father certainly could
mean nothing more by his request to me than what you
say. I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly
fulﬁl my engagement by such acts of assistance and
kindness to them as you have described. When In
mother removes into another house, my services sh l
he readin given to accommodate her as far as] can.
Some little present of furniture, too, may be acceptable
then."

“ Certainly," returned Mrs John Dashwood. “ But,
however, one thing must be considered. When your
father and mother moved to Norland, though the
furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother. Her
house will therefore be almost completely ﬁtted up as
soon as she takes it."

“ That is a material consideran'on, undoubtedly. A
valuable legacy indeed! And yet some of the plate
would haVe been a very pleasant addition to our own
stock here.”

“ch; and the set of breakfast china is twice as
handsome as what belongs to this house. A great deal
too handsome, in my opinion, for any place they can
ever afford to live in. But, however, so it is. Your
father thought only of them. And I must say this: that

12 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

you owe no nicular gratitude to him, nor attention to
his wishet, or we very well know that if he could,
he would have left almoet everything in the world
to r ."

This argument was irresistible. It gave to his inten-
tions whatever of decision was wanting before ; and be
ﬁnally resolved, that it would be aboolutely unnecessary,
if not highly indccorous, to do more for the widow and
children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly
acts as his own wife pointed out.

charm 331!-

RS DASHWOOD remained at Norland several -
months; not from any disinclination to move
when the sight of every well~known spot ceased

to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a
while; for when her spirits began to revive, and her
mind became capable of some other exertion than that of
heightening it: aliliction by melancholy remembrancea,
she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of
Norland ; for to remove far from that beloved spot waa
impossible. But she could hear of no uituation that at
once answered her notions of comfort and cane, and
suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadier
‘udgment rejected several houses as too large for their
income, which her mother would have approved.

Mrs Dashwood had been informed by her husband
of the solemn promise on the part of his son in their
favour, which gave comfort to hil last eartth reﬂec-
tions. She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no
more than he had doubted it himeell', and she thought
of it for her daughters’ nke with eatisfaction, though,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 13

as for herself, she was persuaded that a much smaller

rovision than seven thousand pounds would support her
In affluence. For their brother’s sake too, for the sake
of his own heart, she rejoiced; and she reproached her-
self for being unjust to his merit before, in believing him
incapable of generosity. His attentive behaviour to her—
self and his sisters, convinced her that their welfare was
dear to him, and, for a long time, she ﬁrmly relied on
the Iiberality of his intentions.

The contempt which she had, very early in their ac—
quaintance, felt for her daughter-in-law, was very much
increased by the further knowledge of her character,
which half-a-year’s residence in her family afforded;
and, perhaps, in spite of every consideration of politeness
or maternal aﬂ'ection on the side of the former, the two
ladies might have found it impossible to have lived to-
gether so long, had not a particular circumstance occurred
to give still greater eligibility, according to the opinions
of Mrs Dashwoo'd, to her daughters' continuance at
Norland.

This circumstance was a growing attachment between
her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs John Duhwood,
a gentleman-like and pleasing young man, who was in-
troduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at Norland, and who had since spent the
greatest part of his time there.

Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy
from motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars was the
eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some
might have repressed it from motives of prudence, for,
except a triﬂing sum, the whole of his fortune depended
on the will of his mother. But Mrs Dashwood was
alike uninllucnced by either consideration. It was
enough for her that he ap ared to be amiable, that
he loved her daughter, an that Elinor returned the
partiality. It was contrary to every doctrine of hers,

l4 SENSE AND susrnnm.

that diflerence of fortune should keep any couple asunder
who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and
that Elinor’s merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension
ible.

dward F errarl was not recommended to their good
opinion by any peculiar graces of person or nddrm He
was not handsome, and his manners required intimacy
to make them pleasing. He was too dillidcnt to do
justice to himself; but when his natural sh nest was
overcome, his behaviour gave every indication of an
open, alfectionate heart. His understanding was good,
and his education had given it solid improvement. But
he was neither ﬁtted by abilities nor disposition to answer
the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see
him distinguished—as—they hardly knew what. They
wanted him to make a ﬁne ﬁgure in the world in some
manner or other. His mother wished to interest him
in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or to
see him connected with some of the great men of the
day. Mrs John Dashwood wished it. likewise; but in
the meanwhile, till one of these superior blessings could
be obtained, it would have quieted her ambition to see
him driving a barouche. But Edward had no turn for
great men or barouches. All his wishes centred in
domestic comfort and the quiet of private life. For-
tunately he had a younger brother who was more
promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the house
before he engaged much of Mrs Dashwood's attention ;
for she was, at that time, in such aﬂliction as rendered
her careless of sun‘ounding objects. She saw only that
he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.
He did not disturb the wrctchcdncss of her mind by
ill-timed conversation. She was ﬁrst called to observe
and approve him furﬂrer, by a reﬂection which Elinor

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. Is

chanced one day to make on the diﬂ'erence between
him and his sister. It was a contrast which recom-
mended him most forcibly to her mother.

“ It is enough," said she; “ to say that he is unlike
Fanny is enough. It implies everything amiable. I
love him already."

“I think you will like him,” said Elinor, " when
you know more of him.”

“ Like him ! ” replied her mother, with a smile. “ I
can feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love."

“ You may esteem him.”

" I have never yet known what it was to separate
esteem and love."

Mrs Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted
with him. Her manners were attaching, and soon
banished his'reserve. She speedily comprehended all
his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor
perhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt
mred of his worth: and even that quietness of
manner which militated against all her established ideas
of what a young man’s address ought to be, was no
longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be
warm and his temper affectionate.

No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in
his behaviour to Elinor, than she considered their
serious attachment as certain, and looked fonvard to
their marriage as rapidly approaching.

“In a few months, my dear Marianne,” said she,
“ Elinor will in all probability be settled for life. We
shall miss her ; but 11:: will be happy."

“ 0 mamma ! how shall we do without her ? ”

“ My love, it will he scarcely a separation. We
shall live within a few miles of each other, and shall
meet every day of our lives. You will gain a brother
—-a real, affectionate brother. I have the highest
opinion in the world of Edward’s hrt. But you

l6 SENSE AND SINSIBILITV.

look grave, Marianne; do you disapprove your sister’s
choice ? ”

“ Perhaps,” said Marianne, “ I may consider it with
some surprise. Edward is very amiable, and I love
him tenderly. But yet, he is not the kind of young
man—there is a something wanting, his ﬁgure u not
striking—it has none of that grace which I should
expect in the man who could seriously attach my liner.
His eyes want all that irit, that ﬁre, which at once
announce virtue and intelligence. And besides all this,
I am afraid, mamma, he has no real taste. Music
seems scarcely to attmct him, and though he admires
Elinor’s drawings very much, it is not the admiration
of a person who can understand their worth. It is
evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her while
she draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter.
He admires as a lover, not as a connoisseur. To satisfy
me, those characters must be united. I could not be
happy with a man whose taste did not in every int
coincide with my own. He must enter into al my
feelings; the same books, the same music mun charm
us both. 0 mammal. how spiritless, how tame was
Edward’s manner in reading to us last night! I felt
for my sister most severely. Yet she bore it with so
much composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it. I
could hardly keep my seat. To hear those beautiful
lines which have frequently almost driven me wild,
pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, such
dreadful indifference! ”

“He would certainly have done more justice to
simple and elegant prose. I thought so at the time;
but you would give him Cowper.”

“Nay, mamma, if he is not to be animated by
Cowper l—but we must allow for dill'crencc of taste.
Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore she may over-
look it, and be happy with him. But it would have

 

W ‘ n 4
MWQMWW
,

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I’V. 1']

broken my heart had I loved him, to hear him read with
so little sensibility. Manrma, the more I know of the
world, the more am I convinced that I shall never see
a man whom I can really love. I require so much!
He must have all Edward's virtues, and his person and
manners must ornament his goodness with every possible
charm."

" Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.
It is yet too early in life to despair of such an happiness.
Why should you be less fortunate than your mother?
In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny be dichrcnt from hers! ’

chapter 3’9.

“ HAT a ity it is, Elinor,” said Marianne,
“ that dward should have no taste for
drawing.”

"No taste for drawing," replied Elinor; “wh
should you think so? He does not draw himsel,
indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing the per-
formances of other people, and I assure you, he is by
no means deﬁcient in natural taste, though he has not
had opportunities of im rroving it. Had he ever been
in the way of learning. think he would have drawn
very well. He distnrsts his own judgment in such
matters In much, that he is always unwilling to give his
opinion on any picture; but he has an innate propriety
and simplicity of taste, which in general direct him
perfectly right."

Marianne was afraid of oﬂ'cnding, and said no more
on the subject; but the kind of approbation which
Elinor described as excited in him by the drawin s of
other people, was very far from that npturous deiight,

I. u

l8 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste.
Yet, though smiling within herself at the mistake, the
honoured her sister for that blind partiality to Edward
which produced it.

“ I hope, Marianne,” continued Elinor, “ on do
not consider him as deﬁcient in general taste. ndeod,
I think I may say that on mnnot, for your behaviour
to him is perfectly cordia , and iii/m! were your opinion,
I am sure you could never be civil to him.”

Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would not
wound the feelings of her sister on any account, and

et to say what she did not believe was impossible. At
cngth she re lied—

“Do not oil-ended, Elinor, if my praise of him is
not in everything equal to your sense of his merits. I
have not had so many opportunities of estimating the
minuter propensities of his mind, his inclination, and
tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion in
the world of his goodness and sense. I think him
everything that is worthy and amiable."

“ I am sure,” replied Elinor, with a smile, “ that his
dearest friends could not be dissatisﬁed with such com-
mendation as that. I do not perceive how you could
ex ress yourself more warmly."

glarianne was rejoiced to ﬁnd her sister so easily
pleased.

“ Of his sense and his goodness,” continued Elinor,
“ no one can, I think, be in doubt, who hus seen him
often enou h to engage him in unreserved conversation.
The excelfence of his understanding, and his prind les
can be concealed onl by that shyness which too ogen
kce s him silent. ou know enough of him to do
justice to his solid worth. But of his minutcr propen-
sities, as you call them, you have from peculiar circum-
stances been kept more ignorant than myself. He and
I In vc been at times thrown a good deal together, while

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. I9

you have been wholly engrossed on the most aﬁ'ectionate
principle by as mother. I have seen a great deal of
him, have studied his sentiments, and heard his opinion
on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,
I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed,
his enjoyment of books exceedingly great, his imagina-
tion lively, his observation just and correct, and his taste
delicate and pure. His abilities in every respect improve
as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.
At ﬁrst sight, his address is certainly not striking ; and
his person can hardly be called handsome, till the ex-
pression of his eyes, which are uncommonly good, and
the general sweetness of his countenance is perceived.
At present, I know him so well, that I think him
really handsome; or, at least, almost so. What say
you, Marianne ? ”

“ I shall ve soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I
do not now. hen you tell me to love him as a brother,
I shall no more see imperfection in his face, than I now
do in his heart.”

Elinor suited at this declaration, and was sorry for

the warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of
him. She felt that Edward stood very high in her
opinion. She believed the regard to be mutual; but
she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne’s
conviction of their attachment agreeable to her. She
knew that what Marianne and her mother conjectured
one moment, they believed the next—that with them,
to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect. She
tried to explain the real state of the case to her
sister. .
"I do not attempt to deny,” said she, “that I
think very highly of him—that I greatly esteem, that
I like him.”

Marianne here burst forth with indignation—

“Est him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor.

20 SENSE AND SINSIBILITV.

Oh! wone than cold-hearted! Alhamed of being
otherwiee. Ute tho-e wordl again, and I will lave
the room thin moment.”

Elinor could not help laughing. "Exeuae me,"
laid the, “and be auured that I meant no offence to
you, by Ipeaking, in lo quiet a way, of my own feel-
Ingl. Believe them to be stronger than I haw de-
clared; believe them, in short, tobe Iuch II his merit,
and the lutpieion—the hope of hi: affection for me may
warrant, without impmdence or folly. But further than
thie ou mun not believe. I am by no means mud
of hu regard for me. There are moments when the
extent of it teem: doubtful; and till his ientimenu are
fully known, you cannot wonder at m withing to avoid
any encouragement of my own partlality, by believing
or callin it more than it it. In my heart I feel little
—ecarcely any doubt of his preference. But there are
other points to be conuidcrcd benich hil inclination. He
in very far from being independent. What hi: mother
really ll we cannot know; but, from Fanny'l occalioml
mention of her conduct and opinions, we have never
been dis need to think her amiable; and I am very
much rmstaken, if Edward is not himaelf aware that
there would be many diﬁicultiet in hit way, if he were
to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great
fortune or high rank.”

Marianne wan astonished to ﬁnd how much the im-
gination of her mother and herself had outatripped the
tmth.

“And you really are not engaged to him!" aid
she. “Yet it certainly soon will happen. But two
advantach will proceed from this delay. I Ihall not
lose you so noon, and Edward will have greater op-
xntunity of improving that natural tam- for your
avouritc pumit, which muat be so indiapeneably
neceuary to your hiture felicity. Oh! if he Ihould

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 2 I

be so far stimulated by your genius as to lm to draw
himself, how delightful it would be! "

Elinor had iven her real opinion to her sister. She
could not consider her partiality for Edward in so pros-
perous a state as Marianne had believed it. There was,
at times, a want of spirits about him, which, if it did
not denote indifference, spoke a something almost as
unpromising. A doubt of her regard, supposing him
to feel it, need not give him more than inquietude. It
would not be likely to produce that dejection of mind
which frequentl attended him. A more reasonable
cause might be ound in the de endent situation which
forbad the indulgence of his a ecn'on. She knew that
his mother neither behaved to him so as to make his
home comfortable at present, nor to give him any as-
surance that he might fomi a home for himself, without
strictly attending to her views for his aggrandisement.
With such a knowledge as this, it was impossible for
Elinor to feel easy on the subij She was far from
depending on that result of his )reference of her, which
her mother and sister still considered as certain. Nay,
the longer they were together, the more doubtful seemed
the nature of his regard; and sometimes, for a few pain-
ful minutes, she believed it to be no more than fnend-

shi .

lllut, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy; and
at the same time (which was still more common), to
make her uncivil. She took the ﬁrst opportunity of
aﬂ'ronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to
her so expressiver of her brother’s great expectations,
of Mrs Ferrars’s resolution that both her sons should
marry well, and of the danger attending any oung
woman who attempted to draw bier in, that Mrs ash-
wood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor
endeavour to be calm. She gave her an answer which

22 SENS! AND SENSIBILITY.

marked her cmtempt, and instantly left the room, ne-
wlving that, whatever might be the inconvenience or
expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor
should not be exposed another week to such insinu-
ations.

In this state of her spiriu, a letter was delivered so
her from the pout, which contained a proposal particu-
larly well-timed. It was the oﬂ'er of a small house, on
very easy terms, belonging to a relation of her own, a
gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.
The letter was from this gentleman himself, and written
in the true spirit of friend] accommodation. He under-
stood that she was in nee of a dwelling, and though the
house he now offered her was merely a cottage, he as-
sul‘ed her that everything should be done to it which
she might think necessary, if the situation pleased her.
He earnestly pleased her, after giving the particulars of
the house and garden, to come with her daughters to
Barton Park, the lace of his own residence, from
whence she might Judge herself whether Barton Cot-
tage, for the houses were in the same parish, could by
any alteration be made comfortable to her. He seemed
really anxious to accommodate them, and the whole of
his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not
fail of giving pleasure to his cousin; more especially at
a moment when she was suffering under the cold and
unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections. She
needed no time for deliberation or inquiry. Her rt:-
solution was formed as she read. The situation of
Barton, in a county so far distant from Sussex as
Devonshire, which but a few hours before would have
been a sufﬁcient objection to outweigh every 'ble
advantage belonging to the place, was now its mt re-
commendation. To uit the neighbourhood of Norland
was no longer an evil; it was an ob’ect of desire; it
was a blessing in comparison of the misery of continuing

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 23

her daughter-iu-law’s guest: and to remove for ever
from that beloved place would be less painful than to
inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress.
She instantl wrote Sir John Middleton her acknow-
ledgment n his kindness, and her acceptance of his
proposal; and then hastened to show both letters to her
daughters, that she might be secure of their appmlmtion
before her answer were sent.

Elinor had always thought it would be more pmdent
for them to settle at some distance from Norland than
immediately amongst their present acquaintance. 0n
[bill head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose her
mother’s intention of removing into Devonshire. The
house, too, as described by Sir John, was on so simple
a scale, and the rent so uncommonly moderate, as to
leave her no right of objection on either point; and,
therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any
charm to her fancy, though it was a removal from the
vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she made no
attempt to dissuade her mother from sending her letter
of acquiescence.

Gibson: 17.

O sooner was her answer despatclied, than Mrs
Dashwood indulged herself in the leuure of
announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that

she was rovided with a house, and should incommode
them no onger than till everything were read for her
inhabiting it. They heard her with surprise. rs John
Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly h

that she would not he settled far from Norland. he
had great mtisfaction in replying that she was going into
Devonshire. Edward turned hastin towards her on hear-
ing this, and in a voice of surprise and concern, which

24 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

required no explanation to her, repeated, “ Devonahisel
Are you indeed going there? So far from hence!
And to what part of it 2 " She explained the situation.
It was within four miles northward of Exeter.

“ It is but a cottage," she continued,“ but I hope
to see many of my friends in it. A room or two can
easily be added; and if In friends ﬁnd no diiliculty in
travelling so far to set: me, i am sure I will ﬁnd none
in accommodating them.”

She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr
and Mrs John Dashwood to visit her at Barton; and
to Edward she gave one with still greater affection.
Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-Iaw
had made her resolve on remaining at Norland no
longer than was unavoidable, it had not produced the
smallest eﬂ'ect on her in that point to which it princi-
pally tended. To separate Edward and Elinor was as
far from being her object as ever; and she wished to
show Mrs John Dashwood this pointed invitation to
her brother, how totally she isregnrded her disapproba-
tion of the match.

Mr John Dashwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken an
house at such a distance from Norland as to prevent his
being of any service to her in removing her furniture.
He really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for
the very exertion to which he had limited the perfor-
mance of his romise to his father was by this arrange-
ment rendered) impracticable—The furniture was all
sent round by water. It chieﬂy consisted of household
linen, plate, china, and books, with an handsome piano-
forte of Marianne’s. Mrs John Dashwood saw the

ackagcs depart with a sigh; she could not help feeling
it hard that as Mrs Dathwood’s income would he so
triﬂing in comparison with dieir own, she should have
any handsome article of furniture.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 35

Mrs Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth ; it
was ready furnished, and she might have immediate
possession. No difﬁculty arose on either side in the
agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of her
effects at Norland, and to determine her future house-
hold, before she set off for the west; and this, as she
was exceedingly rapid in the perfonnance of everything
that interested her, was soon done.—The horses which
were left her by her husband had been sold soon after
his death, and an opportunity now offering of disposing
of her carriage, she agreed to sell that likewise at the
earnest advice of her eldest daughter. For the com-
fort of her children, had she consulted only her own
wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of
Elinor prevailed. Her wisdom, too, limited the number
of their servants to three—two maids and a man, with
whom th were speedily rovided from amongst those
who hsdefisrmed their esta Iishment at Norland.

The man and one of the maids were sent off im-
mediately into Devonshire, to prepare the house for
their mistress’s arrival ; for, as Lady Middleton was en-
tirely unknown to Mrs Dashwood, she prefen-ed going
directly to the cottage on being a visitor at Barton Park;
and she relied so undoubtingly on Sir John’s descrip-
tion of the house, as to feel no curiosity to examine it
herself till she entered it as her own. Her ea erness
to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution
by the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the
pro eet of her removal; a satisfaction which was but
feeb y attempted to be concealed under a cold invitation
to her to defer her departure. Now was the time when
her son-in-law’s promise to his father might with par-
ticular propriety be fulﬁlled. Since he had neglected
to do it on ﬁrst coming to the estate, their quitting his
house might be looked on as the most suitable period
for its accomplishment. But Mrs Dashwood began

26 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

shortly to give over every ho of the kind, and to be
convinced, from the general rift of hie dilcoune, that
his “ﬁnance extended no further than their mainten-
ance for xix months at Norland. He no frequently
talked of the increaeing expemel of houeekeeping, and
of the perpetual demands upon his purl: which a man
of any consequence in the world was beyond calculation
exposed to, that he seemed rather to stand in need of
more money himself than to have any design of giving
money away.

In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir
John Middleton’s ﬁn: letter to Norland, eve ing
was so far settled in their future abode, an to enab e Mn
Daehwood and her daughters to begin their journey.

Many were the tears shed by them in their lau adieu:
to a place so much beloved. “ Dear, dear Norland! "
said Marianne, as she wandered alone before the houee,
on the last evening of their being there; “ when Ihall 1
Conan to re re: you P—when learn to feel a home clue-
where? happy house! could you know what I
suﬂ'er in now viewing you from this s c, from whence
perhaps I may view you no more !— nd you, ye well-
known treenl—but you will continue the came—No
leaf will decay because we are removed, nor any branch
become motionless although we can oboerve you no
longer E—No ; you will continue the name; unconsciou-
of the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and inunihle
of any change in those who walk under your uhadc !—
But who will remain to enjoy you 2 ”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 27

charm: 17].

HE ﬁrst part of their journey was performed in too
melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than
- tedious and unpleasant. But as they drew to-
wards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejec-
tion, and a view of Barton Valley as they entered it
gave them cheerfulness. It was a pleasant, fertile spot,
well wooded, and rich in pasture. After winding along
it for more than a mile, they reached their own house.
A small green court was the whole of its demesne in
front; and a neat wicket gate admitted them into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was com-
fortable and compact; but as a cottage it was defective,
for the building was regular, the roof was tiled, the
window-shutters were not painted green, nor were the
walls covered with honeysuckles. A namw ge
led directly through the house into the garden hind.
On each side of the entrance was a sitting-room, about
sixteen feet square; and beyond them were the ofﬁces
and the stairs. Four bedrooms and two gurmta formed
the rest of the house. It had not been built many
ears, and was in good repair. In comparison of Nor-
litnd, it was poor and small indcedl—but the tears
which recollection called forth as they entered the
house were soon dried away. They were cheered by
the joy of the servants on their arrival, and each for
the sake of the others resolved to appear happy. It
was very early in September; the season was ﬁne, and -
from ﬁrst seeing the place under the advantage of good
weather, they received an impression in its favour which
was of material service in recommending it to their
lasting ap robot-ion.
The situation of the house was good. High hills

:8 mmm.

muhnmedhmlyhehhdmdnmgluhneon
uchl'de; nmed'vhieh-uenpudnmﬁe
cultivated and woody. The village «I Burton VII
chieﬂymonenfthaehiugmdﬁunedaﬂen-n
view from the range window; The III {run
watrnnreextenl've; it wmunded theth ofthe
valley,lnd reached intothe cormn'ylaeyond. “hills
which mnvunded the cottage tenninated thevalleyin that
direction ; under amtber name1 and in anothet our-e, it
branched out again betweentwoufthemepe‘nfthetn.
\Viththen'ze-nd ﬂirniuueol'thehounMn Duh-
wood wu upon the whole well stiﬂed; for though
her former Kyle of life rendered many addition! no the
latter indilpenrable, ya to add and improve van a
delight to her; and she had at thin time ready money
enough to supply all that was wanted of grater e
to the apartments. “A. for the house itself, to he
lure." laid she, “it i! too small for our family; but we
will make cunelvel talenny comfortable for the t.
alitiltoolateinthe yurforim rovunenu. el‘ltlpl
in the tpring, if I have plenty 0 money, a: I dare Ily
I shall, we may thinlt about building. The! pzrloun
are both too unall for such panic of our friend: a I
hope to nee often collected here; and I have me
thoughts of throwing the pang: into one of them,
with perhaps a part of the other, and so leave the
remainder of that other for an entrance; this, with a
new drawing-room, which may be arin added, and a
bed-chamber and garnet above, will make it a we mug
little cottage. I could WlBll the stain were han me.
But one must not expect everything; though I mppoee
it would be no difﬁcult matter to widen them. I shall
ace how much I am beforehand with the world in the
spring, and we will plan our improvements accordingly."
In the meantime, till all these alteration: could be
made from the saving! of an income of ﬁve hundred

l

n

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTV. 29

a-yr by a woman who never saved in her life,

were wise enough to be contented with the house M It
was; and each of them was busy in amnging their
particular concerns, and endeavouring, by placing
around them their books and other possessions, to form
themselves a home. Marianne’s pinnofom: was un-
packed and pro rly disposed of ; and Elinor’s draw-
rngs were aﬂixe to the walls of their sitting-room.

In such emplo ments as these they were intermpted
soon after break ast the next day by the entrance of
their landlord, who called to welcome them to Barton,
and to offer them every accommodation from his own
house and garden in which theirs might at present be
deficient. Sir John Middleton was a good-lookin
man about forty. He had formerly visited at Stanh~ ,
but it was too long ago for his young cousins to re-
member him. His countenance was thoroughly good-
humoured; and his manners were as friend] as the
style of his letter. Their arrival seemed to aﬂi’ml him
real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an object of
real solicitnde to him. He said much of his earnest
desire of their living on the most sociable terms with his
family, and ressed them so cordially to dine at Barton
Park every clay till they were better settled at home, that,
though his entreaties were carried to is int of persever-
ance beyond civility, they could not give offence. His
kindness was not conﬁned to words; for within an hour
after he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff
and fruit arrived from the Park, which was followed
before the end of the day by a present of game. He
insisted, moreover, [on] conveying all their letters to
and from the post for them, and would not be denied the
satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day.

Lady Middleton had sent a very civil mesuge by
him, denoting her intention of wainng on Mrs Dash-
wood as soon as she could be assured that her visit

30 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her
was introduced to them the next day.

They were of course very anxious to see a person on
whom so much of their comfort at Barton must de-
pend; and the elegance of her appearance was favour-
able to their wishes. Lady Middleton was not more
than six or seven and twenty; her face was handsome,
her ﬁgure tall and striking, and her address graceful.
Her manners had all the elegance which her husband’s
wanted. But they would have been improved by some
share of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was
long enough to detract something from their ﬁrst ad-
miration, by allowing that, though perfectly well-bred,
she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say for her-
self beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.

Conversation, however, was not wanted, for Sir John
was very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the
wise precaution of bringing with her their eldest child,
a fine little boy about six years old, by which means
there was one subject always to be recurred to by the
ladies in case of extremity; for they had to inquire his
name and age, admire his beauty, and ask him questions,
which his mother answered for him, while he hung
about her and held down his head, to the great surprise
of her ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy be-
fore company, as he could make noise enough at home.
On every formal visit a child ought to be of the party,
by way of provision for discourse. In the present case
it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were
most like his father or mother, and in what particular he
resembled either; for of course everybody differed, and
everybody was astonished at the opinion of the others.

An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dash-
woods of debating on the test of the children, as Sir
John would not leave the house without securing their
promise of dining at the park the next day.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 3!

cbspur FT].

ARTON PARK was about halfa mile from the
cottage. The ladies had passed near it on their
way along the valley, but it was screened from

their View at home by the projection of :III hill. The
house was large and handsome; and the Middletons lived
in a style of equal hospitality and elegance. The former
was for Sir John’s gratiﬁcation, the latter for that of his
lady. They were scarcely ever without some friends
staying with them in the house, and they kept more com-

ny of every kind than any other family in the neigh-
Eurhood. It was necessary to the happiness of both ;
for, however dissimilar in temper and outward behaviour,
they strongly resembled each other in that total want
of talent and taste which confined ther employments,
unconnected with such as society produced, within a
very narrow compass. Sir John was a sportsman,
Lady Middleton a mother. He hunted and shot, and
she humoured her children; and these were their only
resources. Lady Middleton had the advantage of
being able to spoil her children all the year round,
while Sir John’s independent employment: were in
existence only half the time. Continual enga ements
at home and abroad, however, supplied all the elicien-
cies of nature and education ; supported the good spirits
of Sir John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of
his wife.

Lady Middleton iqucd herself upon the elegance of
her table, and of ail her domestic arrangements; and
from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in
any of their parties. But Sir John’s satisfaction in
society was much more real; he delighted in collecting
about him more young people than his house would
hold, and the noisier they were the better was he

32 SENSE AND SINSIBILITV.

pleased. He was a blessing to all the juvenile part of
the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for ever
forming parties to out cold ham and chicken out of
doors, and in winter his private balls were numerous
enough for any young lady who was not suffering under
the insatiable appetite of ﬁfteen.

The arrival of a new family in the country was
always a matter of joy to him, and in every point of
view he was charmed with the inhabitants he had now
procured for his cottage at Barton. The Miss Dash-
woods Were young, pretty, and unaffected. It was
enough to secure his good 0 inion, for to be unaffected
was all that a pretty girl can d want to make her mind
as captivating as her person. The friendliness of his
disposition made him happy in accommodating those
whose situation might be considered, in comparison
with the past, as unfortunate. In showing kindness to
his cousins, therefore, he had the real satisfaction of a
good heart; and in settling a family of females only in
his cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman;
for a sportsman, though he esteems only those of his
sex who are sportsmen likewise, is not often desirous of
encouraging their taste by admitting them to a residence
within his own manor.

Mrs Dashwood and her daughters were met at the
door of the house by Sir John, who welcomed them to
Barton Park with unaffected sincerity; and as he
attended them to the drawing-room, repeated to the
young ladies the concern which the me subject had
drawn from him the day before, at being unable to get
any smart young men to meet them. They would see,
he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the Park, but who
was neither very young nor very gay. He hoped they
would all excuse the smallness of the party, and could
assure them it should never happen so again. He had

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 33

been to several families that morning, in ho of pro-
curing some addition to their number; m it was
moon ight, and mybody was full of engagements.
Luckily, Lady Mi dleton’s mother had arrived at
Barton within the last hour, and as she was a very
cheerful, agreeable woman, he hoped the young ladies
would not ﬁnd it so very dull as they might imagine.
The young ladies, as well as their mother, were
perfectly satisﬁed with having two entire strangers of
the party, and wished for no more.

Mrs Jennings, Lady Middleton’s mother, was a
good-humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked
a great deal, seemed very happy, and rather vulgar.
She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of
lovers and husbands; hoped they had not left their
hearts behind them in Sussex, and pretended to see
them blush whether they did or not. Marianne was
vexed at. it for her sister’s sake, and turned her eyes
towards Elinor, to see how she bore these attacks, with
an earnestness which gave Elinor far more pain than
could arise from such common-place millery as Mrs
Jennings’s.

Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no
more adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend
than Lady Middleton was to be his wife, or Mrs
Jennings to be Lady Middleton’s mother. He was
silent and grave. Hit a pearance, however, was not
unpleasing, in spite of his being in the opinion of
Marianne and Margaret, an absolute old bachelor, for
he was on the wrong side of ﬁve-and-thirty; hut though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible,
and his address was particularly gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any of the party which could
recommend them as companions to the Dashwoods;
but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so par-

1. C

34 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

ticularly repulsive that in comparison of it the gravity
of Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of
Sir John and his mother-in-law, was intercning. Lady
Middleton seemed to be roused to enjoyment only by
the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner, who
pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every
kind of discourse except what related to themselves.

In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be
musical, she was invited to play. The instrument was
unlocked, everybody prepared to be charmed, and
Marianne, who sang very well, at their re uest went
through the chief of the songs which Lady‘h/Iiddleton
had brought into the famil on her marriage, and
which perhaps had lain ever since in the same position
on the pianoforte; for her lad ship had celebrated that
event by giving up music, alihough by her mother's -
account the had played extremely well, and by her
own was very fond of it.

Marianne’s performance was highly applauded. Sir
John was loud in his admiration at the end of every
song, and as loud in his conversation with the others
while every song lasted. Lady Middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one’s attention
could be diverted from music for a moment, and asked
Marianne to sin a particular song which Marianne had
just ﬁnished. (golonel Brandon alone, of all the part ,
heard her without being in raptures. He paid her oni’y
the compliment of attention; and she felt a res]th for
him on the occasion which the others had reasonably
forfeited by their shameless want of taste. His pleasure
in music, though it amounted not to that ecstatic de-
light which alone could sympathise with her own, was
estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensi-
biliry of the others; and she was reasonable enough to
allow that a man of ﬁve-and-thirty might well have
outlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisite

SENS! AND SBNSIBILI’I’Y. 35

power of en'oyment. She was perfectly dilpooed to
make every lowance for the colonel’l advanced state
of life which humanity required.

tbapttr 1733].

RS JENNINGS waa a widow, with an ample
jointure. She had only two daughters, both of
whom she had lived to see reopectably married,

and the had now therefore nothing to do but to marry
all the rest of the world. In the promotion of this
object, she was zmlously active, as far as her ability
reached, and missed no opportunity of projecting wed-
ding: among all the young people of her acquaintance.
She was remarkably quick in the discove of attach-
menta, and had enjoyed the advantage 0 raising the
blushes and the vanity of many a young lady by insinua-
tions of her power over such a young man; and this
ltind of discemment enabled her soon after her arrival
at Barton, decisively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon
was very much in love with Marianne Dashwood. She
rather suspected it to be so, on the very ﬁrst evening of
their being together, from his listening to attentively
while she sang to them; and when the visit was re-
turned by the Middletons dining at the cottage, the
fact was ascertained by his listening to her again. It
must be so. She was perfectly convinced of it. It
would be an excellent match, for b: was rich and :5:
was handsome. Mrs Jennings had been anxious to see
Colonel Brandon well married ever since her connection
with Sir John ﬁrst brought him to her knowledge; and
she was always anxious to get a good husband for every
pretty girl.

The immediate advantage to herself was by no means

36 sense sun snusrnrun.

inconsiderable, for it supplied her with endless
against them both. At the Park she laughed at the
colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. To the
former her raille was probably, as far as it

only himself, pe ectly indifferent; but to the latter it
was at ﬁrst incomprehensible; and when its object was
understood, she hardly knew whether moot to laugh
at its absurdity, or censure its impcrtinence, for she
considered it as an unfeeling reﬂection on the colonel’s
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition an an old
bachelor.

Mrs Dashwood. who could not think a man ﬁve
years younger than herself so exceedingly ancient as he
appeared to the youthful fancy of her daughter, ventured
to clear Mrs Jennings from the probability of wishing
to throw ridicule on his age.

“ But at least, mamma, you cannot deny the absurdity
of the accusation, though you may not think it inten-
tionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon is certainly

ounger than Mrs Jennings, but he is old enough to
be my father; and if he were ever animated enough to
be in love, must have long outlived every sensation of the
kind. It is too ridiculous! When is a man to be safe
from such wit, if age and inﬁrmity will not protect him 9"

“Inﬁrmit I" said Elinor; “do you call Colonel
Brandon in rrm? I can easily suppose that his age
may appear much greater to you than to my modier;
but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the
use of his limbs! "

“ Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism 2
and is not that the commonest inﬁrmity of declining
life ? ”

“ My dearest child,” said her mother, laughing, “at
this rate, you must be in continual tenor of my deny;
and it must seem to you a miracle that my life has been
extended to the advanced age of forty.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 31

“Momma, you are not doing me justice. I know
very well that Colonel Brandon it not old enough to
' make his friends yet a rehensive of losing him in

the course of Nature. e may live twenty years
longer. But thirty-live has nothing to do with
matrimony.”

" Perhaps,” said Elinor, “thirty-live and seventeen
had better not have anything to do with matrimony
together. But if there should by any chance happen
to be a woman who is sin Ie at seven-and-twenty, I
should not think Colonel grandon’s being thirty-five
any objection to his marrying bar."

“A woman of seven-and-twenty,” said Marianne,
after pausing a moment, " can never hope to feel or
inspire affection again ; and if her home be uncomfort-
able, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might
bring herself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the
sake of the provision and security of a wife. In his
marrying such a woman, therefore, there would be no-
thing unsuitable. It would be a compact of con-
venience, and the world would be satisﬁed. In my
eyes it would be no marriage at all, but that would lie
nothing. No me it would seem onl a commercial
exchange, in which each wished to be eﬁted at the
expense of the other.”

“It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor,
“to convince you that a woman of seven-and-twent
could feel for a man of thirtyaﬁve anything near enoug
to love to make him a desirable corn union to her.
But I must object to your dooming Co onel Brandon
and his wife to the constant conﬁnement of a sick
chamber, merel because he chanced to complain yester-
day (a very col, , damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel
in one of his shoulders."

“ But he talked of flannel waistcoats,” said Marianne;
“ and with me a ﬂannel waistcoat is invariably connected

t

38 sausa- AND sanstsiu-rv.

with aches, cramps, rheumatisrns, and eve species of
ailment that can aﬂiict the old and the feeb e.” I

“Had he been only in a violent fever, u would
not have despised him half so much. Con Mari-
anne, is not there something interesting so ou in the
ﬂushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse oiy a fever?"

Soon after this, upon Elinor’s leaving the room,

“Mamma,” said Marianne, “I have an alarm on
the subject of illness, which I cannot conceal from
you. 1 am sure Edward Ferrars is not well. We
have now been here almost a fortnightI and yet he
does not come. Nothing but real indi ition could
occasion this extraordinary delay. hat. else can
detain him at Norlandi” '

“ Had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said
Mrs Dashwood. “I had none. On the contmry, if
I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject, it has been
in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of
pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when

talked of his coming to Barton. Does Elinor expect
him already .’ "

“I have never mentioned it to her; but of course
she must."

“ I rather think you are mistaken, for, when I was
talking to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the
spare bed-chamber, she observed that there was no
immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that the
room would he wanted for some time."

“ How strange this is! What can be the meaning of
it? But the whole of their behaviour to each other
has been unaccountable! How cold, how composed
were their last adieus! How languid their conversa-
tion the last evening of their being together! In
Edward’s farewell there was no distinction between
Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an affec-
tionate brother to both. Twice did I leave them

SENSE AND SENSIDILITV. 39

pu ly together in the course of the lust morning,
an each time did he most unaccountabl followme
out of the room. And Elinor, in quitting Norland
and Edward, cried not as I did. Even now her self-
command is invariable. When is she dejected or
melancholy? When does she try to avoid society, or
appear restless and dissatisﬁed in it P ”

cbspttr ‘Jﬁ.

HE Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with
tolerable comfort to themselves. The house
and the garden, with all the objects surrounding

them, were now become familiar; and the ordinary pur-
suits which had given to Norland half its charms, were
engaged in again with far greater enjoyment than Nor-
land had been able to afford since the loss of their father.
Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for
the ﬁrst fortnight, and who was not in the habit of
seeing much occu ation at home, could not conceal
his amazement on finding them always employed.

Their visitors, except those from Barton ark, were
not many ; for, in spite of Sir John's urgent entreaties
that they would mix more in the neighbourhood, and
repeated assurances of his carriage being always at their
service, the independence of Mrs Dashwood’s spirit
overcame the wish of society for her children ; and she
was resolute in declining to visit any family beyond the
distance of a walk. There were but few who could be
so classed ; and it was not all of them that were attain-
able. About a mile and a half from the cottage, along
the narrow winding valley of Allenham, which issued
from that of Barton, as formerly described, the girls
had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an ancient,

4O SENSE AND SENSIBILI'H’.

respectable-looking mansion, which, by reminding them
a little of Norland, interested their imagination, and
made them wish to he better acquainted with it. But
they learnt, on inquiry, that its possessor, an elderly
lady of very good character, was unfortunately too
inﬁrm to mix with the world, and never stirred from
home.

The whole country about them abounded in beautiful
walks. The high downs, which invited them from
almost every window of the cottage to neck the
exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a
happy alternative when the dirt of the valleys be-
neath shut up their superior beauties; and towards
one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one
memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by
the partial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable
longer to bear the conﬁnement which the settled rain
of the two preceding days had occasioned. The
weather was not tempting enough to draw the two
others from their pencil and their book, in Ipite of
Marianne’s declaration that the day would be lastineg
fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn
at? from their hills ; and the two girls set 03' together.

They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their
own penetration at every glimpse of blue sky: and
when they caught in their faces the animating gale: of
a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fears which
had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing
such delightful sensations.

“ Is there a felicit in the worl ,
“ superior to this? hi
least two hours.”

Margaret agreed, and they pursued their wary against
the wind, resisting it with laughing delight or about
twenty minutes longer, when suddenly the clouds united
over their heads, and a driving rain set full in their faces.

" said Marianne,

argaret, we will walk here at

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 4 I

Chagrined and so rised, they were obliged, though
unwillingly, to turnrlxaclt, for no shelter was nearer than
their own house. One consolation, however, remained
for them, to which the exigence of the moment gave
more than usual propriety; it was that of running
with all possible d down the steep side of the hill
which led immediately to their garden gate.

They set off. Marianne had at lirst the advantage,
but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground, and
Margaret, unable to stop herself to assist her, was in-
voluntarily hurried along, and reached the bottom in
safet .

Aygentleman carryin a gun, with two pointers play-
ing round him, was passing up the hill and within a few
yards of Marianne, when her accident happened. He
put down his gun and ran to her assistance. She had
raised herself from the ground, but her foot had been
twisted in the fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.
The gentleman offered his services, and perceiving that
her modesty declined what her situation rendered necek
sary, took her up in his arms without farther delay, and
carried her down the hill. Then passing through the
garden, the gate of which had been left open by Margaret.
he bore her directly into the house, whither Margaret
was just arrived, and quitted not his hold till he had
seated her in a chair in the parlour.

Elinor and her mother rose u in amazement at their
entrance, and while the eyes of th were fixed on him
with an evident wonder and a secret admiration, which
equally sprang from his appearance, he apologin for
his intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank
and so graceful, that his rson, which was uncommonly
handsome, received additlonal charms from his voice and
expression. Had he been even old, ugly, and vulgar,
the gratitude and kindness of Mn Dashwood would
have been secured by any act of attention to her child ;

42 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

but the inﬂuence of youth. beauty, and elegance, gave
aninteresttotheactionwhichamehometoher
feelings.

She dunked him again and again, and with a sweet-
ness of addre- which always attended her, invited him
tobeseated. Butthishededined,ashcwaedirtyand
wet. Mrs Dalhwood then begged to know to whom
the was obliged. His name, he replied, was Willoughhy,
and his present home was at Allenham, from whence he
hoped she would allow him the honour of ailing to-
morrow to inquire after Miss Dashwood. The honour
was readily granted, and he then departed, to make him-
self still more interesting, in the midst ofan heavy rain.

His manly beauty and more than common graceful-
ness were instantly the theme of general admiration, and
the laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne
received particular spirit from his exterior attractions.
Marianne herself had seen less of his person than the
rest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her faca,
on his lifting her up, had robbed her of the power of
regarding him after their entering the house. But she
had seen enough of him to join in all the admiration of
the others, and with an energy which always adorned
her praise. His person and air were equal to what her
fancy had ever drawn for the hero of a favourite story;
and in his carrying her into the house with so little
previous formality, there was a rapidity of thought which
particularly recommended the action to her. Every cir.
cumstance belonging to him was interating. His name
was good, his residence was in their favourite village,
and she soon found out that of all manl dresses a
shooting-jacket was the most becoming. Hier imagina-
tion was busy, her reﬂections were plmant, and the
pain of a sprained ankle was disregarded.

Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval
of fair weather that morning allowed him to get out of

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 43

doors; and Marianne’s accident being related to him,
he was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentleman
of the name of Willoughby at Allenham.

“Willoughby! " cried Sir John; “what, is be in
the country? That is good news, however; I will
ride over to - morrow, and ask him to dinner on
Thursday.”

“ You know him then i ” said Mrs Dashwood.

“ Know him ! so be sure I do. Why he is down
here every year."

“And what sort ofa oung man is he?"

" As good a kind 0 fellow as ever lived, I assure
you. A very decent shot, and there is not a holder
rider in England.”

“And is [but all you can say for him!” cried
Marianne indignantly. “ But what are his manners
on more intimate acquaintance? what his pursuits, his
talents, and genius ? ”

Sir John was rather puzzled.

" Upon my soul," said he, “I do not know much
about him as to all (but. But he is a pleasant, good-
humoured fellow, and has got the nicest little black
hitch of a pointer I ever saw. Was she out with him
to-day Q ”

But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the
colour of Mr Willoughhy's pointer than he could
describe to her the shades of his mind.

“ But who is he ? ” said Elinor. “ Where does he
come from? Has he a house at Allenham? ”

On this point Sir John could give more certain in-
telligence; and he told them that Mr Willoughhy had
no property of his own in the country ; that he resided
there only while he was visitinpa the old lady at Allen-
ham Court, to whom he was re ted, and whose posses-
sions he was to inherit; adding, “ Yes, yes, he is very
well worth catching, I can tell you, Miss Dashwood;

44 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

he has a pretty little estate of his own in Somerset-hire
besides; and ifI were you, I would not give him up to
my yoriptger sister in spite of all this tumbling down
hi ls. iss Marianne must not expect to have all the
men to herself. Brandon will be jealous, if she doe!
not take care."

“ I do not believe," said Mrs Dashwood, with a good-
humoured smile, “ that Mr Willoughby will be incom-
moded by the attempts of either of my daughter: toward:
what you call tattbing lrim. It is not an employment to
which they have been brought up. Men are very Iafe
with us, let them be ever so rich. I am glad to ﬁnd,
however, from what you say, that he is a respectable
young man, and one whose acquaintance will not be
ineligible.”

“ He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever
lived,” repented Sir John. “I remember last Christ-
mas, at a little ho ) at the Park, he danced from eight
o’clock till four, WIthout once sitting down.”

“ Did he, indeed?” cried Marianne, with sparkling
eyes, “and with elegance, with spirit?"

“Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to
covert."

“ That is what. I like; that is what a young man
ought to be. Whatever be his pursuits, his eagemesl
in them should know no moderation, and leave him no
sense of fatigue.”

“Ay, ay, I see how it will be," said Sir John, “ I
see how it will be. You will be setting your cap at him
now, and never think of poor Brandon. ’

“That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne
warmly, “which I particularly dislike. I abhor every
common-place phrase by which wit is intended; and
‘ setting one’s cap at a man,’ or ‘making a conquest,’
are the most odious of all. Their tendency is gross
and illiberal; and if their construction could ever be

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 45

deemed clever, time has long ago destroyed all its
ingenuit .”

Sir john did not much understand this roof;
but he laughed as heartily as if he did, an then
replied,—

“Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say,
one way or other. Poor Brandon! he is quite smitten
already, and he is very well worth seﬂing your cap at, I
can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling about and
spraining of ankles. '

chapter i.

ARIANNE'S preserver, as Margaret, with more
ele ance than precision, Itiled Willoughhy,
cal ed at the cottage early the next momin to

make his rsonal inquiries. He was received by n
Dashwood)e with more than liteness—wirh a'kindness
which Sir John’ I account 0 him and her own gratitude
prompted; and everything that passed during the visit
tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual aﬂ'cc-
tion, and domestic comfort of the family to whom acci-
dent had now introduced him. of their personal charms
he had not required a second interview to be convinced.

Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular
features, and a remarkably pretty ﬁgure. Marianne was
still handsomer. Her form, though not so correct as
her sister’s, in having the advantage of height, was more
striking; and her face was so lovely, that when, in the
common cant of praise, the was called a beautiful girl,
truth was less violently outraged than usually happens.
Her skin was very brown, but, from its transparency,
her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; her features
were all good ; her smile was sweet and attracﬁve; and

‘fr

46 smseum man.

in her eyee, which madMMeuaiga
qiirit, an agents, which Innlly be men without
delight. From W' their (M was at
ﬁrst held back, by the cabana-meat which the remem-
branoeofhia ainnoeaaud. Bmvhenthie

away, when lrr spirit: beanie (likened—when the av
thanothepetfect good-breeding aftbe gentleman,he
united frankness and vivacity, and, above all, when Ihe
hardhimdedarethatofmulicanddancinghe'aa
passionately fond, she gave him arch a look of appro-
barionaxsecured the large: rhare ofhis diaeourae to
herlelf for the res of his nay.

It was only neceuary to mention any favourite
amusement to engage her to talk. She could not be
silent when such points were introduced, and she had
neither thyneas nor reserve in their dilution. They
speedily discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and
music wal mutual, and that it atone from a general con~
fonnity of judgment in all that related to either. En-
couraged by this to a further examination of his opinion,
the proceeded to question him on the subject of book];
her favourite author: were brought forward and dwelt
upon with ID rapturous a delight, that any young man
of ﬁve-and-twenty must have been insensible indeed, not
to become an immediate convert lo the excellence of
such work, however disregarded before. Their (ante
was strikingly alike. The arm books, the name pu- ‘

' ages were idolised by each—or, if any difference

apycarcd, any objection arose, it lasted 5'0 longer than
Ill the force of her argument: and the bnghtnets of her
eye: could be diaiplayed. He acquiesced in all her
decisions, caught al her enthusiasm, and long before hi-
viair. concluded, they convened with the familiarity of a
long-established acquaintance.

“ Well, Marianne,” said Elinor, as won as he had
left them, “for on: morning I think you have done

sanss um sensrsru-rv. 47

retty well. You have already menained Mr Wil-
roughby’s opinion in almost every matter of impomnce.
You know what he thinks of Co r and Scott; you
are certain of his estimating their auties as he ought,
and you have received every assurance of his admiring
Pope no more than is proper. But how is your acquaint-
ance to be long suxporu-d, under such extraordinary
despatch of every su ject for discourse! You will soon
have exhausted each favourite topic. Another meeting
will sufﬁce to explain his sentiments on picturesque
beauty and second marriages, and then you can have
nothing farther to ask- ’

“ Elinor,” cried Marianne, “is this fair? is this just?
are my ideas so scanty? But I see what you man.
I have been too much at my ease, too ha py, too frank.
I have erred against every common-p ace notion of
decomml I have been open and sincere where I ought
to have been reserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful.
Had I talked only of the weather and the roads, and
had I spoken only once in ten minutes, this reproach
would have been spared.”

“ My love," said her mother, " you must not be
offended with lilinor—uhe was only in jest. I should
scold her myself, if she were capable of wishing to check
the delight of your conversation with our new friend."
Marianne was softened in a moment.

Willoughby, on his side, gave every roof of his

leasure in their acquaintance which an evi ent wish of
Improving it could offer. He came to them every day.
To inquire after Marianne was at ﬁrst his excuse;
but the encouragement of his reception, to which every
day gave greater kindness, made such an excuse un-
necessary before it had ceased to be possible by
Marianne's perfect recovery. She was conﬁned for
some days to the house: but never had any conﬁne-
ment been less irksome. Willoughby was a young man

 

48 SENS! AND SENSIBILITY.

of good abilities, quick imagination, lively spirits, and
open, affectionate manners. He was exactly formed to
engage Marianne's heart; for, with all this, he joined
not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of
mind, which was now roused and increased by the
example of her own, and which recommended him to
her ali'ection beyond everything else.

His society became gmdually her most exquisite
enjoyment. They read, they talked, they sang to-
gether; his musical talents were considerable; and he
read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward
had unfortunately wanted.

In Mrs Dashwood’s estimation, he was as faultless
as in Marianne’s; and Elinor saw nothing to censure
in him but a propensity, in which he strongly resembled
and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying too much
what he thought on every occasion, without attention
to persons or circumstances. In hastily forming and
giving his opinion of other people, in acriﬁcing general
politeness to the enjoyment of undivided attention
where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily
the forms of worldly pro riety, he displayed a want of
caution which Elinor cou d not approve, in spite of all
that he and Marianne could say in its support.

Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation
which had seizud her at sixteen and a half, of ever see-
ing a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection,
had been rash and unjustiﬁable. Willoughby was all
that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour, and
in every brighter period, as capable of attaching her;
and his behaviour declared his wishes to be in that
res ct as earnest at his abilities were strong.

er mother, too, in whose mind not one speculative
thought of their marriage had been raised by his pros-
pect of riches, was led before the end of a week to
hope and expect it, and secretly to congratulate herself

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 49

on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and
Willoughlry.

Colonel Brandon’s partiality for Marianne, which
had so early been discovered by his friends, now ﬁrst
became perceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be
noticed by them. Their attention and wit were drawn
at? to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which
the other had incurred before any partiality arose, was
removed when his feelings began really to call for the
ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility. Elinor was
obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the senti-
ments which Mrs Jennings had assigned him for her
own satisfaction, were now actually excited by her
sister; and that however a general resemblance of dis-

sition between the parties might forward the affection
of Mr Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of
character was no hindrance to the regard of Colonel
Brandon. She saw it with concern ; for what could a
silent man of live-and-thirty hope, when opposed by a
very lively one of live-and-twenty? and as she could
not even wish him successful, she heartily wished him
indifferent. She liked him—in spite of his gravity and
reserve, she beheld in him an object of interest. His
manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserve
appeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits,
than of any natural gloominess of tern . Sir John
had dropped hints of past in'uries and isappointments,
which justiﬁed her belief 0 his being an unfortunate
man, and she regarded him with respect and compassion.

Perhaps she itied and esteemed him the more be-
cause he was ighted by Willoughby and Marianne,
who, prejudiced against him for being neither lively
nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits.

“ Brandon is just the kind of man,” said Willoughby
one day, when they were talking of him together,
“whom everybody speaks well of, and nobody cares

I. D

50 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.

about; whom all are delighted to tee, and nobody
remembers to talk to."

“That is exactly what I think ofhim,"cried Marianne.

“ Do not beat of it, however," said Elinor, “ for it
is injustice in both of you. He is highly eateemed
all the family at the Park, and I never see him myle
without taking pains to convene with him.”

“ That he is patronised by you,” lied Willougbby,
ﬂ is certainly in his favour; but are?” the esteem of
the others, it is a reproach in itself. Who would lub-
mit to the indignity of being approved by luch women
as Lady Middleton and Mn Jennings, that could
command the indifference of anybody else I"

“ But perhaps the abuse of such ple as yourself
and Marianne will make amend: or the regard of
Lady Middleton and her mother. If their praise il
censure, your censure may be praise; for they are
not more undiscerning than you are prejudiced and
unjust."

“In defence of your protege, you can even be
aaucy."

" My protege, at you call him, in a Ienuible man ;
and sense will always have attractions for me. Yes,
Marianne, even in a man between thirty and forty.
He has seen a great deal of the world; has been
abroad; hag read, and has a thinking mind. I have
found him capable of giving me much information on
various subjects, and he has alwaya anlwered my in-
quiries with the readiness of good-breeding and good-
nature.”

“ That is to say," cried Marianne contemptuoiuly,
“ he haa told you that in the East Indies the climate in
hot, and the mosquitoes are troublesome.”

“ He would have told me so, I doubt not, had I
made any web inquiries; but they happened to he points
on which I had been previously informed.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 5!

“ Perhaps,” said Willoughby, “ his observations may
have extended to the existence of nnbobs, gold mohrs,
and palanquins.”

“ I may venture to say that bi: observations have
stretched much farther than your candour. But why
should you dislike him .3 "

“ I do not dislike him. 1 consider him, on the con-
trary, as a very respectable man, who has everybody’i
good word and nobody's notice; who has more money
than he can spend, more time than he knows how to
emplo , and two new coats eve year.”

“ dd to which,” cried arianne, “ that he has
neither genius, taste, nor spirit. That his understanding
has no brilliancy, his feelings no ardour, and his voice
no expression.’

“ You decide on his im rfections so much in the
mass,” replied Elinor, “an so much on the strength
of your own imagination, that the commendation I am
able to give of him is comparatively cold and insi id. I
can only pronounce him to be a oensible man, welil-bred,
well-informed, of gentle address, and, I believe, possess-
ing an amiable heart.”

“ Miss Dziahwood," cried Willoughby, “ you are now
using me unkindly. You are endeavouring to disarm
me by reason, and to convince me against my will. But
it will not do. You shall ﬁnd me as stubborn as you
can be artful. I have three “answerable reasons for
disliking Colonel Brandon: he has threatened me with
rain when I wanted it to be line; he has found fault
with the hanging of my cun-icle, and I cannot persuade
him to buy my brown mare. If it will be any tis-
faction to you, however, to be told that I believe his
character to be in other respects irreproaehahle, I am
ready to confess it. And in return for an acknowledg-
ment which must give me some pain, you cannot deny
me the privilege of disliking him as much u ever.”

52 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

than"! £3.

ITTLE had Mrs Dashwood or her daughters
imagined, when they came ﬁrst into Devonshire,
that so many engagements would arise to occupy ‘

their time as shortly presented themselves, or that they
should have such frequent invitations and such constant
visitors as to leave them little leisure for serious employ-
ment. Yet such was the case. When Marianne was re-
covered, the schemes of amusements at home and abroad
which Sir John had been reviously forming were put in
execution. The private balls at the Park then began;
and artics on the water were made and accomplished
as o ten as a showery October would allow. In ev
meeting of the kind, Willoughby was included; and the
ease and familiarity which naturally attended these
parties were exactly calculated to give increasing in-
timacy to his acquaintance with the Dashwoods, to
afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellences of
Marianne, of marking his animated admiration of her,
and of receiving, in her behaviour to himself, the most
pointed assurance of her affection.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
She only wished that it were less openly shown, and
once or twice did venture to suggest the ropriety of
some self-command to Marianne. But MParianne ab-
horred all concealment where no real disgrace could
attend unreserve; and to aim at the restraint of senti-
ments which were not in themselves illaudible, appeared
to her not merely an unnecessary effort, but a disgrace-
ful subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken
notions. Willoughby thought the same; and their
behaviour, at all times, was an illustration of their
Opinions.

When he was present, she had no eyes for any one

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 53

else. Everything he did was right. Everything he
said was clever. If their evenings at the park were
concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the
rest of the party to get her a good hand. If dancing
formed the amusement of the night, they were partners
for half the time; and when obliged to separate for a
couple of dances, were careful to stand togedrer, and
scarcely spoke a word to anybody else. Such conduct
made them of course most exceedingly laughed at; but
ridicule could not shame, and seemed hardly to provoke
them.

Mrs Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a
warmth which left [her] no inclination for checking
this excessive display of them. To her it was but the
natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and
ardent mind.

This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Her
heart was devoted to Willoughby, and the fond attach-
ment to Norland which she brought with her from
Sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had
thought it possible bbfore, by the charms which his
society bestowed on her present home.

Elinor’s happiness was not so great. Her heart was
not so much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their amuse-
ments so pure. The‘y afforded her no corn anion that
could make amends or what she had left hind, nor
that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret
than ever. Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs Jennings
could supply to her the conversation she missed ;
although the latter was an everlasting talker, and from
the ﬁrst had regarded her with a kindness which insured
her a large share of her discourse. She had already
repeated her own history to Elinor three or four times;
and had Elinor’s memory been equal to her means of
improvement, she might have known very early in her
acquaintance all the particulars of Mr Jennings’s last

54 SENSE AND SENSIBILH'V.

illness, and what he said to his wife a few minutes before
he died. Lady Middleton was more agrenble than her
mother only in being more silent. Elinor needed little
observation to perceive that her reserve was a mere
calmness of manner with which sense had nothing to
do. Towards her husband and mother she was the
same as to them; and intimacy was therefore neither to
be looked for nor desired. She had nothing to say one
day that she had not said the day before. Her insipid-
ity was invariable, for even her spirits were always the
same; and though she did not oppose the parties
arranged by her husband, provided everything were
conducted in style and her two eldest children attended
her, she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from
them, than she might have experienced in sitting at
home ;—and so little did her presence add to the
pleasure of the others, by any share in their conversa-
tion, that they wen: sometimes only reminded of her
being amongst them by her solicitude about her trouble-
some boys.

In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaint-
ance, did Elinor ﬁnd a person who could in any degree
claim the respect of abilities, excite the interest of
friendship, or give pleasure as a companion. Willough
was out of the question. Her admiration and rega ,
even her sisterly regard, was all his own: but he was
a lover; his attentions were wholly Marianne's, and a
far less agreeable man might have been more genemll
pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for himsel ,
had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne,
and in conversing with Elinor, he found the greatest
consolation for the total indifference of her ricer.

Elinon’s compassion for him increased, as she had
reason to suspect that the misery of disappoian love
had already been known by him. This suspicion was
given by some words which accidentally dropt from him

sense AND sensrmu'rv. 55

one evening at the Park, when the were sitting down
together b mutual consent, whi e the others were
dancing. {dis eyes were ﬁxed on Marianne, and, after
a silence of some minutes, he said with a faint smile,
“ Your sister, I understand, does not approve of second
attachments.”

“ No,” replied Elinor; “ her opinions are all
romantic."

“ Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impos-
sible to exist.”

“ I believe she does. But how she contrives it with-
out mllectin on the character of her own father, who
had himsel two wives, I ltnow not. A few years,
however, will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis
of common sense and observation; and then they may
be more easy to deﬁne and to than they now are,
by an y but herself."

" 'his will probably be the case," he replied; “and
yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a
young mind, that one is sorry to see them give way to
the reception of more general opinions.”

“ I cannot agree with you there,” said Elinor.
"There are ineonvcniencus attending such feelings as
Marianne’s, which all the charms of enthusiasm and
ignorance of the world cannot atone for. Her systems
have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety
at nought; and a better acquaintance with the world
is what I look forward to as her greatest possible
advantage."

After a short pause, he resumed the conversation, by
saying—

“ Does your sister make no distinction in her objec-
tions against a second attachment? or is it equally
criminal in everybody? Are those who have been dis-
appointed in their ﬁrst choice, whether from the incon-
stancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances,
to be equally indifferent during the rest of their lives? "

56 SIRS! AND SINSIIIILITY.

“Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the
minutia of her principles. I only know that I never
yetheardher admit any imnoe of: mod anach-
meut ’3 being pardonable.”

“ This," aid he, “cannot hold; but a change, a total
change of sentimenu—No, no, do not deﬁle ig—fur
when the romantic reﬁnements of a young mind are
obliged to give way, how frequently an: they mended
by Inch opinions as are but too common, and too dan-
gerour! I speak from experience. I once knew a
lady who in temper and mind greatly resembled our
sitter, who thought and judged like her, but who not
an enforced change—from a aeriet of unfortunate cir-
cumsumcea” Here he nole suddenly; appealed
to think that he had said too much, and by llll coun-
tenance gave rise to conjectures which might not other-
wise have entered Elinor's head. The lady would
probably have [mused without Iluupicionl had he not
convinced Min Dashwood that what concerned her
ought not to escape his lips. As it was, it required
but a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with
the tender recollection of past regard. Elinor anempted
no more. But Marianne, in her place, would not have
done so little. The whole story would have been
speedin formed under her active imagination, and
[everything] established in the most melancholy order
of disastrous love.

 

chavttr 323:.

S Elinor and Marianne were walking together the
next morning, the latter communicated a piece
of new: to her sister, which, in spite of all that

the knew belbre of Marianne'n imprudence and want of
thought, surprised her by its extnvagant testimony of

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 57

both. Marianne told her, with the greatest delight, that
Willoughby had given her a horse, one that he had bred
himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which was
exactly calculated to carry a woman. Without con-
sidering that it was not in her mother’s plan to keep any
horse—that if she were to alter her resolution in favour
of this gift, she must buy another for the servant, and
keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable to
receive them—she had accepted the present without
hesitation, and told her sister of it in raptures.

“ He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire
immediately for it,” she added, “and when it arrives,
we will ride every day. You shall share its use with
me. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight
of a allop on some of these downs."

oat unwilling was she to awaken from such a
dream of felicity, to com rehend all the unhappy truths
which attended the a air, and for some time she
refused to submit to them. As to an additional
servant, the expense would be a triﬂe; mamma, she
was sure, would never object to it; and any horse
would do for lu'm ,- he might always get one at the
Park; as to a stable, the merest shed would be suf-
ﬁcient. Elinor then ventured to doubt the pro riety
of her receiving such a present from a man so lit e, or
at least so lately known to her. This was too much.

“ You are mistaken, Elinor," aid she warml , “in
supposing I know very little of. Willoughby. have
not known him long indeed, but I am much better
acquainted with him than I am with any other creature
in the world, except yourself and mamma. It is not
time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy :—-it
is disposition alone. Seven years would be insuﬂicient
to make some people acquainted with each other, and
seven days are more than enough for others. I should
hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a

58 sense AND swsisru'rv,

horse from my brother than from Willoughby. Of
John I know very little, though we have lived together
for years; but of Willoughhy, my judgment has long
been formed."

Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.
She knew her sistei’s temper. Opposition on so tender
a subject would only attach her the more to her own
opinion. But by an appeal to her affection for her
mother, by representing the inconveniences which that
indulgent mother must draw on herself, if (as would
probably be the case) she consented to this increase
of establishment, Marianne was shortly subdued; and
she promised not to tempt her mother to such
imprudent kindness by mentioning the olfcr, and to tell
Willoughby when she saw him next, that it must he
declined.

She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby
called at the cottage, the ume day, Elinor heard her
express her disappointment to him in a low voice, on
being obliged to forego the acceptance of his present.
The reasons for this alteration were at the nme time
related, and they were such as to make further entreaty
on his side impossible. His concern, however, was
very apparent; and after ex reusing it with eamest-
ness, he added in the ume ow voice—“But, Mari-
anne, the horse is still yours, though you cannot use
it now. 1 shall keep it only till you can claim it.
When you leave Barton to form your own establish-
ment in a more lasting home, Queen Mab shall receive

ou.”

This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in
the whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing
it, and in his addressing her sister by her christian name
alone, she instantly saw an intimacy so decided, a
meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement
between them. From that moment she doubted not

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'V. 59

of their being engaged to each other; and the belief of
it created no other rise, than that she, or any of
their friends, should be eft by tempers so frank to dis-
cover it by accident.

Margaret related something to her the next day,
which placed this matter in a still clearer light.
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with
them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the
parlour with only him and Marianne, had had oppor-
tunity for observations, which, with a most important
face, she communicated to her eldest sister, when they
were next by themselves.

“0h! Elinor,” she cried, “I have such a secret
to tell you about Marianne. I am sure she will be
married to Mr Willoughby very soon.”

“You have said so," replied Elinor, “ almost every
day since they ﬁrst met on High-church Down; and
the had not known each other a week, I believe,
be ore you were certain that Marianne wore his icture
round her neck; but it turned out to be only the
miniature of our great-uncle."

“ But indeed this is quite another thing. I am sure
they will be married very soon, for he has got a lock of
her hair."

" Take care, Margaret. It may be only the hair of
some great-uncle of Lil.”

“ But indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost
sure it is, for I saw him cut it off. Last night after
tea, when you and mamma went out of the room, they
were whispering and talking together as fast as could
be, and he seemed to be begging something of her, and
presently he took up her scissars and cut off a long lock
of her hair, for it was all tumbled down her back; and
he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece of white paper,
and put it into his pocket-book."

From such particulars, stated on such authority,

60 SENSE AND SENSIDILITY,

Elinor could not withhold her credit: nor was
she disposed to it, for the circumstance was in
perfect unison with what she had heard and seen
herself.

Margaret’s sagacity was not always ' layed in a
way so satisfactory to her sister. When rs Jennings
attacked her one evening at the Park, to give the name
of the young man who was Elinor's particular favourite,
which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying,
“I must not tell, may I, Elinor ?"

This, of course, made everybody laugh; and Elinor
tried to laugh too. But the effort was painful. She
was convinced that Margaret had ﬁxed on a person
whose name she could not bear with composure to
become a standing joke with Mrs Jennings.

Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did
more harm than good to the cause, by turning very red,
and saying in an angry manner to Margaret,—

“ Remember, that whatever your conjectures may be,
you have no right to repeat them."

“I never had any conjectures about it," replied
Margaret; “it was you who told me of it yourself."

This increased the mirth of the company, and
Margaret was eagerly pressed to say something more.

“Oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about
it," said Mrs Jennings. “What is the gentleman’s
name.”

“I must not tell, ma’am. But I know very well
what it is; and I know where he is too.”

" Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own
house at Norland, to be sure. He is the curate of the
parish, I dare say.”

“No, tbal he is not. He is of no profession at
all.”

“Margaret,” said Marianne, with great warmth,

sense AND sensraru'rv. 6:

“you know that all this is an invention of your own,
and that there is no such person in existence.”

“ Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am
sure there was such a man once, and his namc begins
with an F.”

Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for
observing at this moment, “that it rained very hard,”
though she believed the interruption to proceed less
from an attention to her, than from her lad ship’s
great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of rai cry a
delighted her husband and mother. The idea, how-
ever, started by her, was immediately pursued by
Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion mindful
of the feelings of otherl; and much was laid on the
subject of rain by both of them. Willoughby opened
the pianoforte, and asked Marianne to sit down to it;
and thus, amidst the various endeavours of different
people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground. But not
so easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which
it had thrown her.

A party was formed this evening for going on the
{ollowrng day to see a very ﬁne place about twelve
miles from Barton, belonging to n brother-in-law of
Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had
left strict orders on that head. The grounds were
declared to be highly beautiful, and Sir John, who wan
Enicularly warm in their praise, might be allowed to

a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to visit
them, at least, twice every summer for the lat ten
years. They contained a noble piece of water; a sail
on which was to form a great part of the morning’s
amusement; cold revisions were to be taken, open
carriage: only to be employed, and everything con-
ducted in the usual style of a complete party of
pleasure.

62 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

To some few of the company it appeared rather a
bold undertaking, considering the time of year, and
that it had rained every day for the lan fortnight ;—
and Mrs Dashwood, who had already a cold, was
permded by Elinor to stay at home.

@blpttt 33]].

HEIR intended excursion to Whitwell turned out

very differently from what Elinor had expected.

She was prepared to be wet through, fatigued,

and fri htened; but the event was still more unfor-
tunate. or they did not go at all.

By ten o’clock the whole party were assembled at
the park, where the were to breakfast. The morning
was rather favourab e, though it had rained all night, as
the clouds were then dispersing across the sky, and the
Inn frequently appeared. They were all in high spirits
and good humour. eager to be happy, and determined
to submit to the greatest inconvenience: and hardships
rather than be otherwise.

While they were at breakfast, the letters were brought
in. Among the rest there was one for Colonel
Brandon ;—he took itI looked at the direction, changed
colour, and immediately left the room.

“ What is the matter with Brandon ?” said Sir John.

Nobody could telL

“I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady
Middleton. “ It must be something extraordinary that
could make Colonel Brandon lave my breakfast-table
so suddenly.”

In about ﬁve minutes he returned.

“ No bad news, Colonel, I hope ? ” said Mn Jennings,
as soon as he entered the room.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 63

“ None at all, ma’am, 1 thank you."

"Was it from Avignon? I hope it is not to say
that your sister is worse ?"

“ No, ma’am. It came from town, and is merely a
letter of business.” . -

“ But how came the hand to discompose you so
much, if it was only a letter "of business? Come,
come, this won’t do, Colonel; so let us hear the truth
of it.”

“ My dear madam,” said Lady Middleton, “ recollect
what you are a ing.”

“ Perha it u to tell you that your cousin Fanny is
married?’ said Mrs Jennings, without amending to
her daughter’s re roof.

“ No, indeed, It is not."

“ Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel.
And I hope she is well."

“ Whom do you mean, ma’arn ?" said he, colouring
a little.

“Oh! you know who I mean.”

“ I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, address-
ing Lady Middleton, “that I should receive this letter
to-day, for it is on business which requires my imme-
diate attendance in town.”

“In town! " cried Mrs Jennings. “What can you
have to do in town at this time of year?"

“ My own loss is great,” he continued, “ in being
obliged to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the
more concerned, as I fear my presence is necessary to
gaiwour admittance at Whitwell."

hat a blow upon them all was this!

“ But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr
Brandon," laid Marianne, eagerly, “ will it not be
suﬂicient ? ”

He shook his head.

“ We must go," said Sir John. “It shall not be

64 sense mm snusmmrv.

put off when we are so near it. You cannot go to
town till to-morrow, Brandon, that it all.”

“I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not
in my power to delay my journey for one day l "

“ If you would but let ut know what your butinen
is," said Mrs Jennings, “ we might see whether it could
be put oif or not.”

“ You would not be six hours later,” said Willoughby,
“ if you were to defer your journey till our return.”

“ I cannot afford to lose an: hour.”—

Elinor then heard Willoughby say in a low voice to
Marianne, “ There are some people who cannot bear a
party of pleasure. Brandon is one of them. He was
afraid of catching cold, I dare say, and invented this
trick for getting out of it. I would lay ﬁfty guinea:
the letter was of his own writing."

“ I have no doubt ofit," replied Marianne.

“ There is no persuading you to change your mind,
Brandon, I know of old,” said Sir John, “ when once
you are determined on anything. But, however, I hope

on will think better of it. Consider, here are the two
hiss Carey: come over from Newton, the three Min
Dashwoods walked up from the cottage, and Mr
Willoughby got VINO hours before his usual time, on
pu ac to go to hitwell."
olonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being
the cause of disappointing the party, but at the me
time declared it to be unavoidable.

“ Well then, when will you come back again .9"

“ I hope we shall see you at Barton," added her
ladyship, “ as soon at you can conveniently leave town;
and we must put of the party to Whitwell till you
return.”

“ You are very obliging. But it is an uncertain
when I may have it in my power to return, that I dare
not engage for it at all.”

sense AND SENSIBILITV. 65

“ Ohl he must and shall come back,” cried Sir
John. “If he is not here by the end of the week, I
shall go after him.”

“Ay, so do, Sir John,” cried Mrs Jennings, “ and
then rhaps you may ﬁnd out what his business is.”

“ do not want to pry into other men’s concerns, I
sup se it is something he is ashamed of.”

olonel Brandon’s horses were announced.’

“You do not go to town on horseback, do you ? "
added Sir John.‘

“No—only to Honiton. I shall then go post.”

“ Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good
journey. But you had better change your mind."

“ I assure you it is not in my power.”

He then took leave of the whole party.

“Is there no chance of my seeing you and your
listen in town this winter, Miss Dashwood ?”

“I am afraid, none at all."

“ Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time
than I should wish to do."

To Marianne he merely bowed and said nothing.

“Come, Colonel,” said Mrs Jennings, “ before you
go, do let us know what you are going about."

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by
Sir John, left the room.

The complaints and lamentations which liteness
had hitherto restrained, now burst forth universally ;
and the all agreed again and again how provoking it
was to be so disappointed.

l‘I can guess what his business is, however,” said
Mrs Jennings, exultingly. '

“ Can you, ma’am 9 " said almost everybody.

“ Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure.”

“And who is Miss Williams?” asked Marianne.

“What! do you not know who Miss Williams is?
I am sure you must have heard of her before. She is

l. E

66 sense AND SENSIBILITY. '

a relation of the Colonel’s, my dear—a nwr
relation. We will not say how near, for r of
shocking the young ladies.” Then lowering her voice
a little, she said to Elinor, “She is his natural
daughter."-

“ Indeed ! ”

“Oh! yes; and as like him as she can stare. I
dare say the Colonel will leave her all his fortune."

When Sir John returned, he joined mow heartily in
the general regret on so unfortunate an event; conclud-
ing, however, by observing, that as they were all got
together, they must do something by way of being
happy; and after some consultation it was agreed, that
although happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell,
they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by
driving about the country. The carriages were then
ordered; Willoughby’s was ﬁrst, and Marianne never
looked happier than when she got into it. He drove
through the park very fast, and they were soon out of
sight; and nothing more of them was seen till their
return, which did not happen till after the return of all
the rest. They both seemed delighted with their drive,
but said only in general terms that they had kept in the
lanes, while the others went on the downs.

It was settled that there should be a dance in the
evening, and that everybody should be extremely merry
all day long. Some more of the Careys came to
dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down
nearly twenty to table, which Sir John observed with
great contentment. Willoughby took his usual place
between the two elder Miss Dashwoods. Mrs Jennings
sat on Elinor’s right hand ; and they had not been long
seated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby, and
said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear,
“I have found you out, in spite of all your tricks. I
know where you spent the morning."

ms: AND smnrtm. 67

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, “ Where,
ra E"—

‘XDid not you know,” Ilid Willoughby, “that we
had been out in my curricle?"

“ Yes, yes, Mr Impudence, I know that very well,
and I was determined to ﬁnd out wber: ou had been
to. I hope you like your house, Miss arianne. It
is a very large one, I know, and when I come to see
you, I hope you will have new-fumished it, for it
wanted it very much when I was there six years
a o. ’
gMarianne turned away in great confusion. Mrs
Jennings laughed heartily; and Elinor found that in
her resolution to know where they had been, she
had actually made her own woman inquire of Mr
Willoughby’s groom, and that she had by that method
been infomed that they had gone to Allenham, and
spent a considerable time there in walking about the
garden, and going all over the house.

Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it
seemed very unlikely that Willoughby should propose,
or Marianne consent, to enter the home whrle Mrs
Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the
smallest acquaintance.

As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor in-
quired of her about it; and great was her surprise
when she found that every circumstance related by
Mn Jennings was perfectly true. Marianne was quite
angry with her for doubting it.

“Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not
go there, or that we did not see the house? Is not it
what on have often wished to do yourself?”

“ es, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs
Smith was there, and with no other companion than
Mr Willoughby."

“ Mr Willoughby, however, is the only person who

68 sense an SENSIBILITY.

can have a right to show that house; and' as he went
in an open carriage, it was impossible to have any other
ppm nion. I never spent a planter moming in my
I e.

“I am afraid,” replied Elinor, “that the plea-ann-
ness of an employment does not always evince its
propriety.”

“ 0n the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof
of it, Elinor; for if there had been any real impm—
priety in what I did, I should have been sensible of it
at the time, for we always know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no
pleasure."

“ But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed
on to some very impertinent remarks, do you not now
begin to doubt the discretion of your own conduct .’ "

“ If the impeninent remarks of Mrs Jennings are to
be the proof of impmpriety in conduct, we are all
offending every moment of all our lives. I value not
her censure any more than I should do her commenda-
tion. I am not sensible of having done anything wrong
in walking over Mrs Smith’s grounds, or in seeing her
house. They will one day be Mr Willoughby’s,
and "

“ If they were one day to be your own, Marianne,
you would not be justiﬁed in what you have done."

She blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly
gratifying to her; and after a ten minutes’ interval of
earnest thought, she came to her sister again, and said
with great good humour, “Perhaps, Elinor, it war
rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr
Willoughby wanted particularly to show me the place ;
and it is a charming house, I assure you. There is
one remarkably pretty sitting-room upstairs, of a nice
comfortable size for constant use, and with modern
fumituie it would be delightful. It is a corner room,

 

sense Ann SENSIBILITY. 69

and has windows on two sides. On one side you look
across the bowling-green, behind the house, to a beauti-
ful hanging wood; and on the other you have a view
of the church and village, and, balond them, of those
ﬁne bold hills that we have so 0 n admired. I did
not see it to advantage, for nothing could be more
forlorn than the furniture,—but if it were newly ﬁtted
up—a couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says,
would make it one of the pleasantest summer-rooms
in England."

Could Elinor have listened to her without internsp-
tion from the others, she would have described every
room in the house with equal delight.

¢blpttr 3331}.

HE sudden termination of Colonel Brandon’s
visit at the park, with his steadiness in con-
cealing its cause, ﬁlled the mind and raised

the wonder of Mrs Jennings for two or three days:
she was a great wanderer, as ever one must he who
takes a very lively interest in it] the comings and
goings of all their acquaintance. She wondered with
little intermission what could he the reason of it;
was sure there must be some bad news, and thou ht
over every kind of distress that could have befallen
him, with a ﬁxed determination that he should not
escape them all.

“Something very melancholy must be the matter, I
am sure,” said she. “ I could see it in his face. Poor
man! I am afraid his circumstances may be bad. The
estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two
thousand a year, and his brother left everything udly
involved. I do think he must have been sent for about

70 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

money matters, for what else can it be? I wonder
whether it is so. I would give anything to know the
truth of it. Perhaps it is about Miss Williams—and,
by the bye, I dare say it is, because he looked so con-
scious when I mentioned her. Maybe she is ill in
town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a
notion she is always rather sickly. I would lay any
wager it is about Miss Williams. It is not so very
likely he should be distressed in his circumnances m,
for he is a very prudent man, and to be sure mun have
cleared the estate b this time. I wonder what it can
be! Maybe his sister is worse at Avignon, and has
sent for him over. His setting off in such ahurry seems
very like it. Well, I wish him out of all his trouble
with all my heart, and a good wife into the baryin.”
So wondered, so talked Mrs Jennings; her opinion
varying with every fresh conjecture, and all seeming
equally probable as they arose. Elinor, though she felt
really interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon,
could not bestow all the wonder on his going so sud-
denly away which Mrs Jennings was desirous of her
feeling ; for besides that the circumstance did not in her
opinion justify such lasting amazement or variety of
speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed of. It
was engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sister
and Willoughby on the subject, which they must know
to be peculiarly intelesting to them all. As this silence
continued, every day made it appear more strange and
more incompatible with the disposition of both. Why
they should not openly acknow edge to her mother and
herself, what their constant behaviour to each other
declared to have taken place, Elinor could not imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be
immediame in their power; for though Willoughby was
independent, there was no reason to believe him rich.
His estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 7 1

seven hundred a year; but he lived at an ex to
which that incomc could hardly be equal, an he had
himself often complained of his poverty. But for this
strange kind of secrecy maintained by them relative to
their en agement, which in fact concealed nothing at all,
she co d not account; and it was so wholly contra-
dictory to their general opinions and practice, that a
doubt sometimes entered her mind of their being really
engaged, and this doubt was enough to prevent her
making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to
them all than Willoughby’s behaviour. To Marianne
it had all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover’s
heart could give, and to the rest of the family it was
the affectionate attention of a son and a brother. The
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as
his home; many more of his hours were spent there
than at Allenham ; and if no general engagement col-
lected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there,
where the rest of the day was spent by himself :‘t the
side of Marianne, and by his favourite pointer at her
feet.

One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel
Brandon had left the country, his heart seemed more
than usually open to every feeling of attachment to the
objects around him; and on Mrs Dashwood’s happen-
ing to mention her design of improving the comge in
the spring, he warmly opposed every alteration of a
place which affection ha established as perfect with
him.

“ What ! ” he ‘exelaimed—“ Improve this dear cot.
tage. No—tlml I will never consent to. Not a stone
must be added to its walls, not an inch to its size, if my
feelings are regarded.”

“ Do not be alarmed," said Miss Dashwood,

72 SENSE AND SENSIIIILITV.

“ nothing of the kind will be done; for my mother will
never have man enough to attempt it.”

“ I am hea ' y glad of it," he cried. “ May she
nlwa s be poor if she can employ her riches no better.”

“ é‘hank you, Willoughby. But you ma be assured
that I would not sacriﬁce one sentiment of ocal attach-
ment of yours, or of anyone whom I loved, for all the
improvements in the world. Depend upon it, that
whatever unemployed sum may remain when I make u
my accounts in the spring, I would even rather la It
uselesslysby than dispose of it in a manner so inﬁs to
you. ut are you really so attached to this p ace as to
see no defect in it 2 ”

“ I am,” said he. “ To me it is faultless. Nay,
more, I consider it as the only form of building In
which happiness is attainable; and were I rich enough.
I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up
again in the exact plan of this cottage.”

“With dark narrow stain, and a kitchen that smokes,
I suppose,” said Elinor.

“ Yes,” cried he in the same eager tone, “ with all
and everything belonging to it ;—in no one convenience
or inconvenience about it, should the least variation be

rceptible. Then, and then onl , under such a roof,

might perhaps be as happy at ombe as I have been
at Barton."

“ I flatter myself," replied Elinor, " that even under
the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase,
you will hereafter ﬁnd your own house as faultless as
you now do this."

" There certainly are circumstances," said Wil-
loughby, “which might greatly endear it to rue; but
this place will always have one claim on my aﬁcction
which no other can possibly share.”

Mrs Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne,
whose ﬁne eyes were ﬁxed so expressiver on

SENSE AND snusrmu'rv. 73
Willoughby, as plainly denoted how well she understood
him.

“How often did I wish,” added he, " when I was
at Allenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton
cottage were inhabited! I never passed within view
of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no
one should live in it. How little did I then think that.
the very first news I should hear from Mrs Smith, when
I next came into the country, would be that Barton
cottage was taken ! and I felt an immediate ntisfaction
and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of

rescience of what happiness I should experience from
it can account for. Must it not have been so,
Marianne ? " speaking to her in a lowered voice. Then
continuing his former tone, he said, “And yet this
house you would spoil, Mrs Dashwood! You would
rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement! and
this dear parlour, in which our acquaintance ﬁrst began,
and in which so many hapi) hours have been since
spent b us together, you won d degrade to the condi-
tion 0 a common entrance, and everybody would be
eager to pass through the room which has hitherto
contained within itself more real accommodation and
comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest
dimensions in the world could possibly afford.

Mn Dashwood again assured him that no alteration
of the kind should be attempted.

“ You are a good woman,” he warmly replied.
“ Your promise makes me easy. Extend it a little
farther, and it will make me happy. Tell me that not
only our house will remain the me, but that I shall
ever lind you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling;
and that you will always consider me with the kindness
which has made everything belonging to you so dear
to me.”

The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's

74 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTV.

behaviour during the whole of the evening declared at
once his affection and happiness.

" Shall we see you to-morrow to dinner ? " said Mn
Dashwood, when he was leaving them. “I do not aek
you to come in the morning, for we must walk to the
park, to call on Lady Middleton.”

He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.

cbspttt $17.

RS DASHWOOD'S visit to Lady Middleton
took place the next day, and two of her
daughters went with her; but Marianne

excused herself from being of the party, under some
triﬂing pretext of em onment; and her mother, who
concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby
the night before, of calling on her while they were
absent, was perfectl satisﬁed with her remaining at home.

On their return mm the park they found Willoughby's
curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mn
Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been
just. So far it was all as she had foreseen; but on
entering the house, she beheld what no foresight had
taught her to expect. They were no sooner in the
passage than Marianne came hastily out of the parlour,
apparently in violent aﬂliction, with her handkerchief at
her eyes, and without noticing them ran upstairs. Sur-
prised and alarmed, they proceeded directly into the
room she had just quitted, where they found only
Willoughby, who was leaning against the mantel-piece
with his back towards them. He turned round on
their coming in, and his countenance showed that he
strongly partook of the emotion which overpowered
Marianne.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 75

“ Ia anything the matter with her .3 ” cried Mn
Daohwood al she entered—“ in ahe ill 2 "

“I hope not,” he replied, trying to look cheerful;
and with a forced smile, presently added, “ I! in I who
may rather expect to be ill—for I am now sutTering
under a very heavy disappointment! ”

“ Disap intment! ”

“ Yes, ll; I am unable to keep my engagement with
you. Mu Smith 'haa this morning exercised the
privilege of riches upon a poor dependent courin, by
sending me on busineuto London. have jult received
my derpatchea, and taken my farewel of Allenham;
and by way of exhilaration, I am now come to take my
farcwol of you.

“ To London !—and are you going this morning ? ”

" Almolt thia moment.”

“This in very unfortunate. But Mn Smith mth
be obliged ;—-—and her bunineoa will not detain you from
us long, I hope.”

He coloured as he replied, “you are very kind, but
I have no idea of returning into Devonuhire immedi-
ately. My visit! to Mrs Smith are never repeated within
the twelvemonth.”

“ And in Mrs Smith your only friend? In Allen-
ham the only house in the neighbourhood to which you
will be welcome? For shame, Willoughby. Can you
wait for an invitation here ? ”

His colour increased ; and with his eyes ﬁxed on the
ground, he only replied, “ You are too good.”

Mrs Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise. Eli-
nor felt equal amazement. For a few moments every
one was silent. Mrs Dashwood ﬁrst he

“ I have only to add, my dear WillZughby, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome; for I will
not press you to return here immediatel , because you
only can judge how far I’m! might be p casing to Mrs

76 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I’Y.

Smith; and on this head I shall be no more dime-ed
to question your judgment than to doubt your inclina-
uon."

“ My engagements at present,” replied Willoughby,
eonfusedly, “are of such a nature—that—I dare not
ﬂatter myself ” —

He stopt. Mrs Dashwood was too much aston-
ished to speak, and another pause succeeded. This
was broken by Willoughby, who said with a faint
smile, “ It is folly to linger in this manner. I will not
torment myself any longer by remaining among friends
whose society it is impossible for me now to enjoy."

He then hastily took leave of them all and left the
room. They saw him step into his carriage, and in a
minute it was out of sight.

Mrs Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly
quitted the parlour, to give way in solitude to the con-
cern and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned.

Elinor’s uneasiness was at least equal to her mother’s.
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and
distmst. Willoughby’s behavrour in taking leave of
them, his embarrassment, and aﬂectation of cheerfulness,
and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother’s
invitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover—so unlike
himself, greatly disturbed her. One moment she feared
that no serious design had ever been formed on his
side; and the next, that some unfortunate quarrel had
taken place between him and her sister; the distress in
which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a
serious quarrel could most reasonably account for ;
though when she considered what Marianne's love for
him was, a quarrel seemed almost im ible.

But whatever might be the particu ars of their separa-
tion, her sister's allliction was indubitable; and she
thought with the tenderest com assion of that violent
sorrow which Marianne was in al probability not merely

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 77

giving way to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging
as a duty.

In about half an hour her mother returned, and
though her eyes were red, her countenance was not
uncheerful.

“ Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Bar-
ton, Elinor,” said she, as she sat down to work, “and
with how heavy a heart does he travel ! ”

" It is all very strange. So suddenly to be gonel
It seems but the work of a moment. And last nighthe
was with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate!
And now after only ten minutes’ notice—Gone too
without intending to return ?———Something more than
what he owned to us must have happened. He did
not speak, he did not behave like himself. Tau must
have seen the difference as well as I. What can it
be? Can they have uarrelled? Why else should he
have shown such unwillingness to accept your invitation
here ? "—

“ It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor! I
could plainly see Ibat. He had not the power of
acc ting it. I have thought it all over, I assure you,
and can perfectly account for everything that at ﬁrst
seemed strange to me as well as to you.”

“ Can you indeed?”

“Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most
satisfactory way ;—but you, Elinor, who love to doubt
where you can—It will not satisfy you, I know; but
you shall not talk me out of my trust in it, I am per-
suaded that Mrs Smith suspects his regard for Marianne,
disap roves of it perhaps because she has other views
for him), and on at account is eager to get him away ;
—and that the business which she sends him off to
transact, is invented as an excuse to dismiss him. This
is what I believe to have happened. He is moreover
aware that she doe: disapprove the connexion, he dares

78 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

not therefore at present confess to her hie en

with Marianne, and he feels hinuelf obliged, from his
dependent situation, to give into her schemes, and absent
himself from Dcvonuhire for a while. You will tell
me, I know, that this may or may not have happened;
but I will listen to no cavil unless you can point outany
other method of understanding the affair as misfaetory
as thin And now, Elinor, what have you to say 2”

“ Nothing, for you have anticipated my anlwer.”

“ Then you would have told me, that it might or
might not have happened. 0h! Elinor, how incom-
prehensible are your feelings! You had lather take
evil upon credit than good. You had rather look out
for misery for Marianne and guilt for poor Willoughby,
than an apology for the latter. You are resolved to
think him blameable, because he took leave of III with
less affection than his usual behaviour has nhown. And
is no allowance to he made for inadvertence, or for
spirits depressed by recent diurppointment? Are no
probabilities to be accepted, merely because they are
not certainties? Is nothing due to the man whom we
have all In much reason to love, and no reason in the
world to think ill 0 .’ to the possibility of motives
unanswernble in themselves, though unavoidably secret
for a while? And, after all, what is it you suspect
him of? "

“1 can hardly tell you myself. But suspicion of
something unpleasant is the inevitable consequence of
such an alteration as we have just witneued in him.
There is great truth, however, in what you have now
urged of the allowances which ought to be made for
him, and it is m with to be candid in my judgment of
everybody. Willoughby may undoubtedly have very
auﬂicient reasons for his conduct, and I will hope that
he has. But it would have been more like Willoughby
to acknowledge them at once. Secrecy may be advia-

scnsz AND saxsxamrv. 79

able; but still I cannot help wondering at its being
practised by him."

“Do not blame him, however, for departing from
his character, where the deviation is necessary. But
you really do admit the justice of what [ have said in
his defence ?—I am happy—and he is acquitted.”

“Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their
engagement (if they are engaged) from Mrs Smith—
and if that is the case, it must be highly expedient for
Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at present.
But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us.”

“Concealing it from us! my dear child, do you
accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment?
This is strange indeed, when your eyes have been
reproaching them every day for incautiousness.”

“I want no proof of their affection," said Elinor;
" but of their engagement I do.”

" I am perfectly satisﬁed of both."

“ Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the
suhject, by either of them.”

“I have not wanted syllables where actions have
spoken so plainly. Has not his behaviour to Marianne
and to all of us, for at least the last fortnight, declared
that he loved and considered her as his future wife, and
that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest rela-
tion? Have we not perfectly understood each other?
Has not my consent been daily asked by his looks, his
manner, his attentive and affectionate respect? My
Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement? How
could such a thought occur to you ? How is it to be
supposed that Willoughhy, persuaded as he must be of
your sister‘s love, shoud leave her, and leave her
perhaps for months, without telling her of his affection ;
-—-that they should part without a mutual exchange of
conﬁdence.” .

“I confess,” replied Elinor, “ that every circum-

80 SENSE AND SENSIIIILI‘I'V.

stance except one is in favour of an engagement. but
that one is the total silence of both on the subject, and
with me it almost outweighs every other.”

“ How strange this is! You mun think wretchedly
indeed of Willoughby, if, after all that has openly
passed between them, you can doubt the nature of the
terms on which they are together. Has he been acting
a part in his behaviour to your sister all this ﬁme? Do
you In pose him really indifferent to her?”

“ o, I cannot think that. He must and does love
her, I am sure.”

“ But with a strange kind of tendemets, if he can
leave her with such indifference, such carelessness of the
future, as you attribute to him.”

“ You must remember, my dear mother, that I have
never considered this matter as certain. I have had my
doubts, I confess; but they are fainter than they were,
and they may soon be entime done away. If we ﬁnd
they correspond, every fear of mine will be removed."

“ A mighty concession indeed! If you were to see
them at the altar, you would suppose that they were
going to be married. Ungracious girl ! But I require
no such roof. Nothing, in my opinion, has ever
passed to Justify doubt; no secrecy has been attempted;
all has been uniformly open and unreserved. You
cannot doubt your sister's wishes. It must be Wil-
loughby therefore whom you suspect. But why? Is
he not a man of honour and feeling? Has there been
any inconsistency on his side to create alarm? can he
be deceitful ? ”

“ I ho not, I believe not," cried Elinor. “ I love
Willough y, sincerely love him; and In icion of his
integrity cannot be more painful to yoursel than to me.
It has been involuntary, and I will not encourage it. I
was startled, I confess by the alteration in his manners
this morning; he did not speak like himself, and did

sense AND SENSIIILITV. 8:

not return your kindness and with cordialit . But all this
may be explained by such a situation 0 his affairs as
you have supposed. He had just parted from my riser,
had seen her leave him in the greatest afﬂiction; and
if he felt obliged, from a fear of oﬁ'ending Mrs Smith,
to resist the temptation of retuming here soon, and yet
aware that by declining your invitation, by saying that
he was going away for some time, he should seem to
act an ungenerous, a suspicious, part by our family, he
might well be embamssed and disturbed. In such a
case, a plain and open avowal of his difﬁculties would
have been more to his honour, I think, as well as more
consistent with his general character ;-—but I will not
mine objections against any one’s conduct on so illibcnl
a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself,
or a deviation from what I may think right and con-
sistent."

“You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly
does not deserve to be suspected. Though so: have
not known him long, he is no stranger in this part of
the world; and who has ever spoken to his disadvan-
tage? Had he been in a situation to act independently
and marry immediately, it might have been odd that he
should leave us without acknowledging everything to
me at once: but this is not the case. It is an engage-
ment in some respects not prosperously begun, for their
marriage must be at a very uncertain distance; and
even secrecy, as far as it can be observed, may now be
very advisable.”

The were intermpted by the entrance of Margaret;
and Elinor was then at liberty to think over the
sentations of her mother, to acknowled e the probability
of many, and hope for the justice of alf.

They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when
she entered the room and took her place at the table
without ying a word. Her eyes were led and swollen ;

1. 1r

82 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

and it seemed as if her tears were even then restrained
with diﬂiculty. She avoided the looks of them all,
could neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on
her mother's silently pressing her hand with tender
compassion, her small degree of fortitude was quic
overcome—she burst into tears and left the room. '
This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole
evening. She was without any power, because she was
without any desire of command over herself. The
slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby over-
powered her in an instant; and though her family were
most anxiously attentive to her comfort, it was impos-
sible for them, if they s kc at all, to keep clear of
every subject which her filings connected with him.

¢bspttr £193.

ARIANNE would have thought herself ve
inexcusable had she been able to sleep at l
the ﬁrst night after parting from Willoughby.

She would have been ashamed to look her family in the
face the next morning, had she not risen from her bed
in more need of repose than when she lay down in it.
But the feelings which made such composure a disgrace,
left her in no danger of incurring it. She was awake
the whole night, and she wept the greatest part of it.
She got up with a headache, was unable to talk, and
unwilling to take any nourishment; giving pain ev
moment to her mother and sisters, and forbidding
attempt at consolation from either. Her sensibility was
potent enough!

When breakfast was over, she walked out by herself,
and wandered about the village of Allenham, indulging
the recollection of past enjoyment and crying over the
present reverse for the chief of the morning.

 

mug/a

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 83

The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of
feeling. She layed over every favourite song that she
had been to play to Willoughhy, every air in
which their voices had been oftenest joined, and sat at
the instrument gazing on every line of music that he
had written out for her, till her heart was so heavy that
no farther sadness could he gained; and this nourish-
ment of grief was every day applied. She spent whole
hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying,
her voice often totally suspended by her tears. In
books, too, as well as in music, she courted the misery
which a contrast between the past and present was
certain of giving. She read nothing but what they had
been used to read together.

Such violence of allliction indeed could not be sup-

rted for ever; it sunk within a few days into a calmer
melancholy; but these employmenu, to which she dail
recurred, her solitary walks and silent meditations,
produced occasional elfusions of mm as lively as ever.

No letter from Willoughhy came, and none seemed
expected by Marianne. Her mother was surprised,
and Elinor again because uneasy. But Mrs Dashwood
could ﬁnd explanations whenever she wanted them,
which at least satisﬁed hersele '

“Remember, Elinor," said she, “ how very often
Sir John fetches our letters himself from the post, and
carries them to it. We have already agreed that
secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge
that it could not be maintained if their correspondence
were to pass through Sir John’s hands."

Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried
to find in it a motive sufﬁcient for their silence. But
there was one method so direct, so simple, and in her
0 inion so eligible of knowing the real late of the

'r, and of instantly removing all mystery, that she
could not help suggesting it to her mother.

84 sans: AND ssusrsru'rv.

“Why do you not ask Marianne at once,” aid she,
“ whether she is or is not engaged to Willoughby?
From you, her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a
mother, the question could not give offence. It. would
be the natural result of your infection for her. She
used to be all unreserve, and to you more especially."

“I would not ask such a question for the world.
Supposing it possible that they are not engaged, what
distress would not such an inquiry inﬂict! At any
rate, it would be most ungenerous. I should never
deserve her conﬁdence again, after forcing from her a
confession of what is meant at present to be unacknow-
ledged to any one. I know Msrianne's heart: I know
that she dearly loves me, and that I shall not be the
last to whom the affair is made known, when circum-
stances make the revealment of it eligible. I would
not attempt to force the conﬁdence of any one, of a
child much less, because a sense of duty would pmwnt
the denial which her wishes might direct."

Elinor thought this generosity oventrained, consider-
ing her sister’ s youth, and urged the matter farther, but in
vain; common sense, common care, common nrdence,
were all sunk in Mrs Dashwood’s romantic de icacy.

It was several days before Willoughby’s name was
mentioned before Marianne by any of her family; Sir
John and Mrs Jennings, indeed, were not so nice;
their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour ;—
but one evenin , Mrs Dashwood, accidentally taking
up a volume of hake are, exclaimed,

“We have never ﬁshed Hamlet, Marianne; our
dear Willoughby went away before we could get
through it. We will put it by, that when he comes
again. . . . But it may be months, perhaps, before Ibo!
happens."

“Months!” cried Marianne, with strong surprise.
“ No—nor many weeks.” ~

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.~

Mrs Dashwood was sorry for what she had said;
but it gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a ly from
Marianne so expressive of conﬁdence in W' oughby
and knowledge of his intentions.

One morning, about a week after his leaving the
count , Marianne was prevailed on to join her sisters
in their usual walk, instead of wandering away by her-
self. Hitherto she had carefully avoided every com-
panion in her rambles. If her sisters intended to walk
on the downs, she directly stole away towards the
lanes; if the talked of the valley, she was as speedy
in climbing e hills, and could never be found when
the others set off. But at length she was secured by
the exertions of Elinor, who greatl disapproved such
continual seclusion. They walked, along the road
through the valley, and chieﬂy in silence, for Mari-
anne’s mind could not be controuled, and Elinor, satis-
ﬁed with gaining one point, would not then attempt
more. Beyond the entrance of the valley, where the
country, though still rich, was less wild and more n,
a long stretch of the road which they had travel] on
ﬁrst coming to Barton lay before them; and on reach-
ing that point, they stopped to look around them, and
examine a prospect which formed the distance of their
view from the cottage, from a spot which they had
never happened to reach in any of their walks before.

Amongst the ob'ects in the scene, they soon dis-
covered In animate one; it was a man on horseback,
riding towards them. In a few minutes they could
distinguish him to be a gentleman; and in a moment
afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed,

“It is he; it is indeed ;—I know it is!"—and
was hastening to meet him, when Elinor cried out,

“Indeed, Marianne,I think you are mistaken. It
is not Willoughby. The person is not tall enough for
him, and has not his air.”

86 sustains-alum.

“Hehsbhs'aidlxhng‘ln
bl—Iisairﬂli mike: I her
hemldemz.”

5
3i

Shevalkedeagulyuasheqnh;-d8h,b
mlﬁrianeﬁun ‘ ‘,ahfekalln¢
canind‘iunnehu'ng ,qiekenedhspne

andkepnpvixhher. ‘
yardaofthegendemn. Marunielndedagah;
hﬁnnnkwixhinher:andahnqnlymningrmnd,
wahnnyhghch'knEBJIhevnicud'buh
immnindmdeuinhu,athird,ahnna

H!

Li"

9
only one whomuldhavegainedaunileﬁnm her; In
Ihe diqiencd human“: mﬂemhandinherim’a

'nesforgolforatime her own

edinnoumed,andgiring his hone In hi: aernnt
wﬂkedhckwithlhemwnammwhitherhewu
p y coming In visit them.

e was welcomed by then all with great «Inﬁnity,
but eqxcially by MarianneI who thawed more wnrlmh
of regard in her reception of him than even Elinor
henelf. To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between
Edward and her liner was but a continuation of that
unaccountable coldness which she had often observed a:
Norland in their mutual behaviour. 0n Edward'u aide,
more particularly, there was a deﬁciency of all that a
lover ought to look and say on such an ocurion. He
waa confuaed, aeemed scarcely aensible of plenum in
aeeing them, looked neither rapturoun nor gay, nid little
but what was forced from him by questions, and dia-
dnguixhed Elinor by no mark of affection. Marianne
saw and lide with increuing Iurpriae. She began

sense AND swsmm'rvt 87

almost to feel a dislike of Edward ; and it ended, as
every feeling must end with her, by carrying back her
thoughts to Willonghby, whose manners formed s
contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother
elect.

After a short silence which succeeded the ﬁrm sur-

)l'llL‘ and inquiries of meeting, Marianne asked Edward
If he came directly from London. No, he had been in
Devonshire a fortnight.

“ A fortnight! ” she repeated, surprised at his being
so long in the same county with Elinor without seeing
her before.

He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had
been staying with some friends near Plymouth.

“Have you been lately in Sussex ?’ said Elinor.

“I was at Norland about a month ago.’ ’

“And how does dear, dear Norland look?" cried
Marianne.

“ Dear, dear Norland,” said Elinor, “probath looks
much as it alwa s does at this time of year—the woods
and walks thick y covered with dead leaves.”

“ Ohl " cried Marianne, “ with what tranqsorting
sensations have I formerly seen them fall! How have
I delighted, as I walked, to see them driven in showers
about me by the wind! What feelinlgs have they, the
season, the air altogether inspired! ow there is no
one to regard them. They are seen only as a nuisance,
swept hastily off, and driven as much aspossible from
the sight.” '

“It is not every one," said Elinor, “who has your
passion for dead leaves."

“No; my feelings are not often shared, not often
understood. But smelimu they are.”——As she said
this, she sunk into a reverie for a few moments; but
musing herself again, “ Now, Edward,” said she, ralling
his attention to the prospect, " here is Barton valley.

88 sens: AND sensraru'n.

Look up at it, and be tranquil if you can. Look at drone
hillrl Did you ever nee thdr equall? To the left i-
llmon Park, nmonglt those woodl and lantartionl.
You may lee one end of the houne. An there, be-
neath that fartheet hill which rises with Inch grandeur,
is our cottage.”

“ It in a beautiful country,” he replied; “but there
bottoms must be dirty in winter."

“ How can you think of dirt, with such objects before

on ? ”
y " Because,” replied he, smiling, “amongst the rent of
the chem: before me, I nee a very dirty lane."

“ ow strange!” laid Marianne to hcrlelf an Ihe
walked on.

“ Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? Are
the Middletonl pleasant people 3 ”

“No, not at all,” anlwcrcd Marianne; “we could
not be more unfortunately situated.”

“ Marianne," cried her tister, “ how can you say no?
How can you be no unjust? They are a very rerpectr-
able family, Mr Fermrs, and towards ul have behaved
in the friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne,
how man pleasant day: we have owed to them 2 ”

“ No,’ said Marianne, in a low voice, “ nor how
many painful momenta."

Elinor took no notice of this, and directing her atten-
tion to their visitor, endeavoured to mp rt Iometlring
like diacoune with him by talking 0 their preterit
residence, its conveniences, &c., extorting from him
occalional questionl and remarks. Hie coldneu and
reserve mortiﬁed her neverer : the was vexed and half
angry'; but resolving to regulate her behaviour to him
by the part mthcr than the present, the avoided every
appearance of resentment or diaplcauurc, and treated
him as she thought he ought to be creamed from the
family connection.

 

SBNSE AND SENSIBILITV. 89

¢bllm¢ W933-

RS DASHWOOD was surprised only for a
moment at seeing him; for his coming to
Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the
most natural. Her jo and expressions of regard long
outlived her wonder. file received the kindest welcome
from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve, could not
stand against such a reception. They had begun to fail
him before he entered the house, and they were quite
overcome by the ca tivating manners of Mrs Dashwood.
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either
of her daughters, without extending the passion to her;
and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon
become more like himself. His affections seemed to
resnimate towards them all, and his interest in their
welfare again became percepn'hle. He was not in
spirits however; be praised their house, admired its
prospect, was attentive and kind; but still he was not
in spirits. The whole family perceived it, and Mrs
Dashwood, attributing it w some want of liberalit in
his mother, sat down to table indignant against all se ﬁsh
parents.

“ What are Mrs Ferrar’s views for you at present,
Edward?" said she, when dinner was over, and they
had drawn round the ﬁre; “are you still to be a great
orator in spite of yourself?”

“ No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I
have no more talents than inclination for a public life."

“ But how is your fame to be established? for famous

on must be to satisfy all your family; and with no

Inclination for expense, no affection for strangers, no
profession, and no assurance, you may ﬁnd it a dillicnlt
matter.”

l‘I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be dill-

90 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

tinguished; and I have every reason to hope I never
sha l Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced Into genius
and eloquence.”

“ You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes,
are all moderate.”

“As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I
believe. I wish, as well as everybody else, to be per-
fectly happy; but, like everybody else, it must be in my
own way. Greatness will not make me so."

“Strange if it would!” cried Marianne. “What
have wealth or grandeur to do with happiness?”

“ Grandeur has but little,” said Elinor, “but wealth
has much to do with it.”

“ Elinor, for shame! ” said Marianne; “money can
only give happiness where there is nothing else to give
it. Beyond a competence, it can afford no real satis-
faction, as far as mere self is concerned.”

“Perhaps,” said Elinor, smiling, “ we may come to
the same point. Tour competenCe and my wealth are
very much alike, I dare say; and without them, as the
world goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of
external comfort must be wanting. Your Ideas are
only more noble than mine. Come, what is your
competence 2‘ ”

“ About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year;
not more than that."

“ Elinor laughed. Tum thounnd a year! One is
my wealth! I guessed how it would end.”

“ And yet two thousand a year is a very moderate
income," said Marianne. “ A famil cannot well be
maintained on a smaller. I am sure am not extrava-
gant in my demands. A proper establishment of scr-
vzlnts, a carriage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be
supported on less.”

Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so
accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTV. 9!

“Hunter-l" repeated Edward—“ But why must
you have huntenl Everybody doe: not hunt.”

Marianne coloured an she replied, “ But moot people
do"

“I with," Bid Margaret, atriking out a novel
thought, “that wrnebody would give In all n large
fortune apiece! "

“O that they would!” cried Marianne, her eyes

kling with animation, and her cheeks glowing with
t e delight of Inch imaginary happine-

“ We are all unanimous in that Vlllh, I lu Ie,"
said Elinor, “in ite of the inluﬂiciency of w 0h.”

“Oh dear,” cned Margaret, “how happy I ahould
be. I wonder what I Ihould do with it!

Marianne looked at if the had no doubt on that point.

“ I Ihould be puzzled to a large fortune my-
Ielf," said Mn Daahwood, “ If my children were all to
be rich without my help.”

" You mult begin your impmvementl on this house,”
observed Elinor, " and your dillicultiee will won
ranirh."

"What magniﬁcent order: would travel from thin
family to London,” laid Edward, "in Inch an event!
What .1 happy day for booksellers, muaic-eellen, and
print-ahopsl You, Mine Dashwood, would give a
general commileion for every new print of merit to be lent
you—and as for Marianne,I know her greatness of
eoul, there would not be music enough in London to .
content her. And bookul—Thomaon, Cowper, Scott
-—clre would buy them all over and over again; the
would buy up every copy, I believe, to revent their
falling into unworthy handl; and she won d have every
book that tells her how to admire an old twinted tree.
Should not you, Marianne? Forgive me, if I am
very laucy. But I wu willing to chow you that I
had not forgot our old disputes."

92 SENSE AND smsmu'n.

“ I love to be reminded of the past, Edward—
whether it be melancholy or gay, I love to recall it
—and you will never offend me by talking of former
times. You are very right in supposing how my money
would be t—eome of it, at least my loose cash,
would certainly be employed in improving my collection
of music and boo ”

“ And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in
annuities on the author: or their heirs.”

“ No, Edward, I should have something else to do
with it.”

“ Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on
that person who wrote the ablest defence of your
favourite maxim, that no one can ever be in love more
than once in their life—for your opinion on that point
is unchanged, I presume ? "

“ Undoubtedly. At In time of life, 0 iniona are
tolerany ﬁxed. It is not ikely that I shou d now see
or hear anything to change them.”

“ Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you lee," eaid
Elinor, “ she is not at all altered."

“She has only grown a little more gnve than she
was."

“ Nay, Edwar ," laid Marianne, “you need not re-

roach me. You are not very gay yourself.”

“Why should you think so ! ” replied he, with a
sigh. “ But liaiety never was a part of my character."

“ Nor do think it a part of Mnrizmne’a," said
Elinor. “I should hardly call her a lively girl; she is
very earnest, very eager in all she does— sometimes
talks a great deal, and always with animation—but she
is not often really merry.”

“I believe you are right,” he replied, “and yet I
have always set her down as a lively girl.”

“ I have frequently detected myself in such kind of
mistakes," said Elinor, “ in a total misapprehension of

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 93

character in some point or other—fancying peo le- so
much more gay or grave, or ingenious or stupi than
they really are, and I can hardly tell why, or in what
the deception originated. Sometimes one is guided by
what they say of themselves, and very frequently by what
other ple say of them, without giving oneself time
to delibﬁorate and judge."

“ But I thought it was right, Elinor,” said Marianne,
“to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people.
I thought ourjudgments were .ven us merely to be sub-
servient to those of our neigh ura. This has always
been your doctrine, I am sure."

“ No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never
aimed at the subjection of the understanding. All I
have ever attempted to inﬂuence has been the behaviour.
You must not confound my meaning. Iam guilty, I
confeu, of having often wished you to treat our ac-
quaintance in general with greater attention ; but when
have I adviled you to adopt their sentiments or conform
to their judgment in serious matters? "

“ You have not been able then to bring your sister
over to your plan of general civility,” said Edward to
Elinor. “ Do you gain no ground i”

“ Quite the contrary," replied Elinor, looking ex-
pressively at Marianne.

" My judgment,” he returned, “ is all on your side
of the question ; but I am afraid my practice is much
more on our sister's. I never wish to offend, but I
am so foo ishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when
I am only kept back by my natural awkwardness. I
have frequently thought that I must have been intended
by nature to be fond of low company, I am so little at
my ease among strangen of gentility! ”

“ Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention
of hers," laid Elinor.

“ She knows her own worth too well for false than,"

’ Edward. “Shynalinonlytheelfectofam
inferiority in lune way or other. If I could persuade
mac“ that my nunnen were perfectly easy and grace-

, I Ihould not be shy.”

" But you would still be reserved,” said Marianne,
“and that is worse."

Edward nared—“ Reserved? Am I reaerved,
Marianne l"

“ Yes. very.”

“I do not understand you,” replied he, colouring.
“ Raerved l—how, in what manner? What am I to
tell you? What can you ruppoee ? ”

Elinor looked turpan at his emotion, but trying to
laugh off the rubject, the aid to him, “Do not you
know my sitter well enough to undentand what uhe
means? Do not you know she calls every one re-
served, who does not talk as fun, and admire what she
admires as raptumualy aa herself?"

Edward made no anawer. His gravity and thought-
fulnen returned on him in their fullest extent, and he
sat for some time silent and dull.

94 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.
0

“lbw”: £1733].

LINOR law with reat uneasiness the law spirits
E of her friend. is visit aﬂ'ordcd her but a very
partial satisfaction, while his own enjoyment in
it appeared to imperfect. It was evident that he was
unhap y; the wished it were equally evident that he
trill distinguished her by the name aﬂcction which once
the had felt no doubt of inspiring; but hitherto the
continuance of hit preference seemed very uncertain,
and the reservednets of his manner towards her .contra-
dialed one moment what a more animated look had
intimated the preceding one.

 

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 95

He joined her and Marianne in the breakfau-room
the next morning before the others were down; and
Marianne, who_was alwa s eager to promote their
ha piness as far as she co d, soon left them to them-
eeves. But, before she was half way up stairs, she
heard the parlour door open, and, turning round, was
astonished to ace Edward himself come out.

“I am going into the village to lee my horses,” said
he, “ as you are not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be
back again presently.”

 

Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of
the surrounding country; in his walk to the village, he
had seen many parts of the valley to advantage; and
the village itself, in a much higher situation than the
cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which
had exceedingly pleased him. This was a subject
which insured Mananne’s attention, and she was begin-
ning to describe her own admiration of these scenes, and
to uestion him more minutely on the objects that had

rtlcularly struck him, when Edward interrupted her

laying, " You must not inquire too far, Marianne—
remember, I have no knowledge in the picturesque, and
I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste, if
we come to articulars. I shall call hills steep, which
ought to be ld; surfaces strange and uncouth, which
ought to be irregular and mggcd; and dietant objects
out of sight, which ought only to be indistinct through
the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. You mun be
satisﬁed with such admiration as I can honestly give. I
call it a very ﬁne country—the hills are steep, the woods
seem full of line timber, and the valley looks comfort-
able and snug—with rich meadows and several neat
{am-houses scattered here and there. It exactly
answers my idea of a line country, because it unites
beauty with utility—and I dare say it is a picturesque

95 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

one too, because you admire it; I can aein believe it
to he lull of roclu and promontoriee, grey mono and
hrushwood, but these are all loot on me. I know
nothing of the picturesque.”

“I am afrard it is but too true,” nid Marianne;
“ but why should you boat of it ? "

“I mapect," said Elinor, “that to avoid one kind of
aﬂ'ccnrtion, Edward here falls into another. Becqu hr.-
believes many people pretend to more admiration of the
beautiee of nature than they really feel, and it di
with such prereneions, he affect: greater indiﬂ'erence and
lean discrimination in viewing them him-elf than lhe
pone-oer. He in faatidioue and will have an alfectation
of hie own."

“ It is very true," laid Marianne, “ that admiration of
landscape scenery in become a mere jargon. Every-
body retende to feel and triee to delcrihe with the tame
and el;gance of him who lint deﬁned what picturesque
beauty was. I detest "argon of every kind, and eome-
timel I have kept my eelingl to myself, because I could
ﬁnd no language to describe them in but what was worn
and haclmeyed out of all eenee and meaning."

“ I am convinced,” said Edward, " that you rally
feel all the delight in a ﬁne prospect .which on profen
to feel. But, in return, your meter mutt nﬁow me to
feel no more than I profeu. I like a ﬁne p
but not on picturesque principles. I do not like
crooked, twinned, blasted trece. I admire them much
more if they are tall, straight, and ﬂourishing. I do not
like ruined, tattered cottages. I am not fond of
nettlel, or thirtlea, or heath bloeeome. I have more
pleasure in a snug farm-home than a watch-tower—and
a troo: of tidy, happy villager- pleaec me better than the
ﬁneet nditti in the world."

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with
compassion at her sister. Elinor only laughed.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 97

The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne
remained thoughtfully silent, till a new object mddmrly
engaged her attention. She was sitting Edwa ,
and In taking his tea from Mrs Dashw , his hand
passed so directly before her as to make a ring, with a
plait of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of
his ﬁngers.

“I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward,” she
cried. “I: that Fanny’s hair? I remember her
promising to give you some. But I should have
thought her hair had been darker.”

Marianne spoke inconsiderater what she really felt
-—l7ut when she saw how much she had pained Edward,
her own vexation at her want of thought could not be
surpassed by his. He coloured ve deeply, and giving
a momentary lance at Elinor, re? ied, “Yes, it rs my
sister’s hair. he setting always casts a dilferent shade
on it, you know.”

Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious
likewise. That the hair was her own, she inun-
taneously felt as well satisﬁed as Marianne; the only
difference in their conclusions was, that what Marianne

. considered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was
conscious must have been procured by some theft or
contrivance unknown to herself. She was not in a
humour, however, to regard it as an aﬂront, and
affecting to take no notice of what had passed, by
instantly talking of something else, she internally
resolved henceforward to catch every 0 portunity
of eyeing the hair, and satisfying Irene], beyond
all doubt, that it was exactly the shade of her
own.

Edward’s embarrassment lasted Dome time, and it
ended in an absence of mind still more settled. He was
particularly grave the whole momin . Marianne severely
censured herself for what she h said, but her own

1. u

98 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

forgiveness might have been more speedy, had she known
how little oﬂ‘ence it had given her sister.

Before the middle of the day, they were visited by
Sir John and Mrs Jenning, who, having heard of the
arrival of a gentleman at the cottage, came to take a
survey of the guest. With the antistance of his
mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in discovering
that the name of Ferrars began with an F, and this
Empared a future mine of raillery against the devoted

linor, which nothing but the newness of tha'r acquain-
tance with Edward could have prevented from being
immediately sprung. But, as it was, she only learned
from some very signiﬁcant looks, how far their e-
tration, founded on Margaret’s instructions, exten ed.

Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without
either inviting them to dine at the park the next day,
or to drink tea with them that evening. 0n the
present occasion, for the better entertainment of their
visitor, towards whose amusement he felt himself
bound to contribute, he wished to engage them for
both.

“ You mu: drink tea with us tn-night," said he,
“for we shall be quite alone—and to-morrow you ‘
must abwlutely dine with us, for we shall be a large

art ."
P hirs Jennings enforced the necessity. “And who
knows but you may raise a dance?" said she. “And
that will tempt you,Miss Marianne.” .>

“A dance! ” cried Marianne. “ Impossible! "
Who is to dance .3 ”

“Who! Why yourselves, and the Careys, and
Whitaker's, to be sure. What! you thought
nuhotly eoultl tlance because a certain person that shall
be nameless is gone! "

“ I wish with all my soul," cried Sir John, “that
Willoughby were among us again."

sense AND smstnm'rv. 99

This, and Marianne’s blushin gave new suspicions
to Edward. “ And who is Wilﬁiughby P " said he, in
a low voice to Miss Dashwood, by whom he was
sitting.

She gave him a brief reply. Marianne’s countenance
was more communicative. Edward saw enough to
comprehend not only the meaning of others, but such
of Mariannc’s ex ressions as had puzzled him before;
and when their Visitors left them, he went immediater
round her, and said, in a whisper, “I have been
guessing. Shall I tell you my guess?”

“ What do ou mean ? "

“ Shall I tel you?"

“Certainly.”

“ Well, then, I guess that Mr Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could
not help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner, and,
after a moment’s silence, said,

“Oh! Edward! How can you i—But the time
will come, I hope . . . I am sure you will like him.”

“I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonished
at her earnestness and warmth; for had he not imagined
it to be a joke for the good of her acquaintance in
general, founded only on a something or a nothing
between Mr Willonghby and herself, he would not have
ventured to mention it.

chant” ilk

DWARD remained a week at the cottage; he
was cameatly pressed by Mrs Dashwood to stay
longer; but as if he were bent only on self-mor-

tiﬁcation, he seemed resolved to be gone when his
enjoyment among his friends was at the height. His

100 SINSI AND SENSIBHJTY.

spirits, durin the last two or three days, though till
very unequa , were greatly improved—he grew more
and more partial to the house and environs—never spoke
of going away without a sigh—declared his time to be
wholly disengaged—even doubted to what place he
should go when he left them—but still go he must.
Never had any week passed so quickly—he could hardly
believe it to be gone. He said so repeatedly; other
things he said too, which marked the turn of his feelings
and gave the lie to his actions. He had no pleasure at
Norland ; he detested being in town; but either to
Norland or London he must go. He valued thdr
kindness beyond anything, and his grate: happiness
was in being with them. Yet he must leave them at
the end of a week, in spite of their wishes and his own,
and without any restraint on his time.

Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of
acting to his mother’s account; and it was happy for
her that he had a mother whose character was so im-
perfect] known to her, as to be the general excuse for
everything strange on the part of her son. Disa‘ﬁpointed,
however, and vexed as she was, and sometimes 'spleased
with his uncertain behaviour to herself, she wasvery well
disposed on the whole to regard his actions with all the
candid allowances and generous qualiﬁcations, which had
been rather more painfully extorted from her, for Wil-
loughby's service, by her mother. His want of spirits,
of openness, and of consistency, were most usually attri-
buted to his want of independence, and his better know-
ledge of Mrs Ferrars’s dispositions and designs. The
shortnen of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose in
leaving them, originated in the same lettered inclination,
the same inevitable necessity of temporising with his
mother. ' ‘hc old well-established grievance of dut
against will, parent against child, was the cause of al .
She would have been glad to know when these diﬂicul-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. ~ lo!

ties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,—when
Mrs Femrs would be reformed, and her son be at
libe to be happy. But from luch vain wishes, she
was orced to turn for comfort to the renewal of her
conﬁdence in Edward’s affection, to the remembrance
of every mark of regard in look or word which
fell from him while at Barton, and above all to that
ﬂattering proof of it which he constantly wore round
his ﬁnger.

“I think, Edward,” said Mrs Dashwood, as they
were at breakfaat the last morning, “you would be a
happier man if you had any profession to engage your
time and give an interest to your plans and actions.
Some inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might
result from it—you would not be able to give them so
much of your time. But (with a smile) you would be
materially beneﬁtted in one particular at least—you
would know where no go when you left them."

“I do assure you,” he replied, “that I have long
thought on this point as you think now. It has been,
and is, and probably will always be a heavy misfortune to
me, that I have had no necessary business to engage me,
no profession to give me en) )onment or afford me any-
thing like independence. but unfortunately my own
nicety and the nicety of my friends, have made me
what I am, an idle, helpless being. We never could
agree in our choice of a profession. I always preferred
the church, as I still do. But that was not smart
enough for my family. They recommended the army.
That was a great deal too smart for me. The law was
allowed to be genteel enough; many young men, who
had chambers in the Temple, made a very good appear-
ance in the ﬁrst circles, and drove about town in very
knowing gigs. But I had no inclination for the law,
even in this less abstruse study of it, which my family
approved. As for the navy, it had fashion on its side,

102 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

but I was too old when the subject vm lint started to
enter it,—and, at length, as there wan no ncoeuit for
my having any Profession at all, as I might be as ash-
ing and expensive without a red coat on my back as
with one, idleneu was pronounced on the whole to be
the most advantageoua and honourable, and a young
man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on
being busy as to resist the lolicitations of his friend: to
do nothing. I was therefore entered at Oxford, and
have been properly idle ever since.”

“The consequence of which,‘.l Iuppoae, will be,"
said Mn Dashwood, “since leiaure has not promoted
your own happiness, that your soul will be brought up
to as many pursuiu, employments, profesaions, and
trades no Collumella'a.”

“ They will be brought up,” said he, in a oerioul
accent, “to be are unlike myself as is ponible,—-in
feelin , in action, in condition, in everything.”

“ (game, come; this is all an eﬂiuion of immediate
want of spirits, Edward. You are in a melancholy
humour, and fancy that any one unlike your-elf mu“ be
happy. But remember that the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by everybody at timers, whatever be
their education or state. Know your own happineeo.
You want nothing but patience—or give it a more
fascinating name, call it hope. Your mother will
secure to you, in time, that independence you are no
anxious for; it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long
become her happineso to prevent your whole youth from
being wasted in discontent. How much my not a few
months do! "

“ I think,” replied Edward, “that I may defy many
mnnlhu to produce any good to me."

This deaponding turn of mind, though it could not
be communicated to Mrs Dashwood, gave additional
pain to them all in the parting, which shortly took place,

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY. [03

and left an uncomfomble impression on Elinor‘s feelings

ially, which required some trouble and time to
"Elie. But as it was her determination to subdue it,
and to prevent herself from a pearing to suffer more
than what all her family suffe on his going away, she
did not adept the method so judiciou y employed by
Marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and ﬁx
her sorrow, by seeking silence, solitude, and idleness.
Their means were as different as their objects, and
equally suited to the advancement of each.

Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he
was out of the house, busily cm oned herself the whole
day, neither sought nor avoi ed the mention of his
name, appeared to interest herself almost as much as
ever in the general concerns of the family, and if, by
this conduct, she did not lessen her own grief, it was at
least prevented from unnecessary increase, and her
mother and sisters were spared much solicitude on her
account.

Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her
own, appeared no more meritorious to Marianne than
her own had scented faulty to her. The business of
self-command she settled very easily;—with stron
affections it was impossible, with ralm ones it coul
have no merit. That her sister's affections were calm,
she dared not deny, though she blushed to acknowledge
it; and of the strength of her own, she gave a very
striking proof, by still loving and respecting that sister
in ite of this mortifying conviction.

ithout shutting herself up from her family, or
leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them,
or laying awake the whole night to indulge meditation,
Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough to
think of Edward, and of Edward’s behaviour, in every
possible variety which the different state of her spirits
at different times could produce ;—with tenderness,

104 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

pity, approbation, censure, and doubt. There were
moment: in abundance, when, if not by the absence of
her mother and sisters, at least b the nature of their
em loymenu, conversation was forhidden among them,
andJ every eﬁ‘ect of solitude was produced. Her mind
was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could not be
chained .elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a
subject so interesting, must be before her, must Force
her attention, and cngross her memory, her reﬂection,
and her fancy.

From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her
drawing-table, she was mused one morning, soon after
Edward’s leaving them, by the arrival of company.
She happened to be quite alone. The closing of the
little gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of
the house, drew her eyes to the window, and she saw a
large part walking up to the door. Amongst them
were Sir .lbhn and Lady Middleton, and Mrs Jennings;
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who
were quite unknown to her. She was sitting near the
window, and as soon as Sir John perCeived her, he left
the rest of the party to the ceremony of knocking at the
door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to open
the easement to speak to him, though the space was so
short between the door and the window as to make it
hardly possible to speak at one without being heard at
the other.

“Well,” said he, “ we have brought you some
strangers. How do you like them?”

“Hush! they will hear you.”

“Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmers.
Charlotte is very pretty, I can tell you. You may see
her if you look this way.”

As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of
minutes, without taking that liberty, she begged to be
excused.

SENSE AND SBNSIBILITV. 105

“ Where is Marianne? Has she run away because
we are come? I see her instrument is open."

“ She is walking, I believe."

They were now joined by Mrs Jennings, who had
not patience enough to wait till the door was open
before she told ber story. She came hallooing to the
window, “ How do you do, my dear? How does
Mrs Dashwood do? And where are your sisters?
What! all alone! you will be glad of a little company
to sit with you. I have brought my other son and
dart hter tosee you. Onl think of their coming 00

enly! I thought I eard a carriage last night,
while we were drinking our tea, but it never entered my
head that it could be them. I thought of nothing but
whether it might notbe Colonel Brandon come back
again; so I laid to Sir John, ‘I do think I hr a
carria e; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come back
again ”

Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle
of her story, to receive the rest of the party; Lady
Middleton introduced the two strangers; Mrs Dash-
wood and Margaret came downstaira at the same time,
and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mrs
Jennings continued her story as she walked through the
passage into the parlour, attended by Sir John.

Mrs Palmer was several years younger than Lady
Middleton, and totally unlike her in every respect. She
was short and plump, had a very pretty face, and the
linest expression of good humour in It that could possibly
be. Her manners were by no means so elegant as her
sister’s, but they were much more preposeessing. She
came in with a smile—smiled all the time of her visit,
except when she laughed, and smiled when she went
awa . Her husband was a grave looking younfgnli‘rlian
of we or six and twenty, with an air of more 'on
and sense than his wife, but of less willingness to please

I06 sense AND ssnsrsna-rv.

or to be pleased. He entered the room with a look of
self—consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies without
speaking a word, and, after brieﬂy surveying them and
their apartments, took up a newspaper from the table
and continued to read it as long as he staid.

Mrl Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly en-
dowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil
and happy, was hardly seated before her admiration of
the parlour and everything in it burst forth.

“ Well ! what a delightful room this ill I never
saw anything so charming ! Only think, mamma, how
it is improved since I was here last! I alwa s thought
it such a sweet placa, ma’am (turning to rs Dash-
wood), but you have made it so charming ! Onl
look, sister, how delightful everything is ! How
should like such a house for myself. Should not you,
Mr Palmer? "

Mr Palmer made her no answer, and did not even
raise his eyes from the newspaper.

“ Mr Palmer does not hear me,” said she, laughing.
“ He never does, sometimes. It is so ridiculous ! ”

This was quite a new idea to Mrs Dashwood; she
had never been used to ﬁnd wit in the inattention of any
one, and could not help looking with surprise at them
both.

Mrs Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as
she could, and continued her account of their surprise the
evening before, on seeing their friends, without ceasing
till everything was told. Mrs Palmer laughed heartily
at the recollection of their astonishment, and everybody
agreed two or three times over, that it had been quite
an agreeable surprise.

“ You may believe how glad we all were to see
them,” added Mrs Jennings, leaning forward towards
Elinor, and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to
be heard by no one else, though they were seated on
dilferent sides of ' mt “but, however, I can’t

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 107

help wishing they had not travelled quite so East, nor
made such a long journey of it, for th came all round
by London upon account of someebusiness, for you
know (nodding signiﬁcantly and pointing to her daugh-
ter) it was wrong in her situation. I wanted her to
stay at home and rest th'u morning, but she would come
with us; the longed so much to see you all ! "

Mrs Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her
any harm.

“ She expects to be conﬁned in February," continued
Mrs Jennings.

Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a con-
versation, and therefore exerted herself to aak Mr
Palmer if there was any news in the paper.

“ No, none at all,” he re lied, and read on.

“ Here comes Marianne,’ cried Sir John. “ Now
Palmer, you shall see a monstrous pretty girl.”

He immediately went into the passage, opened
the front door, and ushered her in himself. Mrs
Jennings asked her, as soon as she a ared, if she
had not been to Allenham; and Mrs almer laughed
so heartil at the question an to show she understood
it. Mr Filmer looked up on her entering the room,
stared at her some minutes, and then returned to his
new per. Mn Palmer’s eye was now caught by the
drawings which hung round the room. She got up to
examine them.

“Ohl dear, how beautiful these are! Well, how
delightful ! Do but look, mamma, how sweet! I
declare they are quite charming; I could look at them
for ever.” And then sitting down again, she very
soon forgot that there were any such things in the
room.

When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr Palmer
rose also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himself,
and looked at them all round.

l 08 SENSE AND SENSI BILITY.

“My love, have you been asleep?” said his wife,
lau hing.

e made her no answer, and only observed, after
again examining the room, that it was very low-pitched,
and that the ceiling was crooked. He then made his
bow and departed with the rest.

Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend
the next day at the park. Mrs Dashwood, who did
not chuse to dine with them oﬁener than they dined
at the cottage, absoluter refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased. But they had
no curiosity to see how Mr and Mrs Palmer ate their
dinner, and no expectation of pleasure from them in
any other way. They attemEted, therefore, likewise to
excuse themselves; the weat er was uncertain and not
lilter to be good. But Sir John would not be satisﬁed
—the carriage should be sent for them, and they must
come. Lady Middleton too, though she did not press
their mother, pressed them. Mrs Jennings and Mrs
Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed ually
anxious to avoid a family party, and the young adies
were obliged to yield.

“ Why should they ask us 2 ” said Marianne, as soon
as the were gone. “The rent of this cottage is said
to be ow; but we have it on very hard terms, if we
are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them or with us.”

“ They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now,”
said Elinor, “ by these frequent invitations than by those
which we received from them a few weeks ago. The
alteration is not in them, if their parties are grown
tedious and dull. We must look for the change else-
where.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 109

Chant" $5.

S the Min Dashwoode entered the drawing-room
of the park the next day, at one door, Mn
Palmer came running in at the other, looking as

good-humourcd and merry as before. She took them
all most affectionately by the hand, and expreued great
delight in seeing them again.

"I am so glad to see you! " laid the, seating herself
between Elinor and Marianne, “for it ie no bad a d:
I wan afraid you might not come, which would be a
shocking thing, as we go away again lo-morrow. We
must go, for the Weston: come to on next week, you
know. It wan uite a sudden thing our coming at all,
and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was coming
to the door, and then Mr Palmer naked me if I would
go with him to Barton. He in so drolll He never
tell- me anything! I am so sorry we cannot nay
longer; however, we shall meet again in town very
noon, I hope.”

They were obliged to put an end to luch an expec-
uuon.

" Not go to town!" cried Mn Palmer, with a
laugh; “I shall be quite diaa inted if on do not.
I could get the nicest houee in t e world or you next
door to ours, in Hanover Square. You must come,
indeed. I am sure I ohall be very hop to chapemn
you at any time till I am conﬁned, if Mr: Daehwood
should not like to go into public."

They thanked her, but were obliged to reeiat all her
cntreatice.

" Oh! my love,” cried Mn Palmer to her huehand,
who jun then entered the room; “ you mun help me
to. peﬂu’ade the Min Daahwooda to go to town this
Mnmer.’

[IO SENS! AND SENSIBILITV.

Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing
to the ladies, began complaining of the weather.

“ How horrid all this is! ” said he. “Such
weather makes everything and everybody disgusting.
Dulness is as much produced within doors as without
[a rain. It makes one detest all one’l acquaintance.

hat the devil does Sir John mean by not having a
billiard-room in his house? How few people know
what comfort is ! Sir John is as stupid as the weather.”

The rest of the com ny soon dro t in.

“ I am afraid, Miss arianne,” sald Sir John, “ you
have not been able to take your usual walk to Alleuham
to-day."

Marianne looked ve grave, and said nothing.

“ Oh! don’t be so sy before us,” said Mrs Palmer:
"for we know all about it, I assure you; and I admire
your taste very much, for I think he is extremely hand-
some. We do not live n great way from him in the
coungtv, you know,——-not above ten miles, I dare my."

“ uch nearer thirty,” said her husband.

“Ah! well! there is not much diﬂerence. I never
was at his house; but they say it is a sweet. preuy
place."

“ As vile a spot as ever I saw in my life,” said Mr
Palmer.

Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her coun-
tenance betrayed her interest in what was said.

“ Is it very ugly ? ” continued Mrs Palmer—“ then
it must be some other place that is so pretty, I
suppose.”

When they were seated in the dining-room, Sir John
observed with regret that they were only eight all
together.

“ My dear,” said he to his lad , “it is very provok-
ing that we should be so few. hy did not you ask
the Gilberts to come to us to-day ? "

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. (I I

“ Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to
me about it before, that it could not be done? They
dined with us last.”

“ You and I, Sir John,” said Mrs Jennings, “ should
not stand upon such ceremony.”

“ Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr
Palmer.

“ My lomou contradict everybody,” said his wife,
with her u laugh. “Do you know that you are
quite nldei"

“I did not know I contradicted anybody in calling
your mother ill-bred.”

“Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the
good-natured old lady. “ You have taken Charlotte 05
my hands, and cannot give her back again. So there I
have the whi hand of you.”

Charlotte raughed heartin to think that her husband
could not get rid of her, and exultingly said, she did
not care how cross he was to her, as they must live to-
gether. It was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured or more determined to be
happy than Mrs Palmer. The studied indifference,
insole-nee, and discontent of her husband gave her no
pain; and when he scolded or abused her, she was
highl diverted.

“KI! Palmer is so droll l ” said she, in a whisper, to
Elinor. “ He is always out of humour."

Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to
give him credit for being so genuinely and unafl'ectedly
ill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to appear. His
temper might perhaps be a little soured by ﬁnding, like
many others of his sex, that through some unaccount-
able bias in favour of beauty, he was the husband of a
very silly woman—4m she knew that this kind of
blunder was too common for any sensible man to be
lastineg hurt by it. It was rather a wish of distinction,

"I ms: AND SUSIBIUTV.

due believed,which produced hi. contemptmu treat-
ment of everybody, and hi: general ahu: of everything
before him. It wan the desire of apparing vuperior to
Themotivewaatoocnmmontohe
wondered at; but the mean, however they might luc-
oeed by mblishing his superiority in ill-breeding, were
not likely to attach any one to him except hil wife.

“Oh! my dr Min Daahwood,” laid Mn Palmer
noon afterwards, “I have got such a favour to ask of
you and your tiller. Will you come and spend Iome
time at Cleveland this Chmtmaa? Now, ray do—
and come while the Weston: are with no. ou «not
think how happy I shall be! It will be quite delight-
ful! My love,” applying to her huhnd, “don't
you long to have the Min Dathwooda come to Cleve-

nd .’ "

“ Certainly,” he replied with a meer—“ I came into
Devomhire with no other view.’ '

“There now,”——taid hi. lad , “ you nee Mr Palmer
ex cu you; no you cannot re use to come.’ ’

ghey both eagerly and reoolutely declined her invita-
tron.

“But indeed, you must and shall come. I am ture
you will like it of all things. The Weston: will be
with us, and it will be quite delightful. You cannot
think what a tweet lace Cleveland in; and we are so
gay now, for Mr lgalmer is always going about the
country canvassing again» the election; and I0 many

ple come to dine with us that I never uw before,
It in quite charming! But, poor fellow! it is very
fatiguing to him! for he is forced to make everybody
like him.”

Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as Ihc
assented to the hardship of such an obligation.

“ How charming it will be,” said Charlotte, “when
he in in Parliament l—won’t it? How I shall laugh!

 

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. l 13

It will be so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to
him with an MJ’. But do you know, he says he will
never frank for me. He declares he won’t. Don't
you, Mr Palmer?”

Mr Palmer took no notice of her.

“ He cannot bear writing. you know," she continued
~“ he says it is quite shocking.”

“ No,” said he, “I never said anything so irrational.
Don't palm all your abuses of language upon me.”

“There now; you see how droll he is. This is
always the way with him! Sometimes he won’t speak
to me for half a day together, and then he comes out
with something so droll—all about anything in the
world."

She surprised Elinor very much, as they returned
into the drawing-room, by asking her whether she did
not like Mr Palmer excessively.

“ Certainl ," said Elinor, “ he seems very agreeable.”

“Well—l am so glad on do. I thought you
would, he is so pleasant; Indy Mr Palmer is exec-'vely
pleased with you and your sisters, I can tell you, and
you can’t think how disappointed he will be if you
don’t come to Cleveland. I can’t imagine why you
should object to it.”

Elinor was again 0in ed to decline her invitation;
and by changing the su jcct, put a stop to her en-
treaties. She thought it probable that, as they lived in
the same county, rI Palmer mi ht be able to give
some more particular account of Vgs’illoughby‘s eneral
character than could be gathered from the Mid etonl’
partial acquaintance with him, and she wan eager to
gain from any one such a conﬁrmation of his merits as
might remove the saibility of fear for Marianne.
She began by in urring if they aw much of Mr
Willoughby at C‘leveland, and whether they were
intimately acquainted with him.

i. H

H4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“Oh! dear, yes; I know him extremely well,”
replied Mu Palmer—“ Not that I ever rpoke to him,
indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town. Some-
how or other, I never happened to be mying at Barton
while he was at Allenham. Momma haw him here
once before ;——but I wan with my uncle at Weymouth.
However, I dare say we should have teen a great deal
of him in Someraeuhile, if it had not happened very
unluckily that we should never have been in the
country together. He in very little at Combe, I be-
lieve; but if he were ever so much there, I do not
think Mr Palmer would visit him, for he in in the
opposition, you know, and hetides it is Inch 2 way off.
I know why you inquire about him, very well; your
sister is to marry him. I am moo-trout glad of it, for
then I shall have her for a neighbour, you know.”

“Upon my word," replied Elinor, “you know
much more of the matter than I do, if you have any
reason to expect such a match."

"Don’t pretend to deny it, because you know it in
what everybody talk: of. I auure you I heard of it
in m way through town."

“ y dear Mrs Palmer! "

“Upon my honour I did.——I met Colonel Bmdon,
Monday morning in Bond Street, just before we left
town, and he told me of it directly."

“You au )riae me very much. Colonel Brandon
tell you of it! Surely you mutt be mistaken. To
give such intelligence to a person who could not he in-
terested in it, even if it were true, it not what I should
expect Colonel Brandon to do.”

“ But I do assure you it wax to, for all that, and I
will tell you how it happened. When we met him, he
turned back and walked with us; and to we began
talking of my brother and sister, and one thing and
another, and I said to him' ‘So, Colonel, there it a

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. Us

new family came to Barton cottage, I hear, and
mamma sends me word they are very pret‘ty, and that
one of them in going in be married to Mr illoughby,
of Combe Magna. Is it true, pray? for of course
on mutt know, an you have been in Devonlhire Io
ately.”’

“ And what did the Colonel my ? ”

“Oh !—he did not say much; but he looked a: if
he knew it to be tme, so from that moment I set it
down as certain. It will be quite delightful, I declare!
When in it to take place?”

“ Mr Brandon was very well, I ha ?”

“Oh! yes, uite well; and no ful of your praises,
he did nothing in“. say ﬁne things of you.”

“I am ﬂattered by his commendation. He seems
an excellent man; and I think him uncommonly

leaain .”

“So do I.—He in such a charming man, that it is

uim a pity he should be so grave and I0 dull.
ﬁamma any: I» was in love with your sister too. I
auure you it was a great compliment if he wan, for he
hardly ever falls in love with anybody."

"In Mr Willough much known in your part of
Somernetshire?” uald linor.

“Oh! yea, extremely well ;—that is, I do not
believe many people are acguainted with him, because
Combe Magna is so far 0 ; but they all think him
extremely agreeable, I assure you. Nobody in more
liked than Mr Willoughby wherever he goes, and so
you may tell your sister. She is a monstrous lucky
girl to get him, u n my honour; not but that he is
much more lucky In gutting her, because she is to very
handsome and agreeable that nothing can be good enough
for her. However, I don’t think her hardly at all
handsomer than you, I assure you; for I think you
both excessively pretty, and so doen Mr Palmer too, I

116 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

am sure, though we could not get him to own it In:
night.”

Mrs Palmer’s information reopening Willoughlry wan
not very material; but any testimony in his favour,
however small, was pleasing to her.

“I am so glad we are got acquainted at lac,” con-
tinued Charlotte. “ And now I hope we Ihall always
be great friends. You can’t think how much I longed
to ace youl It is so delightful! that you Ihould live at
the cottagel Nothing can be like it, to be lure! And
I am so glad your sister is going to be well married!
I hope you will be a great deal at Combe Magoo. It
ll a sweet place, by al accounts.”

“ You have been long acquainted with Colonel
andon, have not you ?”

“Yes, a great while; ever since my aim married.
He was a particular friend of Sir John’s. I believe,”
she added in a low voice, “he would have been
glad to have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady
Middleton wished it very much. But mamm did not
think the match good enough for me, otherwioe Sir
John would have mentioned it to the colonel, and we
should have been married immediately.”

“ Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir Joho’e pro-
posal to your mother before it won made? Had he
never owned his affection to yourself? ”

“Oh! no; but if momma had not objected to it, I
dare say he would have liked it of all thingl. He had
not seen me then above twice, for it we before I left
school. However, I am much happier an I am. Mr
Palmer is just. the kind of man I like.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. I 17

than: 5!].

HE Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day,
and the two families at Barton were again left
to entertain each other. But this did not last

long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of
her head—had hardly done wondering at Charlotte’s
being so happy without a cause, at Mr Palmer’s acting
so simyly with good abilities, and at the strange unsuit-
ableness which often existed between husband and wife.
before Sir John’s and Mrs Jennings' active zeal in the
cause of society procured her some other new acquaint-
ance to see and observe.

In a moming’s excursion to Exeter, they had met
with two young ladies whom Mrs Jennings had the
satisfaction of discovering to be her relations, and this
was enough for Sir John to invite them directly to the
park, as soon as their present engagements at Exeter
were over. Their engagements at Exerer instantly gave
way before such an invitation, and Lady Middleton
was thrown into no little alarm on the return of Sir
John, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her
life, and of whose elegance—whose tolerable gentility
even, she could have no proof; for the assurances of
her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all. They being her relations too, made it
so much the worse; and Mrs Jennings’ attempts at
consolation were therefore unfortunatel founded, when
she advised her daughter not to care about their being
so fashionable, because they were all cousins and must
put up with one another.

As it was im ssihle however now to prevent their
coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of
it with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, con-

l 13 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

tenting herself with merely giving her husband a gentle
reprimand on the subject live or six times every day.

The young ladies arrived, their appearance was by
no means ungenteel or unfashionable. Their draw was
very smart, their manners very civil, they were delighted
with the house and in raptures with the furniture, and
they hap ned to be so doatingly fond of children that
Lady Mlddleton’u good opinion was engaged in their
favour before they had been an hour at the park. She
declared them to be very agreeable girls indeed, which
for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration. Sir John'l
conﬁdence in his own judgment rose with this animated
Wise, and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the

its Dashwoods of the Miss Steelcs’ an’ival, and to
assure them of their being the sweetest girls in the world.
From such commendation as this, however, there was
not much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the
sweetest girls in the world were to he met with in
every part of England, under every possible variation of
form, face, temper. and understanding. Sir John
wanted the whole family to walk to the park directly
and look at his guests. Benevolent, philanthro ic
manl It was ainful to him even to keep a third
cousin to himself!)

“ Do come now,” said he—“ pray come—you must
come—I declare you shall come.—-You can't think how
you will like them. Lucy is monstrous pretty, and so
good-humoured and agreeable! The children are all
hanging about her already, as if she was an old acquaint-
ance. And they both long to see you of all things, for
they have heard at Exeter that you are the most beauti-
ful creatures in the world; and I have told them it is
all very mm, and a great deal more. You will be
delighted with tltem,I am sure. They have brought
the whole coach full of playthings for the children.
How can you be so cross as not to come! Why, they

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. “9

are your cousins, you know, after a fashion. Ton are
my cousins, and they are my wife's, so you must be
rea .”

But Sir John could not prevail. He could only
obtain a promise of their calling at the Park within a
day or two, and then left them in amazement at their
indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their at-
tractions to the Miss Steeles, as he had been alrmdy
boasﬁng of the Miss Steeles to them.

When their promised visit to the Park and conse-
quent introduction to these young ladies took place,
they found in the appearance of the eldest, who was
nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible face,
nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more
than two or three and twenty, they acknowledged con-
siderable beauty; her features were pretty, and she had
a sharp, quick eye, and a smartness of air, which, though
it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinction
to her person. Their manners were particularly civil,
and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of
sense, when she saw with what constant and judicious
attentions they were making themselves agreeable to
Lady Middleton. With her children they were in
continual mptures, extolling their beauty, courting their
notice, and hurnouring all their whims; and such of
their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which this politeness made on it, was spent
in admiration of whatever her ladyship was doing, if
she happened to be doing anything, or in taking patterns
of some elegant new dress, in which her appearance the
day before had thrown them into unceasing delight
Fortunately for those who pay their court through such
foibles, u fond mother, though, in pulsuit of pmisc for
her children, the most rapacious of human beings, is
likewise the most cuedulous; her demands are ex-
orbitant; but she will swallow anything; and the

120 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

excessive affection and endurance of the Min Steele:
towards her offspring, were viewed therefore by Lady
Middleton without the mallelt tu riae or diurnal.
She saw with maternal complacency a l the impertinent
incroachmenta and miochievoul tricks to which her
cousin: tubmitted. She saw their sashes untied, their
hair pulled about their ears, their work-bags rched,
and their knives and ociuars stolen away, and felt no
doubt of in being a reciper enjoyment. It Iuggested
no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should
lit to composedly by without claiming a share in what
was 'ng.

“ ohn in in nuch spirit: to-day!" said the, on hit
taking Mite Steele’s pocket handkerchief, and throwing
it out of window—“ He ll full of monkey triclu.”

And Icon afterwards, on the second boy’s violently
pinching one of the same lady’s ﬁngers, she fondly
obterved, “ How playful William in! "

“And here it In tweet little Annamaria,” she
added, tenderly care-Bing a little girl of three years old,
who had not made a noise for the last two minutes;
“ And she is alwa a no gentle and quiet—Never wan
there ruch a quiet ittle thing! ”

But unfortunately, in bestowing these emhmces, a pin
in her ladyship’t head-duets tlightly Icratching the child't
neck, produced from this pattern of gentleness mh
violent acreaml as could hardly be outdone by any
creature professedly noisy. The mother's conttemation
waa excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the
Miss Steeles, and everything was done by all three, in
so critical an emergency, which affection could In
as likely to assuage the agoniea of the little au erer.
She was reared in her mother’ a lap, covered with ltiuel,
her wound bathed with lavender-water by one of the
Miss Steeles, who was on her knees to attend her, and
her mouth stuffed with sugar-plums by the other. With

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 1 2!

Inch a reward for her tears, the child was too wise to
cease crying. She still screamed and sobbed luckily,
kicked her two brothers for offering to touch her, and
all their united soothin s were ineffectual till Lady
Middleton luckily remem ring that in a scene of similar
distress, lart week, some apricot marmalade had been
successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same
remedy was eagerly proposed for this unfortunate
scratch, and a slight intermission of screams in the
young lady on heating it, gave them reason to hope
that it would not be rejected. She was carried out of
the room therefore in her mother’s amta, in quest of
this medicine, and as the two boys chose to follow,
though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay
behind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness
which the room had not known for many hours.

" Poor little creature ! ” said Miss Steele, aa soon as
the were gone. “ It might have been a very nd
accident.”

" Yet I hardly know how,” cried Marianne, "unless
it had been under totally diﬂ'erent circumstances. But
this is the usual way of heightening alarml where there
is nothing to be alarmed at in reality.”

“ What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is,” said
Luc Steele.

arianne was silent ; it was impossible for her to say
what she did not feel, however trivial the occasion; and
upon Elinor, therefore, the whole task of telling lies
when politeness required it always fell. She did her
best, when thus called on, by speaking of Lady
Middleton with more warmth than she felt, though
with far less than Miss Lucy.

“And Sir John, too," cried the elder timer, “ what
a charming man he is! "

Here, too, Miss Dashwood’s commendation being
only simple and just, came in without any éclat. She

122 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

merely observed that he was perfectly good-humoured
and friendly.

“ And what a charming little family the have! I
never saw such ﬁne children in my life. declare I
quite doat upon them already, and indeed I am always
distractedly fond of children."

“ I should guess so," said Elinor with a smile,
“ from what I have witnessed this morning.”

“ I have a notion," said Lucy, “ you think the little
Middletons rather too much indulged; perhaps they
may be the outside of enough; but it is so natural in
Lady Middleton ; and for my part, I love to see
children full of life and spirits; I cannot hear them if
they are tame and quiet.”

“I confess," replied Elinor, “that while I am at
Barton Park, I never think of tame and quiet children
with any abhormncc.”

A short pause succeeded this speech, which was ﬁrst
broken by Miss Steele, who seemed very much '
for conversation, and who now said rather abruptl ,
“ And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashw ?
I suppose you were very sorry to leave Sutsex.”

In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or
at least at the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor
replied that she was.

“ Norland is a prodigious beautth place, is not it 2"
added Miss Steele.

“ We have heard Sir John admire it excessively,"
said Lucy, who seemed to think some apology necessary
for the freedom of her sister.

“ I think every one mm! admire it,” replied Elinor,
“ who ever saw the place; though it is not to
be supposed that any one can estimate its beauties as
we do.”

“And had you a great many smart beaux there?
I suppose you have not so many in this part of the

SENSE AND SENS!!! “TV. I 23

world; for my part, I think they are a vast addition
.1“ n .

“ ut why should you think,” said Lucy, looking
ashamed of her sister, “ that there are not as many
genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex?”

“ Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don’t pretend to lay that
there an't. I’m sure there’s a vast many smart beaux in
Exeter; but you know, how could I tell what smart
benux there might be about Norland.’ and I was only
afraid the Miss Dashwoods might ﬁnd it dull at Barton,
if they had not so many as they used to have. But
perhaps you young ladier may not care about the beaux,
and had nllief be without them as with them. For my
part, I think they are vastly a reeable, provided they
dress smart and behave civil. but I can’t bear to see
them dirty and nasty. Now, there’s Mr Rose at
Exeter, a prodigious smart young man, uite : beau,
clerk to Mr Simpson, you know, and yet i you do but
meet him ofa morning, he is not lit to be seen. I su
pose your brother was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood,
before he married, as he was so rich i”

“ Upon my word,” replied Elinor, “I cannot tell
you, for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of
the word. But this I can say, that if he ever was a
beau before he married, he is one still, for there is not
the smallest alteration in him.”

“0h! dearl one never thinks of married men's
being beaux—tlrey have something else to do."

“ Lord! Anne,” cried her sister, “ you can talk of
nothing but beaux ;——-you will make Miss Dashwood
believe you think of nothing else.” And then, to turn
the discourse, she began admiring the house and
furniture.

This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. The
vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest left her no re-
commendation, and as Elinor was not blinded by the

124 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

bauty or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want
of real elegance and artleuneu, the left the houae with-
out any with of knowing them better.
, Not so the Miss Steeles. They mine from Exeter,
well rovided with admiration for the uae of Sir John
Midd eton, his family, and all his relations, and no
niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair aniline,
whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,
accomplished and agreeable girls they had ever beheld,
and with whom they were particularly anxious to be
better acquainted. And to be better acquainted there-
fore, Elinor soon found was their inevitable lot; for as
Sir John was entirely on the side of the Min Steeles,
their puny would be too strong for opposition, and that
kind of intimacy must be submitted to, which consist: of
sitting an hour or two together in the same room almost
everyday. Sir John could do no more; but he did not
know that any more was required ; to be together was,
in his opinion, to beintimate, and while his continual
schemes for their meeting were effectual, he had not I
doubt of their being established friends.

To do him justice, he did everything in his wer,
to promote their unreserve, by making the Miss teeles
acquainted with whatever he knew or sup std of his
cousins’ situations in the most delicate pamculam—and
Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before the
eldest of them wished her joy on her sister’s having
been so lucky as to make a conquest of u very Imart
beau since she came to Barton.

“ ’Twill be a ﬁne thing to have her married to young,
to be sure," caid ehe, “ and I hear he is quite a bean,
and prodigious handsome. And I hope you may have
as good luck yourself soon,-—-but perhaps you may have
a friend in the corner already.”

Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be
more nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 125

Edward, than, he had been with t to Marianne;
indeed it was rather his favourite jo e of the trim, It
being Iomewhat newer and more con'ectural : and lirrce
Edward’s vinit, they had never din together, without
hie drinking to her best aﬁ'ectiona with In much ligni-
ﬁcancy, and to many node and winku, as to excite
general attention. The letter F— had been likewite
invariably brought forward, and found productive of
Inch countleu jokes, that its character as the wittiest
letter in the alphabet had been long eatabliehed with
Elinor. '

The Miss Steelet, an the expected, had now all the
beneﬁt of these jokel, and in the eldeat of them they
railed a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman
alluded to, which, though often impertinently expreued,
was perfectly of a {iece with her general inquintiveueea
into the concemao their family. But Sir John did not
:Port long with the curiosity which he delighted to nine,

or he had at least as much pleuure in telling the name,
at Miss Steele had in hearing it.

"Hi: name in Ferraro,” said he, in a very audible
whitpcr; “but pray do not tell it, for it’a .1 grant
secret."

" Ferrars! " repeated Miu Steele ; “ Mr Ferrari in
the happyI man, is he? What! your sinter-in-llw’l
brother, in Dathwoodr‘ a very agreeable young man,
to be lure; I know him very well. ’

' “ How can you say to, Anne?” cried Lucy, who
generally made an amendment to all her sister's aler-
tions. “ Though we have seen him once or twice at
my uncle’s, it in rather too much to pretend to know him
ve well."

rglinor heard all thin with attention and turpriee.
“ And who was this uncle? where did be live? how
came they acquainted!" She wished very much to
have the Iubject continued, though she did not chute

126 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

to ‘oin in it hereelf; but nothing more of it wan mid,
and, for the lirtt time in her life, the thought Mn
Jennings deﬁcient either in curioaity, after petty infor-
mation, or in a dlivslpotition to communicate it. The
manner in which in Steele had tpoken of Edward
increased her curiotity; for it ttruck hemu being rather
ill-natured, and suggested the Iuapicion of that lady’-
ltnowing, or fanc 'ng herself to know, something to hit
disadvantage. ut her curiosity was unavailing, for no
farther notice was taken of Mr Ferraru’t name by Mia:
Steele when alluded to or even openly mentioned by
Sir John.

¢bllmt ﬁll

ARIANNE, who had never much tolention for
anything like impertinence, vulgarit , inferiorit
of partl, or even difference of talte mm henel ,
was at this time particularly ill-disposed, from the state
of her npil'ita, to be pleased with the Mist Steelee, or to _
encourage their advanceu; and to the invariable cold-
ness of her behaviour towarde them, which checked
eve endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor prin-
cipa ly attributed that preference of herself which Ioon
became evident in the manncrl of both, but elpecially
of Lucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in
conversation, or of striving to improve their acquaintance
by an easy and frank communication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often
just and amnain ; and an a companion for half an hour
Elinor frequent y found her agreeable; but her power:
had received no aid from education, she wan ignorant
and illiterate, and her deﬁciency of all mental improve-
ment, her want of information in the most common

 

 

SENSE AND SENSIBI LITY. I 27

particulars, could not be concealed from Miss Duh—
wood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to
advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied her for the neglect
of abilities which education might have rendered so
respectable; but she saw, with less tenderness of feel-
ing, the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitudc, and
integrity of mind, which her attentions, her assiduities,
her ﬂatteries at the Park betrayed; and she could have
no lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who
joined insincerity with ignorance, whose want of instruc-
tion revented their meeting in conversation on terms of
equa ity, and whose conduct towards others made every
show of attention and deference towards herself perfectly
valueless.

“You will think my question an odd one, I dare
say," said Lucy to her one day as they were walking
together ﬁ'om the Park to the cottage—“ but, pray, are
you peroonally acquainted with your sister-in-law's
mother, Mrs F errars ? ”

Elinor (ﬁll think the question a very odd one, and her
countenance expressed it, as she answered that she had
never seen Mrs F errors.

“Indeedl” repliul Lucy; “I wonder at that, for
Ithought you must have seen her at Norland some-
times. Then, perhaps you cannot tell me what sort of
a woman she is ? ”

“ No," returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real

opinion of Edward’s mother, and not very desirous of
satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity—"I know
nothing of her.”
' “I am sure you think me very strange, for inquiring
about her in such a way,” said Lucy, eyeing Elinor
attentively as she spoke; “'but perhaps there may be
reasons—l wish I might venture; but however I hope
you will do me the justice of believing that I do not
mean to be impeninent."

l 28 SENSE AND SBNSIBI LITY.

Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on
for a few minutes in Iilence. It wan broken by Lucy,
who renewed the subject again by ying with conic
hesitation—

"I cannot hear to have» you think me impertinently
curioue; I am oure I would rather do anything in
the world than be thought It) by a person whoselgood
opinion is so well worth having an oun. And am
sure I should not have the smallest Ear of muting
you ,- indeed I should be ve glad of your advice how
to manage in such an uncom omble rituation an I am;
but however there is no occasion to trouble you. I am
sorry you do not happen to know Mrs Femrs."

“ I am sorry I do not,” said Elinor in great astonieh-
ment, “if it could be of any use to you to know my
opinion of her. But really, I never understood that
you were at all connected with that Family, and there-
fore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an
inquiry into her character.”

"I dare say on are, and I am sun: I do not at all
wonder atit. u! if I dared tell you all, you would
not be so much surprised. Mn Fen-an in certainly
nothing to me at present—but the time may come—
how soon it will come must depend upon hemlf—when
we may be very intimately connected."

She looked down as she said this, amiany bashful,
with only one side-glance at her companion to observe
its effect on her.

“ Good heavens! " cried Elinor, “ what do you
mean? Are you acquainted with Mr Robert Fen-an?
Can you be i” And she did not feel much delighted
with the idea of such a sister-in-law.

“ No," replied Lucy, “ not to Mr Robert Ferraro—-
I never saw him in my life; but,” ﬁxing her eye: upon
Elinor, “ to his elder brother."

What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment,

SENSE AND SENS'IBI Ll“. I 29

that would have been as 'nful as it was strong, had
not on immediate disbelie of the assertion attended it.
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable
to divine the reason or object of such a declaration;
and though her complexion varied, she stood ﬁrm in
ineredulity, and felt in no danger of an hysterical ﬁt
or a swoon.

“ You may well be surprised,” continued Lucy;
“for, to be sure, you could have had no idea of it
before; for I dare say he never dropped the smallest
hint of it to you or any of your family ; because it was
always meant to be a great secret, and 1 am sure has
been faithfully kept so by me to this hour. Not a soul
of all my relations know of it but Anne, and I never
should have mentioned it to you, if I had not felt the
greatest dependence in the world upon your secresy;
and I real y thou ht my behaviour in asking so many
questions about Nfrs F errars must seem so odd that it
ought to be explained. And I do not think Mr F errars
can be displeased when he knows I have trusted you,
because I know he has the highest opinion in the world
of all your family, and looks upon yourself and the
other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own sisters."-—She
paused.

Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Her
astonishment at what she heard was at ﬁrst too great
for words; but at length forcing herself to speak, and
to speak cautiously, she said with a calmness of manner
which tolerany well concealed her surprise and solici-
tude—“May I ask if your engagement is of long
standing?”

“ We have been engaged these four years.”

“ Four years ! ”

u Ya}:

Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to
believe it.

130 SENSE AND SENSIDILITY.

"I did not know," aid she, “that you were even
acquainted till the other day."

" Our acquaintance, however, is of many yea'rs’ date.
He was under my uncle’s care, you know, a considerable
while.”

“ Your uncle! "

" Yes ; Mr Pratt. Did you never hear him talk of
Mr Pratt ? ”

"I think I have," re lied Elinor, with an exertion
of" spirits which incre with her increase of emotion.

“ He was four years with my uncle, who lives It
Longsraple, near Plymouth. It was there our acquaint-
ance begun, for m sister and me was often staying
with my uncle, an it was there our engagement was
formed, though not till a year after he had quitted as a
pupil; but he was almost always with us afterwards.

was ve unwilling to outer into it, as you may
imagine, Without the knowledge and approbation of his
mother; but I was too young and loved him too well
to be so prudent as I ought to have [rem—Though
you do not know him so well as me, Miss Dashwood,
you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he
is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached
to him.”

“ Certainly," answered Elinor, without knowing what
she said; but after a moment's reﬂeCtion, she added
with revived security of Edward’s honour and love, and
her cnmpanion’s ﬁrlsehood—“ Engaged to Mr Edward
Ferrars !—I confess myself so totally surprised at what
you tell me, that really—I beg our pardon; but surely
there must be some mistake ofy person or name. We
cannot mean the same Mr Ferrars.”

“We can mean no other,” cried Luc , smiling.
“Mr Edward Ferrari, the eldest son of rs Ferraro
of Park-street, and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs
John Dashwood, is the person I mean; you must allow

Sulsl AND SENSIBILITY. 131

thatIamnotlikel tobe deceived as to the name of
the man on who ali my happiness depends.”

“ It is strange,” replied Elinor, in a most painful
perplexity, “that I should never have heard him even
mention your name."

“ No; considering our situation, it was not strange.
Our first care has been to keep the matter secreL—
You knew nothing of me or my family, and therefore
there could be no aeration for ever mentioning my name
to you; and as he was always particularly afraid of his
sister’s inspecting anything, Ibo! was reason enough for
his not mentioning it."

She was silent.—Elinor’s security sunk; but her
self-command did not sink with it.

“ F our years you have been engaged," said she with
a ﬁrm voice.

" Yes; and Heaven knows how much longer we may
have to wait. Poor Edward! it puts him quite out of
heart.” Then taking a small miniature from her pocket,
she added, “To prevent the posaihility of mistake, he so
good as to look at this face. It does not do him
justice, to he sure, but yet I think you cannot be de-
ceived as to the person it was drew for. I have had
it above these three years.”

She put it into her hands as she spoke, and when
Elinor saw the aiming, whatever other doubts her fear
of a too hasty ecision or her wish of detectin false-
hood might suffer to linger in her mind, she cou d have
none of its being Edward’s face. She returned it
almost instantly, acknowledgin the likeness.

“I have never been able, ' continued Lucy, “to
give him my picture in return, which I am very
much vexed at, for he has been always so anxious to
get it! But I am determined to sit for it the very

rst yportunity.”

“ ou are quite in the right,” replied Elinor calmly.

I32 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

They then proceeded a few paces in silence. Lucy
spoke ﬁrst. -

“ I am sure,” said she, “I have no doubt in the
world of your faithﬁrlly keeping this secret, became
you must know of what importance it is to us not to
have it reach his mother; for she would never ap rove
of it, I dare say. I shall have no fortune, and I ancy
she is an exceeding proud woman."

“I certainly did not seek your conﬁdence,” said
Elinor 3 “ but you do me no more than justice in
imagining that I may be depended on. Your secret is
safe with me; but pardon me if I express come sur-
prise at so unnecessary a communication. You must
at least have felt that my being acquainted with it could
not add to its safety."

As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hop-
ing to discover something in her countenancc,—perha
the falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been
saying; but Lucy's countenance suﬂEred no change.

“ I was afraid you would think I was taking a great
liberty with you,” said she, “in telling you all this. I
have not known you long to be sure, rsonally at least,
but I have known you and all your amin by descrip-
tion a great while; and as soon as I saw ou,I felt
almost as if you was an old acquaintance. 'des, in
the present case, I really thought some explanation was
due to you after my making such particular inquiries about
Edward's mother; and I am so unfortunate that I have
not a creature whose advice I can ask. Anne is the
only person that knows of it, and she has no judgment
at all ; indeed, she does me a great deal more harm than
good, for I am in constant fear of her betraying me.
She doc: not know how to hold her tongue, as you must
perceive; and I am sure I was in the greateut {right in
the world t’ other day, when Edward’s name was men-
tioned by Sir John, lust she should out with it all. You

SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTV. 133

can’t think how much I go through in my mind from
it altogether. I only wonder that I am alive after
what I have suﬂ'ered for Edward’s sake these last four
years. Everything in such suspense and uncertainty,
and seeing him so seldom—we can hardly meet above
twice a-year. I am sure I wonder my heart is not
quite broke."

Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did
not feel very compassionate.

“ Sometimes,” continued Lucy, after wiping her
eyes, “ I think whether it would not better for us both,
to break 03' the matter entirely.” As she said this,
she looked directly at her companion. “ But then, at
other times, I have not resolution enough for it. Ican-
not bear the thoughts of making him so miserable, as
I know the very mention of such a thing would do.
And on my own account too—so dear as he is to me
—I don't thinkI could be equal to it. What would
{gu advise me to do in such a case, Miss Dashwood?

hat would you do ourself? ”

“Pardon me,” replied Elinor, startled by the ques-
tion ; " but I can give you no advice under such cir-
cumstances. Your own judgment must direct you.”

“ To be sure,” continued Lucy, after a few minutes’
silence on both aides, “ his mother must rovide for him
some time or other; but poor Edward In so cast down
about it! Did not you think him dreadful low-spirited
when he was at Barton? he was so miserable when he
left us at Longstable, to go to you, that I was afraid you
would think him quite ill.”

“Did he come from your uncle’s then when he visited
us ? ”

“ Oh yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us.
Did you think he came directly from town i"

“No,” lied Elinor, moat feelineg sensible of
every fresh Circumstance in favour of Lucy’s veracity.

134 SENSE AND SENSIIIILITV.

“I remember he told us that he had been staying
a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth.” She
remembered, too, her own surprise at the time, at his
mentioning nothing further of those friends, at his total
silence with respect even to their names.

“ Did not you think him sadly out of spirits?" re-
peated Lucy.

“We did indeed, particularly to when he first
arrived.”

“ I begged him to exert himself for fear you should
su t what was the matter; but it made him so
mmclioly, not being able to stay more than a fort-
night with us, and seeing me so much affected—Poor
fellow l—I am afraid it is just the same with him now;
for he writes in wretched s irits. I heard from him
just before I left Exeter; ’ taking a letter from her
pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor.
“ You know his hand, I dare say, a charming one it is;
but that is not written so well II usual. He was tired,
I dare say, for he had just ﬁlled the sheet to me as full
as possible."

Elinor saw that it was his hand, and the could doubt
no longer. The picture, she had allowed herself to
believe, might have been accidentally obtained ; it might
not have been Edward‘s gift; but a correspondence
between them by letter could subsist only under a
positive engagement, could be authorised by nothing
else; for a few moments she was almost OVercome—
her heart sunk within her, and she could hardly stand;
but exertion was indispensany necessary, and she
struggled so resoluter against the oppression of her
feelings that her success was speedy, and for the time
complete.

“ Writing to each other,” said Lucy, returning the
letter into her pocket, “is the only comfort we have in
such long separations. Yes, I have one other comfort

V SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTV. 135

in his icture; but poor Edward has not even 11ml. If
he halibut my picture, he says he should be easy. I
gave him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was
at Longstaple last, and that was some comfort to him,
he said, but not equal to a picture. Perhaps you might
notice the ring when ou saw him ? ”

"I did,” said Elinor, with a com re of voice
under which was concealed an emotion and distress
beyond anything she had ever felt before. She was
mortiﬁed, shocked, confounded.

F ortnnately for her they had now reached the cottage,
and the conversation could be continued no further.
After sitting with them a few minutes, the Miss Steele:
returned to the Park, and Elinor was then at liberty to
think and be wretched.

Charm #313.

OWEVER small Elinor’s general dependence on

H Lucy’s veracity might be, it was impossible for
her on serious reﬂection to suspect it in the pre-

sent case, where no temptation could be answerable to
the folly of inventing a alsehood of such a description.
What Lucy had asserted to be true, therefore, Elinor
could not, dared not longer doubt; supported as it was
too on every side by such probabilities and proofs, and
contradicted by nothing but her own wishes. Their
opportunity of ac unintance in the house of Mr Pratt
was a foundation or the rest, at once indisputable and
alarming ; and Edward’s visit near Plymouth, his
melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own
rospects, his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the

Intimate knowledge of the Miss Steeles as to Norland
and their family connexions, which had often surprised

l36 SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTY.

her, the picture, the letter, the ring, formed altogether
such a body of evidence in ovemme every fear of con-
demning him unfairly, and established a: a fact which
no partiality could set aside, his ill-treatment of henelf.
Her resentment of such behaviour, her indignaan at
having been its dupe, for a short time made her fed
only for herself; but other ideas. other considerations,
soon arose. Had Edward been intentionally deceiving
her? Had he feigned a regard for her which he did
not feel? Was his engagement to Lucy an engage-
ment of the heart? No; whatever it might once have
been, she could not believe it such at preacnt. His
slfection was all her own. She could not be deceived
in that. Her mother, sisters, Fanny, all had been con-
scious of hi] regard for her at Norland; it was not an
illusion of her own vanity. He certainly loved her.
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion! How
much could it not tempt her to forgive! He had been
blameable, highly blameable in remaining at Norland
after he ﬁrst felt her inﬂuence over him to be more than
it ought to be. In that, he could not be defended ; but
if he had injured her, how much more had he injured
himself! If her case were pitiable, his was hopelen.
His imprudence had made her miserable for a while;
but it seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of
ever being otherwise. She might in time regain tran-
guility; but In, what had he to look forward to?

cold he ever be tolerany happy with Lucy Steele?
could he, were his affection for herself out of the ques-
tion, with his integrity, his delicacy, and well-informed
mind, be satisﬁed with a wife like her—illiterate, artful,
and selﬁsh ?

The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally
blind him to everything but her beauty and good
nature ; but the four succeeding years—years which, if
rationally spent, give such improvement to the under-

SKNSI’. AND SENSHIIIJTY. [37

standing, must have opened his eyes to her defects of
education: while the same period of time, spent on her
side in inferior society and more frivolous pursuits, had
perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which might
one have given an interesting character to her beauty.

If, in the su position of his seeking to marry herself,
his difficulties from his mother had seemed great, how
much greater were they now likely to be, when the
object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in
connexions, and probably inferior in fortune to herself!
These difﬁculties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from
Lucy, might not ress very hard upon his patience ; but
melancholy was the state of the person by whom the
expectation of family opposition and unkindness could
be felt as a relief I

As these considerations occurred to her in painful
succession, she wept for him more than for herself.
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing to
merit her present unha piness, and consoled by the
belief that Edward h done nothing to forfeit her
esteem, she thought she could even now, under the ﬁrst
smart of the heavy blow, command herself enough to
guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother and
sisters. And so well was she able [0 answer her own
expectations, that when she joined them at dinner only
two hours after she had ﬁrst suﬂ'ered the extinction of
all her dearest hopes, no one would have suppow from
the appearance of the sisters, that Elinor was mourning
in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever
from the object of her love, and that Marianne was
internally dwelling on the perfections of a man of
whose whole heart she felt thoroughly possessed, and
whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house.

The necessity of concealing from her mother and
Marianne what had been entrusted in conﬁdence to her-

[38 SENSE AND SENSIHIIJ'I'Y.

self, though it obli ed her to unceasing exertion, was no
aggravation of Elmor’s distress. On the contrary, it
was a relief to her to be spared the communication of
what would give such alliiction to them, and to be saved
likewise from hearing that condemnation of Edward
which would probably ﬂow from the excess of their
partial affection for herself, and which was more than
she felt equal (0 support.

From their counsel or their conversation she knew
she could receive no assistance ; their tendemesl and _
sorrow must add to her distress, while her self-command
would neither receive encouragement from their example
nor from their praise. She was stronger alone, and her
own good sense so well supported her, that her ﬁrmness
was as unshaken, her appearance of cheerfulness as in-
variable, as, with regrets so poignant and so fresh, it was
possible for them to be.

Much as she had suffered from her ﬁrst conversation
with Lucy on the subject, the soon felt an earnest wish
of renewing it, and this for more reasons than one. She
wanted to hear many particulars of their engagement
repeated again, she wanted more clearly to understand
what Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were
any sincerity in her declaration of tender regard for him,
and she particularly wanted to convince Lucy, by her
readine to enter on the matter again, and her calmness
in conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interested
in it than as a friend, which she very much feared her
involuntary agitation, in their morning discourse, must
have left at least doubtful. That Lucy was disposed
to be jealous of her, appeared very probable; it was
plain that Edward had alwa a spoken highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy s assertion, but from her
venturing to trust her on so short a personal vauaint-
ance, with a secret so confessedly and evidently import-
ant. And even Sir John’s joking intelligence must

SENSE AND SENSlllHJTY. 139

have had some weight. But indeed, while Elinor
remained so well assured within herself of being really
beloved by Edward, it required no other consideration
of robabilities to make it natural that Lucy should be
jealbus; and that she was so, her very conﬁdence was
a roof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
lgir could there be, but that Elinor might be informed
by it of Lucy’s superior claims on Edward, and be
taught to avoid him in future? She had little difﬁculty
in understanding thus much of her rival’s intentions, and
while she was ﬁrmly resolved to act by her as every
principle of honour and honesty directed, to combat her
own affection for Edward and to see him as little as
possible; she could not deny herself the comfort of
endvoun'ng to convince Lucy that her hean. war
unwounded. And as she could now have nothing
more painful to hear on the subject than had already
been told, she did not mistrust her own ability of going
through a repetition of particulars with composure.

But it was not immediately that an opportunity of
doing so could be commanded, though Lucy was as
well difosed as herself to take advantage of any that
occurre ; for the weather was not often ﬁne enough to
allow of their joining in a walk, where they might most
easily separate themselves from the others; and though
they met at least every other evening either at the Park
or cottage, and chieﬂy at the former, they could not be
supposed to meet for the sake of conversation. Such a
thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady
Middleton’s head, and therefore very little leisure was
ever given for general chat, and none at all for par-
ticular discourse. They met for the sake of eating,
drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards or
consequences, or any other game that was sufﬁciently
nous .

Oyne or two meetings of this kind had taken place

I40 SENSE AND SENSIRHJTY.

without aﬂ‘ording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy
in private, when Sir John called at the cottage one
morning, to beg in the name of charity, that they would
all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was
obliged to attend the club at Exeter, and she would
othenvise be quite alone, except her mother and the
two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who foresaw a fairer opening
for the point she had in view, in such a party as this
was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under
the tranquil and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton
than when her husband united them together in one
noisy purpose, immediately accepted the invitation;
Margaret, with her mother’s permission, was equally
compliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to
join any of their parties, was persuaded by her mother,
who could not bear to have her seclude herself from
any chance of amusement, to go likewise.

The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton wal
happily preserved from the frightful solitude which had
threatened her. The ineipidity of the meeting was
exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not
one novelty of thought or expression, and nothing could
be less intemsting than the whole of their discourse both
in the dining parlour and drawing-room : to the latter,
the children accompanied them, and while they remained
there, she was too well convinced of the impossibility
of engaging Lucy’s attention to attempt it. They quitted
it only with the removal of the tea-things. The card-
table was then placed, and Elinor began to wonder at
herself for having ever entertained a hope of ﬁnding
time for conversation at the Park. They all rose up
in preparation for a round game.

“ I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy, “you
are not going to ﬁnish poor little Annamaria’s basket
this evening; for I am sure it mult hurt your eyes to
work ﬁllagree by candlelight. And we will make the

SENSE AND SEISIBILITY. I4!

dear little love some amends for her dinppointment to-
morrow, and then I hope she will not much mind it."

This hint was enough ; Lucy recollected herself
instantly and replied, “ Indeed, you are very much
mistaken, Lady Middleton ; I am only waiting to
know whether you can make our party without me, or
I should have been at my ﬁllagree already. I would
not disappoint the little angel for all the world; and if
you want me at the card-table now, 1 am resolved to
ﬁnish the basket after sup er.”

“ You are very good ; hope it won’t hurt your eyes
—will you ring the hell for some working candles?
My poor little girl would be sadly disappointed, I know,
if the basket was not ﬁnished to-morrow, for though I
told her it certainly would not, I am sure she depends
upon having it done.”

Lucy directly drew her workvtable near her, and
resented herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness which
seemed to infer that she could taste no greater delight
than in making a fillagree basket for a spoilt child.

Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of casino to the
others. No one made any objection but Marianne,
who, with her usual inattention to the forms of general
civility, exclaimed, “ Your ladyship will have the good—
ness to excuse nit—you know I detest cards. I shall
go to the pianoforte ; I have not touched it since it was
tuned." And without farther ceremony, she turned
away and walked to the instrumenL

Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven
that :12: had never made so rude a h.

“ Marianne can never keep long mum instrument,
you know, ma’am," said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth
away the offence; “ and I do not much wonder at it,
for it is the very best-toned pianoforte I ever heard."

The remaining ﬁve were now to drawtheir cards.

“ Perhaps," continued Elinor, “if I should happen

I42 SENSE AND SINSlBlLlTY.

tocutouglnuybeofsome usetoMiuany Steele,
in rolling her papers for her; and there is so much nil]
to be done to the basket, that it must be impossible, I
think, for her labour singly, to ﬁnish it this evening. I
should like the work exceedingly, if she would allow
me a share in it.”

“ Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for
your help," cried Lucy, “for I ﬁnd there is more to
be done to it than I thought there was; and it would
be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after
all." .
“ Oh ! that would be terrible indeed," said Miss
Steele. “ Dear little soul, how I do love her! ”

“ You are very kind," said Lady Middleton to
Elinor; “ and as you really like the work, perhaps you
will be as well pleased not to cut in till another rubber,
or will you take your chance now ?”

Elinor joyfully proﬁted by the lint of these roposals,
and thus, by a little of that address which rianne
could never condescend to practise, gained her own
end and pleased Lady Middleton at the same time.
Lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the
two {air rivals were thus seated side by side at the nine
table, and with the utmost harmony engaged in forward-
ing the same work. The pianoforte, at which Marianne,
wrapt up in her own music and her own thoughts, had
by this time forgotten that anybody was in the room
besides herself, was luckin so near them that Miss
Daahwood now judged she might safely, under the
shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting subject,
without any risk of being heard at the card-table.

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y. I43

Cblvm 55117.

N a ﬁrm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began——
“ I should be undeserving of the conﬁdence you
have honoured me with, if I felt no desire for its
continuance, or no farther curiosity on its subject. I
will not apologise therefore for bringing it forward
again."

“ Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, “for breaking
the ice; you have set my heart at ease by it; for I was
somehow or other afraid I had offended you by what I
told you that Monday.”

“Oﬂ'ended me! How could you suppose so? Be-
lieve me,” and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity,
“ nothing could be farther from my intention than to
give you such an idea. Could you have a motive for
the trust that was not honourable and ﬂattering to
me ? ”

“And yet I do assure you,” replied Lucy, her little
sha eyes full of meaning, “there seemed to me to be
a co dness and displeasure in your manner that made me
quite uncomfortable. I felt sure that you was angry
with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever
since, for having took such a liberty as to trouble you
with my affairs. But I am very glad to find it was only
m‘y own fancy, and that you do not really blame me.
I you knew what a consolation it was no me to relieve
my heart by speaking to you of what I am always think-
ing of every moment of my life, your compassion would
make you overlook everything else, I am sure.’ ’

“Indeed I can easily believe that it was a very great
relief to you to acknowledge your situation to me, and
be assured that you shall newr have reason to repent it.
Your case is a very unfortunate one; you seem to me
to be surrounded with difﬁculties, and you will have

144 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

need of all your mutual affection to support you under
them. Mr Femrs, I believe, is entirely dependent on
his mother.”

“ He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it
would be madness to marry upon that, though for my
own part I could give up every prospect of more without
a sigh. I have been always used to a very small income,
and could struggle with any verty for him; but I love
him too well to be the sel sh means of robbing him,
perhaps, of all that his mother might give him if he
married to please her. We must wait, it may be for
many years. With almost every other man in the
world, it would be an alarming prospect; but Edward’s
aﬂ'ection and constancy nothing can deprive me of, I
know.”

“ That conviction must be everything to you ; and he
is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in yours.
If the strenth of your reciprocal attachment had failed,
as between man people and under many circumstances
it naturally would during a four yurs' engagement, your
situation would have been pitiable indeed.”

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careﬁil in
guarding her countenance from every expression that
could give her words a suspicious tendency.

“ Edward’s love for me,” said Lucy, “ has been
pretty well put to the test, by our long, very long ab-
sence since we were ﬁrst engaged, and it has stood the
uial so well that I should be unpardonable to doubt it
now. I can safely say that he has never gave me one
moment’s alarm on that account from the ﬁrst.”

Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this
assertion.

Lucy went on. “I am rather of a jealous tern r,
too, by nature, and from our diﬂ'erent situations in ife,
from his being so much more in the world than me, and
our continual separation, I was enough inclined for sus-

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. l 45

picion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there
had been the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me
when we met, or any lowness of spirits that I could not
account for, or if he had talked more of one lad than
another, or seemed in any respect less happy at ong-
staple than he used to be. I do not mean to say that I
am particularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but
in such a case I am sure I could not be deceived.”

“ All this,” thought Elinor, “ll very pretty; but it
can impose upon neither of m."

“ But what," said she, after a short silence, “are

our views? or have you none but that of waiting for
{In F errars’ death, which is a melancholy and shocking
extremit l II her son determined to submit to this,
and to a l the tediousness of the many years of mspense
in which it may involve you. rather than run the nsk of
her displeasure for a while by owning the truth ?”

“ If we could be certain that it would be only for a
while! But Mrs Ferrars is a very headstrong, proud
woman, and in her first ﬁt of anger upon hearing it,
would very likely secure everything to Robert; and
the idea of that, for Edward’s sake, frightens away all
my inclination for hasty measures.” .

“ And for your own sake too, or you are carrying

ur disinterestedness beyond reason.”

Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.

“ Do you know Mr Robert Ferrars ? ” asked Elinor.

“Not at all—I never saw him; but I fancy he is
very unlike his brother—silly and a great coxcomb.”

" A great coxcombl ” repeated Miu Steele, whose
ear had caught those words by a sudden pause in
Marianne’s music—“ Oh! they are talking of their
favourite beaux, I dare say.”

“ No, sister,” cried Lucy, “ you are mimken there,
our favourite beaux are no! great coxcom "

“ I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood’l is not,”
h K

I46 SENSE AND SENSINIJTV.

said Mrs Jenningl, laughing hardly; “ fbr he is one of
the modeneot, prettiest-behaved young men I ever law.
But as for Lucy, she is such a cly little creature, there
ll no ﬁnding out who :15: likeu."

“ Oh! " cried Miu Steele, looking signiﬁcantly
round at them, “I dare say Lucy’s bean is quite is
modest and pretty-behaved at Miu Dalhwood’a."

Elinor blushed in Ipile of herself. Lucy hit her lip,
and looked angrily at her sister. A mutual silence
took place for some time. Lucy ﬁrst ut an end to it
by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne was then
giving them the powerful protection of a very magniﬁ—
cent concerto—

“I will honestly tell on of one scheme which has
lately come into my head" for bringing matters to bar;
indeed, I am bound to let you into the secret, for you
are a party concerned. I dare ray you have seen enough
of Edward to know that he would refer the church to
every other profealion. Now, my pliin in that he should
take orders as coon a: he can, and then through your
interest, which I am sure you would be kind enough to
use out of friendship for him, and, I hope, out of tome
regard to me, your brother might be penuaded to give
him Norland living ; which I understand in a very
good one, and the present incumbent not likely to live
a great while. That would be enough for us to marry
upon, and we might trust to time and chance for the
rest.’ ’

“I should be always happy," re lied Elinor, “to
show any mark of my enteem and riendd-iip for Mr
Ferrara; but do not on perceive that my interert on
such an occasion wou d be perfectly unnecessary? He in
brother to Mrs John Dashwood—lba: mm be recom-
mendation enough to her husband."

“ But Mn John Dashwood would not much approve
of Edward’s going into orders.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. I 4 7

“ Then I rather suspect that my interest would do
very little.”

They were again silent for many minutes. At
length Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh—

“ I believe it. would be the wisest way to put an end
to the business at once by dissolving the engagement.
We seem so beset with diﬂiculties on every side, that
though it would make us miserable for a time, we
should be happier perhaps in the end. But you will
not give me your advice, Miss Dashwood?”

“No,” answered Elinor, with a smile which con-
cealed ve agitated feelings, “on such a subject I cer-
tainl will, not. You know very well that my opinion
wou d have no weight with you, unless it were on the
side of your wishes.”

“Indeed, you wrong me," replied Lucy with great
solemnity; “ I know nobody of whose 'udgment I
think so highly as I do of yours; and l do really
believe, that if you was to say to me, ‘ I advise you by
all means to put an end to your engagement with
Edward Ferrars, it will be more for the happiness of
both of you,’ I should resolve upon doing It. imme-
diately.” ‘

Elinor bluslted for the insincerity of Edward’s future
wife, and re li , “ This compliment would effectually
frighten me From giving any opinion on the subject, had
I formed one. It. raises my inﬂuence much too high;
the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached
is too much for In indifferent person."

“ ’T is because you are an indiﬁ'erent person," said
Lucy, with some pique, and laying a particular stress
on those words, “ that your judgment might jun] have
such weight with me. If you could be an to be
biased in any respect by your own feelings, your opinion
would not be worth having."

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this,

I48 SENSE AND SlNSIBlLITV.

lest they might provoke each other to an unauitable
incmae of em and unraerve, and we: even partly
determined never to mention the abject again. An-
other paule, therefore, of many minutes' duration euc-
oeeded thil Ipeech, and Lucy wan dill the ﬁrst to end it.

“ Shall you be in town this winter. Mm Daahwood ? ”
taid she, with all her aecustomary complacency.

“Ceminly not."

“ I am sorry for that," returned the other, while her
eyet brightened at the information; " it would have
gave me such pleasure to meet you there! But I
dare say you will go for all that. To be sure, your
brother and sister will ask you to come to them."

“ It will not be in my power to accept their invitation
if they do.”

“ How unlucky that it! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there. Anne and me are to go the latter
end of January to some relations who have been wanting
us to visit them theee several an! But I only go
for the sake of seeing Edwa He will be there in
February; otherwise London would have no chamu for
me, I have not spirit: for it.”

Elinor wal soon called to the cardotablc b the con-
clusion of the ﬁrlt nibber, and the conﬁdentia dilcoune
of the two ladies was therefore at an end, to which both
of them submitted without any reluctance, for nothing
had been aid on either side to make them dillilte each
other less than they had done before; and Elinor let
down to the card-table with the melanchol pertuaoion
that Edward was not only without affection for the
per-on who was to be his wife, but that he had not even
the chance of being tolerany happy in marriage, which
sincere affection on in ride would have given, for self-
interelt alone could induce a woman to keep a man to
an engagement of which she seemed so thoroughly aware
that be via: weary.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 149

From this time the subject was never revived by
Elinor; and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom
missed an op rtunity of introducing it, and was par-
ticularly care ul to inform her conﬁdante of her ha pi-
ness whenever she received a letter from Ed , it
was treated by the former with calmness and caution,
and dismissed as soon as civility would allow; for she
felt such conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy
did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.

The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was
lengthened far beyond what the lint invitation implied.
Their favour increased, they could not be spared; Sir
John would not hear of their going; and In ite of
their numerous and long-arranged engagements in xeter,
in ite of the absolute necessity of their returning to
fulii them immediately, which was in full force at the
end of every week, they were prevailed on to stay
nearly two months at the Park, and to assist in the
due celebration of that festival which requires a more
than ordinary share of private balls and large dinners to
proclaim its importance.

chap": iiv.

HOUGH Mrs Jennings was in the habit of
spending a large portion of the year at the
houses of her chi dren and friends, she was

not without a settled habitation of her own. Since the
death of her husband, who had traded with success in a
less elegant part of the town, she had resided every
winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman-

uare. Towards this home, she began on the approach
0 January to turn her thoughts, and thither she one day
abmptly, and very unexpectedly by them, asked the

150 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

elder Mist Dashwoods to accompany her. Elinor,
without observing the varying complexion of her sitter,
and the animated look which spoke no indifference to
the plan, immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial
for both, in which she believed herself to be speaking
their united inclinations. The reason alledged, was their
determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that
time of year. Mrs Jennings received the refusal with
some sul wise, and repeated hcr invitation immediately.

“0 0rd! I am sure your mother can spare you
very well, and I do beg you will favour me with your
company, for I’ve quite set my heart upon it. Don't
fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I
shan’t put m self at all out of my way for you. It will
only be sending Betty by the coach, and I hope I can
afford (but. \Ve three shall be able to go very well in
my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do not like
to go wherever I do, well and good, you may always go
with one of my dau hters. I am sure your mother will
not object to it; or I have had such good luck in
getting my own children oﬂ" my hands, that she will
think me a very ﬁt person to have the charge of you:
and if I don’t get one of you at least well married
before I have done with you, it shall not be my fault.
I shall speak a good word for you to all die young
men, you may depend u n it."

“I have a notion,’ said Sir John, “ that Miss
Marianne would not object to such a scheme, if her elder
sister would come into it. It is very hard indeed that
she should not have a little pleasure, because Miss Dash-
wood does not wish it. So I would advise you two to
set off for town when you are tired of Barton, without
saying a word to Miss Dashwood about it."

“ Nay," cried Mrs Jennings, “I am sure I shall be
monstrous glad of Miss Marianne's company, whether
Miss thshwood will go or not, only the more the

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 15!

merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfort-
able for them to be together; because if they got tired
of me, they might talk to one another, and laugh at In
odd ways behind my back. But one or the other, If
not both of them, I must have. Lord bless mel how
do you think I can live poking by myself, I who have
been always used till this winter to have Charlotte with
me. Come, Miss Marianne, let us strike hands upon
the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change her
mind by-and-bye, why, so much the better.”

“ I thank you, ma’am, sincerely thank you," said
Marianne, with warmth; “ our invitation has insured
my gratitude for ever, and, it would give me such
ha pinesb—yes, almost the greatest happiness I am cap-
ab 0 of, to be able to accept it. But my mother, my
dearest, kindest mother,—I feel the justice of what
Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made less
happy, less comfortable by our absence—0h l no,
nothing should tempt me to leave her. It should not,
must not be a stmggle.”

Mrs Jennings repented her assurance that Mrs Dash-
wood could spare them perfectly well; and Elinor, who
now understand her sister, and saw to what indiﬁ'erencc
to almost everything else she was carried by her eager-
ness to be with Willoughby again, made no farther
direct opposition to the plan, and merely referred it to
her mother’s decision, from whom however she scarcely
expected to receive any support in her endeavour to re-
vent a visit which she can d not approve of for ri-
anne, and which on her own account she had particular
reasons to avoid. Whatever Marianne was desirous of
her mother would be eager to promote—she could not
expect to inﬂuence the latter to cuutiousness of conduct
in an alfair respecting which she had never been able to
inspire her with distrust: and she dared not explain the
motive of her own disinclination for going to ondon.

152 stars: AID SUSIE-MTV.

That Marianne. ﬁnidioua :- be was, thoroughly
acquainted with Mn .lmningl’a manual, and invariably
diegimed by them, ahould overlook every inconvenience
ofduthdeiIegardwhmvermhemou
wwndingtnherirritablefeelingyinherpuruitofooe
ohjecgwaaeudia f,oouong,aofull,oftltiln-
portanoeofthatolyectto ber,a-Elinor,inupite ofall
that had was nu prepared to witneu.

0n bung informed of the invitation, Mn Daahwood,
penuaded that ouch an excunion would be productive
of much arnuaernmt to both her daugth and perceiv-
ing through all her alfectionate attention to her-elf, how
much the hurt of Marianne was in it, would not hear
of their declining the oﬂer upon ba- aeoount; hailed
on their both accepting it directly, and then began to
foresee, with her umal cheerfulnen, a variety of advan-
taget that would accnte to them all from thir reparation.

“I am delighted with the Ian," the cried, “it in
exactly what I could with. argaret and I rhall be at
much beneﬁted by it as yourselves. When you and the
Middletonl are gone, we Ihall go on no quietly and happil
together with our hooh and our mutic! You
ﬁnd Margaret so improved when you come hack again |
And I have a little plan of alteration for your bedroom
too, which may now be performed without inconveni-
ence to any one. It ll very right. that you rboulrl go
to town ; I would have every young woman of your
condition in life acquainted with the manners and amuse-
ments of London. You will be under the care of a
motherly, good non of woman, of whoee kindness to you
I can have no doubt. And in all rohability you will
see your brother, and whatever may he hit faults, or the
faults of his wife, when I consider whose son he is, I
cannot bear to have you 50 wholly estranged from each
other."

“ Though, with your usual anxiety for our happinetn,"

sense um sensrnrurv. :53

said Elinor, “you have been obviating every impedi-
ment to the present scheme which occurred to you, there
is still one objection which, in my opinion, cannot be so
ean'l rernov ”

Nl’arianne’s countenance sunk.

“ And what," said Mrs Dashwood, “is my dear
prudent Elinor going to suggea? What fomtidablc
obstacle is she now to bring forward? Do not let me
hear a word about the expense of it.”

“ My objection is this: though I think very well of
Mrs Jennings’ heart, she is not a woman whose society
can afford us pleasure, or whose protection will give us
come uence.’

“ hat is very true," replied her mother; “ but of her
society, separately from that of other people, you will
scarcely have anything at all, and ou will almost always
appear in ublie with Lady Middfeton.”

“ If E inor is frightened away by her dislike of Mn
Jennings," hid Marianne, “at least it need not prevent
in} accepting her invitation. I have no such scruplel,
and I am sure I could ut up with every unpleasantness
of that kind with very ittle eifort."

Elinor could not help smiling at this display of in-
diiference towards the manners of a person to whom
she had often had dilﬁculty in persuading Marianne to
behave with tolerable politeness, and resolved within
herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would
go likewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianne
should be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment,
or that Mrs Jennin s should be abandoned to the mercy
of Marianne for al the comfort of her domestic hours.
To this determination she was the more easily reconciled,
by recollecting that Edward F errars, by Lucy’s account,
was not to be in town before February, and that their
visit, without any unreasonable abridgment, might be
previously ﬁnished.

154 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

“I will have you bulb go," said Mrs Dashwood;
“ these objections are nonsensical. You will have much
pleasure in being in London, and especially in being to-
gether; and if Elinor would ever condescend to antici-
pate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety
of sources; she would perhaps expect some from im-
proving her acquaintancu with her sister-in-law's family.”

Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of at-
tempting to weaken her mother’s dependence on the
attachment of Edward and herself, that the shock might
be the less when the whole truth were revealed, and
now on this attack, though almost hopeleu of success,
she forced herself to begin her design by saying, as
calmly as she could, “I like Edward Femn very
much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to
the rest of the family, it is a matter of perfect indilference
to me whether I am ever known to them or not.”

Mrs. Dashwood smiled and said nothing. Marianne
lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor con-
jectured that she might as well have held her tongue. '

After very little farther discourse, it was ﬁnally
settled that the invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs
Jennings received the information with a great deal of
joy, and many assurances of kindness and care; norwas
it a matter of pleasure merely to her. Sir John was
delighted; for to a man whose prevailing anxiety was
the dread of being alone, the acquisition of two to the
number of inhabitants in London was something. Even
Lady Middleton took the trouble of being delighted,
which was putting herself rather out of her way; and
as for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never
been so happy in their lives as this Intelligence made
them.

Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counter-
acted her wishes with less reluctance than she had
expected to feel. With regard to herself, it was now a

ssuss sun snusmu-nr. 155

matter of unconcem whether she went to town or not;
and when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased
with the Klan, and her sister exhilarated by it in look,
voice, an manner, restored to all her usual animation,
and elevated to more than her usual gaiety, she could not
be dissatisﬁed with the cause, and would hardly allow
herself to distrust the consequence.

Marianne’s joy was almost a degree beyond happiness,
so great was the perturbation of her spirits and her im-
patience to be gone. Her unwillingness to quit her
mother was her only restorative to calmness; and at the
moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.
Her mother’s afﬂiction was hardly less, and Elinor was
the only one of the three who seemed to consider the
separation as anything short of eternal.

Their departure took place in the ﬁrst week in
January. 'lhe Middletons were to follow in about a
week. The Miss Steeles kept their station at the Park,
and were to quit it only with the rest ofdie family.

chests: saw].

LINOR could not ﬁnd herself in the carriage with
Mrs Jennings, and beginning a joumeyto London
under her protection, and as her guest, without

wondering at her own situation, so short had their
acquaintance with that lad been, so wholly unsuited
were they in age and disposition, and so many had been
her objections against such a measure only a few days
before! But these ob'ections had all, with that ha y
ardour of youth which ariannc and her mother cqulilly
shared, been overcome or overlooked; and Elinor, in
spite of every occasional doubt of Willoughby’s con-
stancy, could not witness the rapture of delightful ex-

156 SENSE AN‘D SINSIBILITY.

pectation which ﬁlled the whole soul and beamed in the
eyes of Marianne, without feeling how blank was her
own prospect, how cheerless her own state of mind in
the comparison, and how gladly she would engage in
the solicitude of Marianne’s situation to have the same
animating object in view, the same possibility of hope.
A short, a very short time, however, must now decide
what Willoughby’s intentions were: in all probability
he was already in town. Marianne’s eagemeu to be
gone declared her dependanoe on ﬁnding him there;
and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every
. new light as to his character which her own observation
or the intelligence of others could give her, but likewise
upon watching his behaviour to her sister with such
zealous attention, as to ascertain what he was, and what
he meant, before many meetings had taken place.
Should the result of her observations be unfavourable,
she was determined at all events to open the eyes of her
sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions would be
of a different. nature—she must then learn to avoid every
selﬁsh comparison, and banish every regret which might
lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne.
They were three days on their journey, and Mari-
anne’s behaviour as they travelled was a happy specimen
of what her future coniplaisance and comlnmonableness
to Mrs Jennings might be expected to be. She tat in
silence almost all the way, wrapt in her own medita-
tions, and scarcely ever voluntarily speaking, except
when any object of picturesque beauty within their view
drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively
addressed to her sister. To atone for this conduct,
therefore, Elinor took immediate possession of the
of civility which she had assigned herself, behaved with
the greatest attention to Mrs Jennings, talked with her,
laughed with her, and listened to her whenever she
could; and Mrs Jennings on her side treated them both

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. [57

with all possible kindness, was solicitous on every occa-
sion for their ease and enjoyment, and only disturbed
that she could not make them choose their own dinners
at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring
salmon to cod, or boiled {owls to veal cutlets. They
reached town by three o’clock the third day, glad to be
released, after such a journey, from the conﬁnement of
F carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good
ire.

The house was handsome and handsomely fitted up,
and the young ladies were immediately put in possession
of a very comfortable apartment. It. had formerly been
Charlotte’s, and over the mantelpiece still hung a land-
scape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof of
her having spent. seven years at a great school in town
to some effect.

As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours
from their arrival, Elinor determined to employ the
interval in writing to her mother, and sat down for that
purpose. In a few moments Marianne did the same.
“I am writing home, Marianne,” said Elinor; “had
not you better defer your letter {or a day or two ? "

“I am not going to write to my mother," replied
Marianne hastily, and as if wishing to avoid an farther
inquiry. Elinor said no more; it immediately struck
her that she must then be writing to Willoughby, and
the conclusion which as instantly followed was, that
however mysteriously they might wish to conduct the
aﬂitir, th must be engaged. This conviction, though
not entire y satisfactory, gave her pleasure, and she con-
tinued her letter with greater alacrity. Marianne's was
ﬁnished in a very few minutes; in length it could be no
more than a note: it was then folded up, sealed and
directed with eager ra idity. Elinor thought she could
distinguish a large “y in the direction, and no sooner
was it complete than Marianne, ringing the bell, re-

r 58 ssuss AND SENSIBILI’L'Y.

quested the footmsn who answered it, to get that letter
conveyed for her to the two-penny post. This decided
the matter at once.

Her spirits still continued very high, but there was a
ﬂutter in them which prevented their giving much
pleasure to her sister, and this agitation increased as the
evening drew on. She could scarcely eat any dinner,
and when they afterwards returned to the drawing-
room, seemed anxiously listening to the sound of every
carnage.

It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mn
Jennings, by being much engaged in her own room,
could see little of what was passing. The tea things
were brought in, and already had Marianne been dis-
appointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring
door, when a loud one was sudden y heard which could
not be mistaken for one at an other house. Elinor
felt secure of its announcing illoughby’s approach,
and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door.
Everything was silent; this could not be borne many
seconds, she opened the door, advanced a few steps
towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute,
returned into the room in all the agitation which a con-
viction of having heard him would naturally produce;
in the extasy of her feelings at that instant she could
not help exclaiming, u0 Elinor, it is Willoughby,
indeed it is! " and seemed almost ready to throw her-
self into his arms, when Colonel Brandon a red.

It. was too great a shock to be home With calmness,
and she immediately left the room. Elinor was dis-
appointed too; but at the same time her regard for
Colonel Brandon insured his welcome with her, and she
felt particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister
should perceive that she experienced nothing but grief
and disappointment in seeing him. She inlandy w
that it was not unnoticed by him, that he even observed

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. [59

Marianne as she quitted the room, with such astonish-
ment and concern, as hardly left him the recollection of
what civility demanded towards herself.

“Is your sister ill?” said he.

Elinor answered in some distress that she was, and
then talked of head-aches, lowapirits, and over-farigues;
and of everything to which she could decently attribute
her sister’s behaviour. Y

He heard her with the most earnest attention, but
seeming to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,
and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them
in London, making the usual inquiries about their journey
and the friends they had left behind.

In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on
either side, they continued to talk, both of them out of
s irits, and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere.

linor wished very much to ask whether Willoughby
were then in town, but she was afraid of giving him pain
by any inquiry after his rival ; and at length by way of
saying something, she asked if he had been in London
ever since she had seen him last. “ Yes,” he replied
with some embarrassment, “ almost ever since; Ihave
been once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has
never been in my power to return to Barton.”

This, and the manner in which it was said, im-
mediately brought back to her remembrance all the
circumstances of his quitting that place, with the uneasi-
ness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings,
and she was fearful that her question had implied much
more curiosity on the subject than she had ever felt.

Mrs Jennings soon came in. “C Colonel! " said
she, with her usual noisy cheerfulneas, “ I am monstrous
glad to see you—sorry I could not come before—beg
youwrdon, but I have been forced to look about me
a li e, and settle my matters; for it is a long while
since I have been at home, andvyou know one has always

160 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

a world of little 'odd things to do after one has been
away for any time t and then I have had Cartwright to
settle with. Lord, I have been as buy an a bee ever
since dinner! But pra , Colonel, how came you to
conjure out that I ahoul be in town to-day 2”

“I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer},
where I have been dining."

“Oh! you did; well, and how do they all do at
their house? How doea Charlotte do? I wanant you
she is a ﬁne size by this time.”

“ Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am com-
missioned to tell you that you will certainly see her to-
marrow.”

“ Ay, to be sure, I thoughtu much. Well, Colonel,
I have brought two young ladies with me, you see—that
is, you see but one of them now, but there ia another
somewhere. Your friend Miss Marianne, too—which
you will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what you
and Mr. Willoughby will do between you about her.
Ay, it is a line thing to beyoung and handsome. Well!
I was young once, but I never was very hand-ome—
wone luck for me. However, I got a very good
husband, and I don’t know what the greatest beautycan

'do more. Ah! poor man! he hasbeen dead theae
eight years and better. But, Colonel, where have you
been to since we parted? And how doea your business go
on 2 Come, come, let’l have no aecreu among friends.”

He replied with his accustomary mildnea to all her
inquiriel, but without Illilfying her in any. Elinor now
began to make the tea, and Marianne was obliged to
appear again.

After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more
thoughtful and silent than he had been before, and Mrs.
Jennings could not prevail on him to my long. No
other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladiea were
unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed,

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 16!

Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits
and happy looks. The disappointment of the evening
before seemed forgotten in the expectation of what was
to hap n that day. They had not long linirhed their
h before Mr: Palmer's hamuche stopped at the
door, and in a few minutes she came laughing into the
room ; so delighted to see them all, that it wan hard to
say whether she received most pleasure from meeting her
mother or the Miss Dashwooda again. So surprised at
their coming to town, though it was what she had rather
expected all along; no angry at their accepting her
mother’s invitation after having declined her own, though
at the same time the would never have forgiven them if
they had not come !

“ Mr Palmer will be so ha my to see you,” laid Ill! ;
“ what do you think he uni when he heard of your
coming with mamma? I forget what it was now, but
it wan something so dmll ! ”

After an hour or two spent in what her mother called
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variet of
inquiry conceming all their acquaintance on re
Jennings’a ride, and in laughter without cnuae on Mn
Palmer's, it was proposed by the latter that they ahould _
all accnm y her to some ahops where she had hueineaa»
that momrng, to which Mn Jennings and Elinor readin
consented, an havin likewise some purchase! to make
themselvea; and rianne, though declining it at ﬁrst,
was induced to go likewise.

Wherever they went, she wan evidently always on the
watch. In Bond-street especially, where much of their
business lay, her eye: were in constant inquiry; and in
whatever lllop the party were engaged, her mind was
equally abstracted from everything actually before them,
from all that intereeted and occupied the othen. Rect-
lesu and dissatisﬁed everywhere, her sister could never
obtain her opinion of any article of purchase, however it

I. L

r 6: sense AND SENSIBXLITY.

might equally concern them both ; she received no plea-
sure from anything; was only impatient to he at home
again, and could with difﬁculty govern her vexation at
the tediousness of Mrs Palmer, whose eye was caught
by everything pretty, expensive, or new ; who was wild
to buy all, could determine on none, and dnwdled away
her time in rapture and indecision.

It was late in the morning before they retumed home;
and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne
ﬂew eagerly upstairs, and when Elinor followed, she
found her turning from the table with a sorrowful
countenance, which declared that no Willoughby had
been there.

“ Has no letter been left here for me since we went
out ? ” said she to the footman who then entered with
the parcels. She was answered in the negative. “Are
you quite sure of it i " she lied. “Are you certain
that no servant, no porter has eft any letter or note ?"

The man replied that none had.

“ How very odd,” mid she in a low and dippointed
voice, as she turned away to the window.

“ How odd indeed! ’ repeated Elinor within herself,
regarding her sister with uneasiness. “ If she had not
known him to be in town, she would not have written
to him, as she did; she would have written to Combe
Magna; and if he is in town, how odd that he should
neither come nor write! 0 my dear mother, you
must be wrong in permitting an engagement between a
daughter so oung, a man so little known, to be can'ied
on in so douhtful, so mysterious a manner! I long to
inquire ; but how will In] interference be borne! "

She determined, after some consideration, that if
appearances continued many days longer as unpleasant as
they now were she would represent in the strongest man-
ner to her mother the necessity of some serious inquiry
into the aﬁalr.

sense AND swsmu-rv. 163

Mrs Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mn Jennin 't
intimate acquaintance, whom the had met and invi in
the morning, dined with them. The former left them
soon after tea to fulfil her evening engagements'; and
Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whim-table for
the othere. Marianne was of no use on these occasions,
as the would never learn the game; but though her time
wan therefore at her own disposal, the evening was by
no man: more productive of pleuure to her than to
Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiet of expecta-
tion and the ain of dina intment. he eometirnee
endeavoured or a few mlnutea to read; but the book
was soon thrown aside, and the returned to the more
interesting employment of walking backwards and for-
wards acruu the room, panning for a moment whenever
she came to the window, in hopes of distinguishing the
long-expected rap.

'nlutluu. In": suns. Palm-:5. Roll-DIEM.

This preservation photocopy was made
at BookLab. Inc. In compliance with copyright law.
The paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO
23948-1992 (Permanence of Paper)

Austin 1995

[Ill

3 2044 uz4 595 u:

 

‘1‘; “1“ ‘11:“ “le HM
VE r R]

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HARVARD
COLLEGE
LIBRARY

JANE AUSTEN’S NOVELS

EDITED BY

REGINALD BRIMLEY JOHNSON

IN TEN VOLUMES

VOL. IL

. SENSE AND SENSIBILITY

VOL. H.

 

wmzm w

rum g ,.
go J

 

 

'THE I,
NOVELS OF ‘ v

JANE AUSTEN §

{I‘M 21w muting}

SENSE

AND

{ SENSIBILITY §

 

 

 

 

 

 

LONDON: Publifhed by J,M.DENT and COMPANY
I1. AI.sz HOUSE in Great Euﬂern Street. E.C.
MDCCCXCII

 
      
 

  

“HEEL/Arm
UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

Tu: Cownn’a S'rou . . . Fmth‘piec:
“Hun You Hm nu Nun?” . no: go

A Runs” AND sznluw NIGHT . ,, l4!

    

 

    
    

 
  
 
  
 

_ ‘ s ' A V:

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
.__,._

cbsptn yawn. .

“ F this open weather holds much longer," said Mrs
Jenningl, when they metat breakfast the following
morning, “ Sir John will not like leaving Eamon

next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day’s

pleasure. Poor souls! I always pityI them when they
do—they seem to take it so much to cart.”

“That is tnie," cried Marianne in a cheerful voice,
and walking to the window as she spoke, to examine the
day. “ I had not thought of Ibal. This weather will
keep many namen in the country.”

It was a ucky recollection, nll icr good spirits were
restored by it “ It is charming weather for than
indeed,” she continued, as she sat down to the breakfast
table with 1 ha countenance. “How much they
must enjoy it! ut” (with a little return of anxiety),
“it cannot be expected to last long. At this time of
year, and after such a series of rain, we shall certainly
have very little more of it F rosts will soon set in, and
in all probability with severity. In another day or two,
perhsps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer—
nay, perhaps it may freeze to-night l ”

“ At any rate," said .Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs
Jennings from sedng her sister‘s thoughts as clearly as

H. A

2 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

she did, “ I daresay we shall have Sir John and Lady
Middleton in town the end of next wee ”

" Ay, my dear, 'll warrant you we do. Mary
always has own wa ."

“ And now,” s' ently conjectured Elinor, “ she will
write to Combe by this day’s post."

But if she did, the letter was written and sent away
with a privacy that eluded all her watchfulnese to ascer-
tain the fact. Whatever the truth of it might be, and
as far as Elinor was from feeling thorough couteutrnent
about it, yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she
could not be very uncomfortable hersele And Marianne
was in spirits, happy in the mildness of the weather, and
still happier in her expectation of a front.

The momin was chieﬂy spent in leaving cards at
the houses of ngt Jennings’s ac uaintance to inform
them of her being in town ; and arianne was all the
time busy in observing the direction of the wind, watch-
ing the variations of the sky, and imagining an alteration
in the pir.

“ Don't you ﬁnd it colder than it was in the mom-
ing, Elinor? There seems to me a very decided
difference. I can hardly keep my hands warm even in
my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The
clouds seem parting too, the sun will be out in a
moment, and we shall have n clear nﬂcmoon."

Elinor was alternately diverted and pained ; but
Marianne persevered, and saw every night in the bright-
ness of the ﬁre, and every morning in the appearance
of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approaching
frost.

The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be
dissatisﬁed with Mrs Jennings’s style of living and set
of acquaintance than with her behaviour to themselves,
which was invariably kind. Everything in her house-
hold arrangements was conducted on the most liberal

SENSE AND SINSIBILITY. 3

Ian, and excepting a few old city frienda, whom, to

ady Middleton'e regret, lhe had never dropped, the
vieited no one to whom an introduction could at all dic-
compole the feeling: of her young companion; Pleated
to ﬁnd hemlf more comfortably Iituated in that 'cu-
lar than she had expected, Elinor was very ‘ in to
compound for the want of much real enjoyment In
any of their evening genius, which, whether at home or
thread, formed only r curda, could have little to amuce
her.

Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the
house, wua with them almoet every day; he came to
look at Marianne and talk to Elinor, who often derived
more Intiefaction from conversing with him than from
any other daily occurrence, but who aw at the came
time with much concern hil continued regard for her
litter. She feared it was a strengthening regard It
grieved her to nee the eameetneu with which he often
watched Marianne, and hi: spirits were certainly worse
than when at Barton.

About a Week after their arrival, it became certain
that Willoughhy was also arrived. Hit card war on
the table when they came in from the morning’e drive.

“Good God! ' cried Marianne, “ he ha been here
while we were out.” Elinor, rejoiced to be assured
of hi. being in London, now ventured to lay, “ Depend
upon it, he will call again to-rnorrow.” But Marianne

hardly to hear her, and on Mn Jenninge’n
entrance, «coped with the predoue card. '

This event, while it mined the spirits of ‘Elinor,
reetored to thoee of her eicter all, and more than all,
their former agitation. me thil moment her mind
war never quiet; the expectation of seeing him ev
hour of the day made her unﬁt for anything; She
incised on being left behind the next momrng, when the
other: went out.

4 SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTV.

Elinor‘e thought: were ﬁll of what might be paring

in Berkeley-meet during their abeenoe; but a moment'-

eeat her linerwhen theyretumed wumough to

Inform her that Willoughby had paid no eeeond vii:

there. A note war jun then brought in, and laid on
the table. .

“ For me I " cried Marianne, upping buu'ly forward.

“ No, ma’am, for my mimeu."

But Marianne, not convinced, took it inmtly up.

“ It ie indeed for Mn Jennings ; how provoking ! "

“ You are expecting a letter then 2" mid Elinor,
unable to be longer silent.

“ Yet! a little—41a much.”

After a short pause, “ You have no conﬁdence in
me, Marianne.”

“ Nay, Elinor, thin reproach from you l—you who
have conﬁdence in no one! ” -

“ Me I " returned Elinor in come confusion ; “ indeed
Marianne, I have nothing to tell.”

“ Nor I,” answered Marianne with me ; “ our
Iituationl then are alike. We have neither 0 In any-
thing to tell; you, because you communicate, and I,
beauae X conceal nothing."

Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in her-elf,
which the war not at liberty to do away, knew not how,
under loch cimunmancee, to press for greater openness
in Marianne.

Mn Jenningr soon appeared, and the note being
given her, the red it aloud. It wall from Lady Middle-
ton, announcing their arrival in Conduit—street the night
before, and uerting the company of her mother and
couline the fol owing evening. Butiuee: on Sir John's
port, and a violent cold on her own, prevented their
calling in Berkeley-street. The invitation wan accepted:
but when the hour of :gpointrnent drew near, u
u it war in common ci ' ity to Mr: Jennings that they

SENS! AND msmu-rv. 5

should both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had come
difﬁculty in persuadin her sister to go, for till the had
leen nothing of W'loughby, and therefore was not
more indieposed for amusement abroad, than unwilling
to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.

Elinor found, when the evening was over, that die-
position in not materially altered by a change of abode;
for although scarcely settled in town, Sir John had con-
trived to collect around him nearly twenty young le,
and to amuee them with a ball. Thia was an 'r,
however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve.
In the country, an unpremeditated dance was very
allowable; but in London, where the reputation of
elegance was more important and less easily obtained, it
waa risking too much, for the gratiﬁcation of a few girls,
to have it known that Lady Middleton had given a
small dance of eight or nine couple, with two violins,
and a mere sideboard collation.

Mr and Mrs Palmer were of the rty; from the
former, whom they had not seen beore since their
arrival in town, as he was careful to avoid the appear-
ance of any attention to hie rnother-in-law, and therefore
never came near her, they received no mark of recog-
nition on their entrance. He looked at them slightl ,
without seeming to know who they were, and mere y
nodded to Mn Jennings from the other side of the
room. Marianne gave one glance round the apartment
as uhe entered ; it was enough, I» was not theer
she sat down, equally ill-disposed to receive or communi-
cate pleasure. After they had been assembled about an
hour, Mr Palmer Ianntered towards the Miss Daeh-
woods, to express his surprise on seeing them in town,
though Colonel Brandon had been lint informed of
their arrival at his house, and he had himself mid
something very droll on hearing that they were to
come. ,

6 sense AND smsrnitm.

“ I thought you were both in Demuhire," laid he.

“ Did you? ’ replied Elinor.

“When do you go back again?” v

“ I do not know.” And tho. ended their discoune.

Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in
her life as she was that evening, and never so much
fatigued by the exercise. She complained of it as they
returned to Berkele -Itreet.

“ Ay, ay," said rs Jennings, “ we know the reason
of all that very well; if a certain non who shall be
nameless had been there, you wougd not have been a
bit tired; and to say the truth, it was not very pretty of
him not to give you the meeting when he wan invited."

“Invited l ” cried Marianne.

“So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems
Sir John met him somewhere in the street thin morning."

Marianne said no more, but looked exceedingly hurt.
Impatient in this situation to be doing something that
might lead to her sister’s relief, Elinor resolved to write
the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awaken-
ing her fears for the health of Marianne, to pracure
those inquiries which had been so long delayed; and
she was still more eagerly bent on this measure, by per-
ceiving after breakfast on the marrow, that Marianne
was again writing to Willoughby, for she could not
up so it to be to any other person.

bout the middle of the day, Mrs Jennings went out
I) herself on business, and Elinor began her letter
directly; while Marianne, too restless for employment,
too anxious for conversation, walked from one window
to the other, or sat down by the lire in melancholy
meditation. Elinor was very earnest in her application
to her mother, relating all that had passed, her suspicions
of Willoughby’s inconstancy, urging her by every plea
of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an
account of her real situation with rerpect to him.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7

Her letter was namely ﬁnished, when a rap foretold
a viaitor, and Colonel Brandon waa announced. Mari-
anne, who had Ieen him from the window, and who
hated compan of any kind, left the room before he
entered it. e looked more than usually grave, and
though ex reusing eatiefaction at ﬁnding Mira Da'ahwood
alone, as i? he had somewhat in particular to tell her,
at for some time without ﬂying a word. Elinor, per-
suaded that he had some communication to make in
which her liner wan concerned, impedently expected
iu openin It was not the ﬁrst time of her feeling the
lame kin of conviction; for more than once before,
beginning with the observation of “Your uia'ter loolu
unwell to-day,” or “Your sister seem- out of spirits,”
he had appeared on the point, either of dilcloaing, or of
inquiring, something particular about her. After a pause
of leveral minutel, their silence was broken b hil ank-
ing her, in a voice of lame agitation, when he was to
congratulate her on the ac uieition of a brother? Elinor
way not prepared for to a question, and having no
anrwer ready, war obliged to adopt the simple and com-
mon ex ‘ent of asking what he meant? He tried to
smile a he replied, “ Your rioter’e engagement to Mr
Willoughby is very generally known."

“ It cannot be generally known,” returned Elinor,
“ for her own family do not know it."

He looked Iurpriaed, and said, “I beg your pardon,
I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent ; but I had
not luppoled any uecrecy intended, as the openly
corre nd, and their nnrnage in universally ked of.”

“ ow can that be? By whom can you have heard
it mentioned.”

- “ By many—by tome of whom you know nothing.
by other! with whom you are most intimate-Mn
Jenningn, Mn Palmer, and the Middleton. But still
I might not have believed it—-—for where the mind i- '

8 532133 m smsrsrmv.

Eerhapt rather unwilling or be convinced, it will always
nd Iornething to IIIPPOI‘I its doubts—if I had not, when
the Iervant let me in to-day, accidentally seen a letter
in his hand, directed to Mr Willoughhy in your sister's
writing. I came to inquire, but I was convinced before
I could salt the question. In everything ﬁnally Iettled?
Is it impoosihle to—-.’ But I have no right, and I
could have no chance of succeeding—Ex“: me, Min
Dashwood. I believe I have been wrong in laying I0
muchI but I hardly know what to do, and on your
pnrdence I have the strongest dependence. Tell me
that it is all absolutely resolved on, that any attemftr—
that in short concealment. if concealment be postib e, in
all that remains.’ '

These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct
avowal of his love for her sister, nﬂ'ectcd her very much.
She was not immediately able to say an thing, and even
when her spirits were recovered, she d ted for a short
time on the answer it would he most proper to give.
The real state of things between Willoughhy and her
sister was so little known to herself, that in endeavour-
ing to ex lain it, she might be an liable to my too much
an too lit . Yet as she was convinced that Marianne'o
affection for Willoughby could leave no hope of Colonel
Brandon’s success, whatever the event of that affection
might be, and at the same time wished to shield her
conduct from censure, she thought it man prudent and
kind, after some consideration, to say more than she
really knew or believed. She acknowledged, therefore,
that though she had never been informed by themselves
of the terms on which they stood with each other, of
their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of their
correspondence she was not astonished to hear.

He listened to her with silent attention, and on her
ceasing to rpealt, role directly from his seat, and after
saying in a voice of emotion, “ To your sister I wish

.SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. - 9

all imaginable happineal; to Willoughby, that he may
endeavour to deeerve her,"-—took leave, and went

aw: .
glinor derived no comfortable feelinge from this con-

verlah'an to lessen the uneaeinees of her mind on other
inn; the was left, on the contrary, with a melancholy

impression of Colonel Brandon's nnha ineu, and wai

porevented from even wiahing it rerno by her anxiety
r the very event that muot conﬁrm it.

levut iiHJJJ‘

OTHING occurred during the next three or four
days to make Elinor regret what she had done in
applying to her mother ; for Willoughby neither
came nor wrote. They Were engaged about the end of
that time to attend Lady Middleton to a party, from
which Mrs Jennings was kept away by the indi him
of her youngeu daughter; and for this party, arianne,
wholly dirpirited, careless of her apparance, and seem-
ing equally indifferent whether the went or staid, pre-

without one look of hope, or one expression of
pleasure. She at h the drawing-room ﬁre after tea,
till the_rnoment of lady Middleton's arrival, without
once nirring from her seat, or altering her attitude, but
in her own thouth and inaenrible of her sister’s pre-
tence : and when at last they were told that Lady
Middleton waited for them at the door, she started an if
she had forgotten that any one wu expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of deetinao'on,
and as soon as the Itring of carriages before them would
allow, alighted, mended the mire, heard their name!
announced from one ,landing-place to another in an
audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up,

to SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

quite full of company, and inlutferably hot. When
they had paid their tnhute of politeness by curtseying
to the lady of the house, they were permitted to mingle
in the croud, and take their share of the heat and in-
convenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add.
After some time spent in saying little and doing lens,
Lady Middleton sat down to casino, and as Marianne
was not in epirita for moving about, she and Elinor,
luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themeelvea at no
great distance from the table.

They had not remained in this manner long, before
Elinor perceived Willoughby, minding within a few
arda of them, in earnest convemtion with a v
fashionable-looking young woman. She soon caught
his e , and he immediately bowed, but without ab
tempting to rain to her, or to approach Marianne,
though he CO d not but see her; and then continued
his discourse with the lame lady. Elinor turned in-
voluntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be
unobserved by her. At that moment she ﬁrst rceived
him, and her whole countenance glowing wi Judden
delight, the would have moved towards him instantly,
had not her sister caught hold of her.

“ Good heavens! " she exclaimed, “ he ll there—he
is there. Oh! why does he not look at me? why
cannot I speak to. him 3”

“Pray, pray be composed,” cried Elinor, “ and do
not betray what you feel to everybody present. Perhaps
he has not observed‘you yet.’ '

This, however, was more than she could believe her-
self, and to be composed at such a moment was not only
beyond the reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish.
She sat in an agony of impatience which affected every
future.

At last he turned round again, and regarded them
both; she started up, and pronouncing his name in a

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. II

tone of amnion, held out her hand to him. He ap-
ﬁnached, and addressing himself rather to Elinor than

arianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined
not to observe her attitude, inquired in a hurried manner
after Mrs Dashwood, and asked how long they had
been in town. Elinor was robbed of all presence of
mind by such an address, and was unable to say I ward.
But the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed.
Her face was crimsoned over, and she exclaimed in I
voice of the greatest emotion, “Good God l Willoughby,
what is the meaning of this? Have you not received
my letters 2 Will you not shake hands with me i "

He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed
Einful to him, and he held her hand only for a moment.

uring all this time he was evidently struggling for com-
posure. Elinor watched his countenance, and saw its
expression becoming more tranquil. After a moment’s

use, he spoke with calmness.

" I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley-street
last Tuesday, and very much regremd that I was not
fortunate enough to ﬁnd yourselves and Mrs Jennings at
home. My card was not lost, I hope.”

“ But have you not received In notes?” cried
Marianne in the wildest anxict . “ ere is some mis-
take, I am sure—some dreadl'u mistake. What can be
the meaning of it? Tell me, Willoughhy—for heaven's
sake, tell me, what is the matter? ” '

He made no reply ; his complexion changed and all
his embarrassment mumed; but as if, on catchin the
eye of the young lady with whom he had been previously
talking, he felt the necessity of instant exertion, he
recovered himself again, and after saying, " Yes, I had
the pleasure of receiving the infomation of your arrival
in town, which you were so as to send to me,"
turned hasu'ly away with a ight bow and joined his
friend.

12 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

Marianne, now looking dreadfull white, and unable
to stand, sunk into her chair, andy Elinor, expecting
every moment to see her faint, tried to screen her from
the observation of others, while reviving her with lavender
water.

“ Go to him, Elinor," she said, as soon as she could
speak, “ and force him to come to me. Tell him I
must see him again —must speak to him inmntl . I
cannot rest—I shall not have a moment’s oe ti this
is explained—some dreadful misapprehension or other.
Oh, go to him this moment.”

“ How can that he done? No, my dearest Marianne,
an must wait. This is not a place for explanations-

ait only till ro-morrow.”

With difﬁculty, however, could she prevent her from
following him herself; and to persuade her to check her
agitation—to wait, at least, with the appearance of com-
posure—till she might speak to him with more privacy
and more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continued
incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misc of
her feelings, by exclamations of wretchedness. n a
short time Elinor saw Willough quit the room by the
door towards the staircase, and De ing Marianne that he
was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to him
again that evening, as a fresh argument for her to be
calm. She instantly begged her sister would entreat
Lady Middleton to take them home, as she was too
miserable to stay a minute longer.

Lady Middleton, though in a middle of a rubber, on
being informed that Marianne was unwell, was too polite
to object for a moment to her wish of going away, and
making over her cards to a friend, they departed as soon
as the carriage could be found. Searcer a word was
spoken during their return to Berkeley-street. Marianne
was in a silent agony, too much oppressed even for lean;
but as Mrs Jennings was luckily not come home, they

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'H'. 13

could directly to their own room. where hamhom
mo her a liuleto henelf. She was noon undreeaed
and in bed, and as the seemed deimus of being alone,
her sister then left her, and while the waited the return
of Mn Jenningl, had leisure enough for thinking over

the 1pm.
hat some kind of engagement had subsisted between
4 Willoughby and Marianne, she could not doubt; end
that Willoughhy was weary of it, seemed equally clear;
for however Marianne might still feed her own wiahee,
:5: could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or mis-
a prehension of any hind. Nothing but a thorough
e ge of neutiment could account for it. Her indigna-
tion would have been still stronger than it was, had Ihe
not wimeued that embnrnument which seemed to speak
a conedoulneee of his own misconduct, and revented
her from believing him so un rincipled as to ve been
sporting with the alfectionl 0 her Iister from the' lint,
without an design that would hear inveni tion.
Absence might have weakened his regard, an con- .
venience might have determined him to overcome it, but
that such a regard had formerly existed she could not
bring herself to doubt.

As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy I
meeting mun already have given her, and on those still
more eevere which might await her in its probable con-
eequence, she could not reﬂect without the deepen con-
cern. Her own duration gnined in the comparison ; for
while she could mean Edward as much as ever, how-
ever they might be divided in future, her mind might
be alwayu cupported. But every circumnance that could
embitter such an evil seemed uniting to hei hten the
rniaery of Marianne in a ﬁnal Iepantion from illoughby
—in an immediate and irreconcilable mpture with him.

I4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Cle" ’53,.

EFORE the house-maid had lit their ﬁre the next
day, or the sun gained any ﬁlm? over a cold,
gloomy morning in January, arianne, only half

dressed, was kneeling'against one of the window-seats

for the sake of all the little light she could command '
from it, and writing as fast as a continual ﬂow of tears

would permit her. In this situation, Elinor, roused

from sleep by her agitation and sobs, ﬁrst perceived her;

and after observing her for a few moments with silent

anxiety, said, in a tone of the most considerate gentle-

neu—

“ Marianne, may I ask i ”

“No, Elinor,” she replied, “all: nothing; you will
soon know all."

The sort of despemte calmness with which this was ‘
mid lasted no longer than while she spoke, and was
immediately followed by a remm of the same excessive
afﬂiction. It was some minutes before she could go on
with her letter, and the frequent bursts of grief which
still obliged her, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were
proofs enough of her feeling how more than probable
it was that she was writing for the last time to
Willoughby.

Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention
in her power; and she would hnve tried to soothe and
tranquilise her still more, had not Marianne entreated
her, with all the eagemess of the most nervoul in-ita-
bility, not to speak to her for the world. In such
circumstances, it was better for both that they should
not be long together ; and the restless state of Marianne’s
mind not only prevented her from remaining in the room
a moment after she was dressed, hut requiring at once
solitude and continual change of place, made her wander

SENSE AND SENSIBXLITV. [5
about the hnule till hreakfaat time, avoiding the right of

everybody.

At breakfut Ill: neither am not attem ted to at any-
thing; and Elinor’a attention wan then a! employed, not
in urging her, not in ‘tying her, nor in a ring to re-
gard her, but in endeinvouring to engage mJenninga’a
notice entirely to herself.

Ar this waa a favourite mail with Mn Jenningl, it
laxed a considerable time, and they were setting them-
edvea, after it, round the common work table, when a letter
wandelivered to Marianne, which Ihe eagerly caught from
the aervant, and, turning of a death-like palenear, inatantly
ran out of the room. Elinor, who saw ac plainly by this,
as if the had seen the direction, that it must come from
Willoughhy, felt immediately such a aicltneu at heart
:4 made her hardly able to hold up her head, and eat in
each a general tremour aa made her fear it irnpoaaible to
eacape Mn Jenninge’r notice. That good lady, how-
ever, saw only that Marianne had received a letter from
Willoughby, which ap red to her a very good joke,
and which the trea accordingly, by hoping, with a
laugh, that ahe would ﬁnd it to her liking. 0f Elinor’a
diatrcae, the was too busily employed in mcaruring
lengths of wanted for her rug, to ace anythin at all;
and calmly continuing her talk, ac loan a arianne
diaap red, ahe raid—

“ pon my word, I never saw a onng woman no
desperately in love in my life! 11!] grrlr were nothing
to her, and yet they used to be foolish enough; but u
for Mira Marianne, ahe in quite an altered creature. I
hope, from the bottom of my heart, he won't keep her
wam'ng much longer, for it in quite grievoua to see her look
.0 ill and forlorn. Pray, when are they to be married P"

Elinor, though never leu dirpoeed no speak than at
that moment, obli ed heraelf to newer Inch an attack
as thin, and, there are, trying to smile, replied, “And

16 SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY.

have you really, ma'am, talked yourself into a persuasion
of my sister’s being engaged to Mr Willoughbyi I
thought it hsd been only a joke, but so serious 3 ques-
tion seems to imply more: and I must beg, therefore,
that you will not deceive ourself any longer. [do
assure you that nothing would surprise me more than to
hear 0 their being going to be married."

“ For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwoodl How
can you talk sol Don’t we all know that it must be a
match—4hat they were over head and ears in love with
each other from the ﬁrst moment they met? Did not
I see them together in Devonshire every day, and all
day long ? And did not I know that your matter came
to town with me on purpose to buy wedding clothes?
Come, come, this won’t do. Because you are so sly
about it yourself, you think nobod else has any senses;
but it is no sucb thing, I can toil you, for it has been
known all over the town this ever so long. I tell
everybody of it, and so does Charlotte."

“ Indeed, ma'am,” said Elinor very seriously, “ you
are mistaken. Indeed, you are doing a very unkind
thing in spreading the report, and you will ﬁnd that you
have, though you will not believe me now."

Mrs Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not

irits to say more, and eager at all events to know that
alilloughby had written, hurried awn to their room,
where, on opening the door, she saw arianne stretched
on the bed, almost choked by rief, one letter in her
hand, and two or three others ying by her. Elinor
drew near, but without saying a word ; and seating her-
self on the bed, took her hand, kissed her affectionately
several times, and then gave way to a burst of tears,
which at ﬁrst was scarcely Iesg violent than Msrianne's.
The latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all
the tenderness of this behaviour, and after some time
thus spent in joint afﬂiction, she put all the letters into

snusn AND SENSIBILITY. ' 17'

Elinor’s hands; and then covering her face with her
handkerchief, almost screamed with agony. Elinor,
who knew that such grief, shocking as it was to witness
it, must have its course, watched by her till this excess
of sulfering had somewhat spent itself, and then turning
agerly to Willoughby’s letter, read as follows :-——

Bonn S-nuuz-r, January.

MY Dun Manner—I have just had the honour of
receiving your letter, for which I beg to return my
sincere acknowledgments. I am much concerned to
ﬁnd there was anything in my behaviour laot night that
did not meet your ap robau'on; and though I am quite
ata loss to discover in what point I could be so un-
fortunate as to offend you, I eutreat your forgiveness of
what I can assure you to ban been perfectly un-
intentional. I Ihnll never reﬂect on my former acquaint-
ance with your family in Devonshire without the most

leful pleasure, and ﬂatter myself it will not be broken
gany mistake or miupprehension of my actions. M
em for your whole family is very sincere; but if
have been so unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of
more than I felt. or meant to express, I shall reproach
myself for not having been more guarded in my pro-
fessions of thnt esteem. That I should ever have meant
more, you will allow to be impossible, when you under-
nand that my affections have been lon engaged else-
where, and it will not be man weeks, I believe, before
this engagement is fulﬁlled. t is with great regret that
I obey your commands of returning the letters with -
which I have been honoured from you, and the lock of
hair which you so obligingly bestowed on me.

I am, dear Madam,
Your most obedient
humble Servant,
‘ Jorm Wruouausv.
u. n

:8 sense AND SENSIBILITY.

With what indignation such a letter as this must be
read by Miss Dashwood, may be imagined. Though
aware, before she began it, that it must bring a confu-
sion of his inconmncy, and confirm their separation for
ever, she was not aware that such language could he
suffered to announce it! nor could she have supposed
Willoughby capable of departing so far from the ap-
pearance of every honourable and delicate feeling—so
far from the common decorum of a gentleman, as to
send a letter so impudently cruel : a letter which, instead
of bringing with his desire of a release any professions
of regret, acknowledged no breach of faith, denied all

uliar affection whatever—a letter of which every
liiice was an insult, and which proclaimed in writer to
be deep in hardened villany.

She paused over it for some time with indignant
astonishment; then read it again and again; but every
perunl only served to increase her abhorrence of the
man, and so bitter were her feelings against him, that
she dared not trust herself to speak, lest she might
wound Marianne still deeper by treating their disengage-
ment, not as a loss to her of any possible good, but as
an escape from the worst and most irremediable of evils,
a connexion, for life, with an unprincipled man, as a
deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important

In her earnest meditations on the contents of the
letter, on the depravity of that mind which could dictate
it. and, probably, on the very different mind of a very
dilferent person, who had no other connexion whatever
with the aﬁir than what her heart gave him with
everything that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate
distress of her sister, forgot that she had three letter! on
her lap yet unread, and so entirely forgot how long she
had been in the room, that when, on hearing a cam'age
drive up to the door, she went to the window to see
who could be coming so unreasonably early, she was all

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 19

astonishment to perceive Mrs Jennings's chariot, which
she knew had not been ordered till one. Determined
not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of contributing,
at present, so her ease, she hurried away to excuse
herself from attendin Mrs Jennings, on account of her
sister being indisposeti Mrs Jennings, with a thoroughly
good-humoured concern for its cause, admitted the ex-
" cuse most readily, and Elinor, after seeing her safe of,
returned no Marianne, whom she found attempting to
rise from the bed, and whom she reached just in time
to prevent her from falling on the ﬂoor, faint and giddy
froma long want of pro r rest and food; for it was'
many days since she h any appetite, and many nights
since she had rcallynselgn; an now, when her mind
was no longer by the fever of suspense, the
consequence Jilin this was felt in an aching head, a
weakened stomach, and general nervous faintness. A
glass of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and she was at last able to
express some sense of her kindness, by saying—
“ Poor Elinor! How unhappy I make you I ”
“I only wish,” replied her sister, “ there were any-
I could do which might be of comfort to you."
his, as everything else would hsvc been, was too
much for Marianne, who could only exclaim, in the
an 'sh of her heart, “ 0 Elinor, I am miserable
inﬁned," before her voice was entirely lost in sohs.
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unre-
sisled grief in silence.
“ Exert younelf,,dear Marianne," she cried, “ if
on would not kill yourself and all who love you.
hink of your mother; think of her misery while you
suffer; for her sake you must exert yourself."
"I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; “ leave me,
leave me, if I distress you; leave me, hate me, fo
me; but do not torture me so. Oh! how easyrgi

20 SENSE AND SENSIBILXTY.

than who have no nor-row of their own to talk of exer-
tion! Happ , happy Elinor, you cannot have an idea
of what I luﬁyer ”

“Do you call in: happy, Marianne! Ah; if you
knewl And can you ieve me to be to while I nee
you so wretched! ”

“ Forgive me, forgive me,” throwing her arm. round
her rilter’a neck; “ I know you feel for me; I know
what a heart you have; but yet you are—you‘muat be
happy; Edward loves you—what, oh ! what can do
away luch happineu as that l "

“ Many, rriany circumnanoeu," said Elinor solemnly.

“ No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly; “he lom
you, and only you. You mu have no grief."

“ I can have no pleasure while I see you in thin
tulle.”

“ And on will never nee me otherwise. Mine is n
misery which nothing can do away.” '

“ You mutt not talk so, Marianne. Have you no
comfom.’ no friends? II your loan ouch as leaves no
opening for consolation ? Much as you auﬁ'er now,
think of what you would have suffered if the diacove
of hi: character had been delayed to a later period—«f
your engagement had been carried on for month: and
monthe, as it might have been, before he chose to put an
end to it. Every additional day of unhappy conﬁdence,
on your ride, would have made the blow more dreadful."

“Engagement! ” cried Marianne, “there ha been
no en agement.”

“ o engagement! "

“ No, he is not '0 unworthy an you believe him. He
he broken no faith with me.”

“ But he told you that he loved you ? "

“ Yeo—no—never—aboolutely. It was every da
implied, but never profeuedly declared. Sometimes
thought it had been—but it never was.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. II

“Yetyouwrotetohimi” _

“Yen—could that bewrong after all that had pulled?
But I cannot talk."

Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three
letter: which now mined amuch stronger curioeity than
before, directly ran over the coutentl of all. The ﬁrst,
which wan what her sitter had tent him on their arrival
in town, wan to this effect,—

"Bnuuv Snwr, January.

“ How man-iced you will be, Willaughby, on receiv-
ing thin! an I think you will feel something more
than lurPriIe, when you know I am in town. An
opportunity of coming hither, though with Mn Jennings,
was a temptation we could not resist. I winh you ma
receive thin in time to come here to-night, but I '1
not depend on it. At any rate I Ahall expect you to-
morrow. For the pmt, adieu. M. D."

Her eeeond note, which had been written on the
morning after the dance at the Middletono’, was in
thele word-—

“I cannot cxprcu my disappointment in having
missed you the day before yeaterday, nor my anonilh-
ment at not having received any anlwer to a note which
I eent you above a week ago. I have been expecling
toheerﬁ'om you,audn:illmoreto|ee you,ev hour
of the day. Play call again so soon as pouib e, and
explain the realon of my having expected this in vain.
You had better come earlier another time, became we
are generally out by one. We were last ni ht at Lady
Middleton’s where there wan I dance. have been
told that you were naked to be of the party. But could
it be Io? You muat be very much altered indeed lince
we parted, if that could be the caae, and you not there.

22 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

, But I will not suppose this possible, and I hope very.
soon to receive your personal asluranoe of its being
otherwise. M. D.”

The contents of her last note to him were these :—

“What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your be-
haviour last night? Again I demand an explanation of
it. I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure
which our separation naturally produced, with the famili-
arity which our intimacy at Barton a red to me to
justify. 1 was repulsed indeed! have passed a
wretched night in endeavouring to excuse I conduct
which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but
though I have not yet been able to form an reasonable
apology for your behaviour, I am pierfecty read to
hmr our justiﬁcation of it. You ave perhaps been
misin orrned, or purposely deceived, in something con-
cerning me, which may have lowered me in your
opinion. Tell me what it is, explain the grounds on
which you acted, and I shall be satisﬁed in being able
to satisfy you. It would grieve me indeed to be obliged
to think ill of you; but if I am to do it, ifI am to
learn that you are not what we have hitherto believed

on, that your regard for us all was insincere, that your
behaviour to me was intended only to deceive, let it be
told as soon as possible. My feelings are at present in
a state of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you,
but certainty on either side will be ease to what I now
suffer. If your sentiments aré no longer what they
were, you will return my notes, and the lock of my
hair which is in your possession. M. D."

That such letters, so full of affection and conﬁdence,
could have been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby’s
lake, would have been unwilling to believe. But her
condemnation of him did not blind her to the impro-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 23

priety of their having been written at all ; and she was
silently grieving over the imprudence which had hamded
such unsolicited proofs of tenderness, not warranted by
anything preceding, and' mot severely condemned by
the event, when Marianne, perceiving that she had
finished the letters, observed to her that they contained
nothing but what any one would have written in the
same situation.

“ I feltm lf," she added, “ to be as solemnl engaged
to him as ' the strictest legal covenant had u'nd us
to each other.”

"1 can believe it,” said Elinor; “ but unfortunately,
he did not feel the same."

“ He id feel the same, Elinor—for weeks and weeks
he felt it. I know he did. Whatever may have changed
him now (and nothing but the blackest art employed
against me can have done it), 1 was once as dear to him
as my own soul could wish. This~ lock of hair, which
now he can so readily give up, was begged‘of me with
the most earnest supplication. Had you seen his look,
his manner, had you heard his yoice at that moment!
Have you forgot the last evening of our being to ether
at Barton? The morning that we parted tool on
he told me that it might be many weeks before we met
again—his distress—can I ever fo et his distress! ”

For a moment or two she no d say no more; but
when this emotion had passed away, she added, in a
ﬁrmer tone—

“ Elinor, I have been cruelly used, but not by
Willoughby." .

“ Dearest Marianne, who but himself? By whom
can he have been instigated?"

“ By all the world, rather than by his own heart. I
could rather believe emy creature of my acquaintance
. leagued together to ruin me in his opinion, than believe
his nature capable of such cruelty. This woman of

24 SENSE AND SENSIBILI".

, whom he writes—whoever the be—or any one, in Ahort,
but your own dear self, mm, and Edward, may have
been so barbarous to belie me. Be and you three, is
there a creature in the world whom would not rather

ct of evil than Willoughhy, whose heart I know lo
we] 2 ”

Elinor would not contend, and only replied, “ Who-
ever mny have been '0 detestably your enemy, let them
be cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sister, by
seeing how nobly the contciaulness of your own inno-
cence and good intentions supports your Ipirits.' It is a
reasonable and laudable pride which resists such male-
valence.”

“ No, no,” cried Marianne, “ misery Iuch as mine has
no pride. I care not who knows that I am wretched.
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the
world. lilinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be
proud and indefpendent no they like—ma mist insult,
or return nwrti cation—but I cannot must feel—I
must he wretched—and they are welcome to enjoy the
consciousness of it that can."

" But for my mother‘s sake and mine—"

“ I would do more than for my own. But to appear
happy when I am so nriserable-—Oh! who can require
it . ”

Again they were both silent. Elinor wat employed
in walking thoughtfully from the ﬁre to the window,
from the window to the ﬁre, without knowing that she
received warmth from one, or discerning objects through
the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,
with her head leaning against one of its posts, again took
up Willoughby’s letter, and after shuddering over every -
sentence, exclaimed—

“ It in too much I O Willoughby, Willoughby,
could this be yours! Cruel, cruel—nothing can acquit
you. Elinor, nothing can. Whatever he might have

SENSE AND SINSIBILITY. 25

heard against me—ought he not to have mapended his
belief ? ought he not to have told me of it,to have given
me the power of clearing myself? 'The lock of hair
(repeating it from the letter), which you so obligingly
bestowed on me ’——-that is unpardonahle. Willoughby,
where was your heart, when you wrote those words?
Ohl barbaroust insolent l—Elinor, can he be justi-
lied?”

“ No, Marianne, in no possible way."

“And yet this woman—who knows what her art
may have been—how long it may have been premedi-
tated, and how deeply contrived by her !—Who is she?
—Who can she be i—Whom did I ever hear him talk
of as young and attractive among his female acquaint-
ance? Oh! no one, no one—he talked to me only of
myself.”

Another use ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated,
and it end thus—

“Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort
mama. Cannot we be gone to-mormw ? ”

“ To-mormw, Mariannel "

"Yes; why should I stay here? I came on] for
Willoughlry’a nuke—and now who cares for me? ho
: regards me i ”

“ It would be impossible to go lo-morrow. We owe
Mn Jennings much more than civility; and civility of
the commoneet kind muat prevent such a hasty removal
as that." '

“ Well, then, another day or .two perhapl; but I can-
not stay here lon , I cannot my to endure the quenions
and remarks of aﬁ these ple. The Middleton and
Palmen—how am I to r their pity? The Pity of
such a woman as Lady Middleton !—oh I what would
be an to that! "

Ehnor advised her to lie down again, and for a mo-
ment she did so ; but no attitude could give her ease,

:6 SENSE AND snusmu'rv.

and in restless pain of mind and body she moved from
one posture to another, till growing more and more
hysterical, her sister could with difﬁculty keep her on
the bed at all, and for some time was fearful of being
constrained to call for assistance. Some lavender drops,
however, which she was at length persuaded to take,
were of use; and from that time till Mrs Jennings
returned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless.

chasm ##i.

RS Jennings came immediately to their room on
her return, and without waiting to have her
request of admittance answered, opened the

door and walked in with a look of real concern.

“ How do you do, W dear ? ” said she, in a voice of
great compassion, to arianne, who turned away her
face without attem ting to answer.

“ How is she, its Dashwood? Poor thing! she
looks very bad. No wonder. Ay, it is but too true.
He is in be married very soon—a good-for-nothing
follow! I have no patience with him. Mrs Taylor
told me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it by a
particular friend of Miss Grey herself, else I am sure I
should not have believed it; and I was almost ready to
sink as it was. Well, said I, all I can say is, that if it
is tme, he has used a young lady of my acquaintance
abominany ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife may
plague his heart out. And so I shall always say, my
dear, you may depend on it. I have no notion of men's
going on in this way; and if ever I meet him again, I
will give him such a dressing as he has not had this
man a day. But there is one comfort, my dear Miss
Marianne; he is not the only young man in the world

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY. 27

worth having; and with your pretty face you will never
want admirers. Well, poor thing I I won’t disturb her
any longer, for she had better have her cry out at once
and have done with it. The Parrys and Sandersans
luckily are coming to-night, you _know, and that will
amuse her."

She then went away, walking on n' we out of the
room, as if she supposed her young riend’s afﬂiction
could be increased by noise.
» Marianne, to the rise of her sister, determined on

dining with them. Elinor even advised her against it.
But “ no, she would go down 3 she could bear it very
well, and the bustle about her would be less.” Elinor,
pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a
motive, though believing it hardly possible that she could
sit out the dinner, said no more; and adjustin her dress
for her as well as she could while Marianne stil remained
on the bed, was ready to assist her into the dining-room
as soon as they were summoned to it.

When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate
more and was calmer than her sister had expected. Had
she tried to speak, or had she been conscious of half Mrs
Jennin s’s well-meant but ill-judged attentions to her,
this rafmneu could not have been maintained; but not

a syllable escaped her lips, and the abstraction of her
thoughts preserved her in ignorance of everything that
was using before her.

E 'nor, who did justice to Mrs Jennings’s kindness,
though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments, and
returned her those civilities, which her sister could not
make or return for herself. Their good friend saw that

_ Marianne was unhappy, and felt that everything was due-
to her which might make her at all less so. She treated
her, therefore, with all the indulgent fondness of a
parent towards I favourite child on the last day of its

:8 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

holidays. Marianne was to have the best place by the
line, was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the
house, and to be amused by the relation of all the news
of the day. Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of
her sister, seen a checkto all mirth, she could have been
entertained by Mrs Jenningn’s endeavours to cure a die-
a pointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and
o ives, and a good ﬁre. As soon, however, as the con.
sciousneu of all this was forced by continual repetition
on Marianne, she could stay no longer. With an hasty
exclamation of misery, an a sign to her sister not to
follow her, she directly got up and hurried out of the
room.

“ Poor soul ! " cried Mn Jennings, as soon as she was
gone, “ how it grievcs me to see her! And I declare
if she is not gone away without ﬁnishing her wine!
And the dried cherries too! Lord! nothing seems to
do her any good. I am sure if I knew of anything she
would like, I would send all over the town for it.
Well, it is the oddest thing to me, that n man should
use such a pretty girl so ill ! But when there is plenty
of money on one side, and next to none on the other,
Lord bless you ! they Cart: no more about such things l—J’

“ The lady then—Min Grey I think you called her
——is very rich .’ "

“ Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see
her? a smart, stilish girl, the say, but not handsome.
I remember her aunt very we I, Biddy Henshawe; she
married a very wealthy man. But the Family are all
rich together. Fifty thounnd pounds ! and by all
accounts it won’t come before it 's wanted ; for they say
he is all to pieces. No wonder! dashing about with
his curricle and hunters! Well, it don't signify talking,
but when a young man, be he who he will, comes and
makes love to a pretty girl, and promises marriage,
he has no bueinees to ﬂy off from his word only because

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 19

he we r,andaricher ' iereld mhavehim.
ngyodonme, in such a g, oell hiz homes, let hie
house, turn of? hi: servants, and make a thorough reform
at once? I warrant ou, Mine Marianne would have
been ready to wait til matterl came round. But that
won’t do now-a-dayl; nothing in the way of pleasure
can ever be given up by the young men of this age."

“ Do on know what kind of a girl Miu Grey in!
Iaehe eardtobeamiahle?"

“ I never heard any harm of her; indeed, I hardly
ever heard her mentioned; ex t that Mn Taylor did
say this morning, that one da in Walker hinted to
her, that she believed Mr an Mn Ellioon would not
be norry to have Mien Grey married, for the and Mn
Elli-on could never agree."

“And who are the Ellison! ? ”

“Her guardians, my dear. But now she in of age
and ma choose for herself; and a Pretty choice she
has ma rel—What now," after pauung a moment-—
“ your poor uiater has gone to her own room, I suppose,
to moan by herself. In there nothing one can get to
comfort her? Poor dear, it seem: quite cruel to let her
be done. Well, by-nnd-by we Ihall hnvc a few friendl,
and that will nmm her a little. What lhlll we play
at? She hates whiat, I know; but in there no round
game ahe cares for ? "

"Dear ma’am, thin kindneu iI quire unneceeury.
Marianne, I dare say, will not leave her room again thin
evening. I shall penuade her, if I can, to go early to
bed, for I am rure ahe wanta rest."

"Ay, I believe that will be best for her. Let her
name her own supper, and go to bed. Lord! no
wonder the ha been looking '0 bad and no cant-down
thin lam week or two, for this matter I suppose he
been hanging over her head all long as that. And no
the letter that came to-day ﬁnished it! Poor soul] I

3° SENSE AND SRNSIBILITY.

Immifl had hadanodouofiglwould not have
joked her about it for all my money. But then, you
know, how should I gue- Iuch a thing? I made cure
of it: being nothing but a common love-letter, and you
know young people like to he laughed at About them.
Lord! how concerned Sir John and my daughter! will
be when they hear it! If I had had my neme- about
me, I might have called in Conduit-street in my way
home, and told them of it. But I ahall see them
to-morrow.”

“It would be unnecessary, I am sure, for you to
caution Mrs Palmer and Sir John agaimt ever naming

‘Mr Willoughby, or making the alightect alliuion to
what has passed, before my sister. Their own good-
nature must point out to them the real cruelty of
appearing to know anything about it when the in recent;
and the lost that may ever be said to m tel on the
subject, the more my feelings will be apar , at you, my
dar madam, will easily believe."

“0 Lordl ya, that I do indeed. It must be
terrible for you to hear it talked of; and as for your
sister, I am sure I would not mention a word about it
to her for the world. You law I did not all dinner-
time. No more would Sir John nor my daughters, for

_the are all very thoughtful and counidemtr—eapecially
if Iygive them a hint, an I certainly will. For my part,
I think the lean that is sold about such things, the
better, the sooner ’tis blown over and forgot. And
what good does talking ever do, you know?”

" In thil affair it can only do harm—more IO perhapo
than in many cases of a similar kind, for it has been
attended by circurnttancel which, for the alt: of every
one concerned in it, make it unﬁt to become the public
convenation. I must do tbi: juice to Mr Willoughby
-—he haa broken no positive engagement with my
sister."

suns: arm susrmu'nr. . 3:

“Law, my dearl Don't retend to defend him.
No politive enga ent indeedl after taking her all
over Allenham once, and ﬁxing on the very moms
th were to live in hereafter! "

zlinor, for her either”: take, could not preu the
aubject farther, and she hoped it war not required of
her for Willoughby’l; Iince, though Marianne might
lone much, he could gain very little by the enforcement
of the real truth. After a uhort Iilence on both aidea,
Mn Jennings, with all her mortal hilarity, burst forth

n— .

“Well, my dear, ’55 a true laying about an ill wind,
for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He
will have her It Int; 3 , that he will. Mind me, now,
if they an’ t married by 'dsummer. Lord! how he’ll
chuckle over thil newll I hope he will come to-night.
It will be all to one a better match for our liner.
Two thounnd a-year without debt or whack——
except the little love-child, indeed; ay, I had forgot
her; but she may be ’ renticed out at mall coat, and
then what does it Ii ' P Delaford is a nice place, I
can tell you ; exac y what I call a nice old-fahioned
place, full of comfort: and conveniences; quite Ihut in
with great garden wall! that are covered with the best
fruitp-treeu in the country; and such a mulberry tree in
one corner] Lord! how Charlotte and I did waif the
only time we were there! Then, there in a dovecote,
some delightful newpondo, and a ve prett canal;
and everything, in short, that one coul wish or: and,
moreover, it in clue to the church, and only a quarter

> of a mile from the turnpike-road, so ’tia never dull, for
if you only go and lit up in an old yew arbour behind
the house, you may see all the carriagea that'pau along.
Ohl 'til a nice place! A butcher hard by in the
village, and the parsonage-home within a none I throw.
To my fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton
Park, where they are forced to lend three mile! for

32 ~ SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y.

their meat, and have not s neighbour nesner than your
mother. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as
I can. One shoulder of mutton, u know, drives
another down. If we em but put Willoughby out of
her head! ”

“Ay, if we can but do IbaI, ma’am," said Elinor,
“ we shall do very well with or without Colonel Bren-
don." And then rising, she went nwny to join Mari-
anne, whom she found, II she expected, in her own
room, leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains
of a fire which, till Elinor's entrance, had been heronly
ﬁght

“You had better leave me,” was all the notice that
her sister received from her.

“ I will leave you," said Elinor, “if you will go to
bed." But this, from the momentary perverseness of
impatient suffering, she at ﬁrst refused to do. Her
ﬁster’s earnest, though gentle. persuasion, however, soon
softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her
aching head on the pillow, and saw her, as she hoped,
in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her.

In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she
was soon joined by Mrs Jennings, with a wine-glass,
full of something, in her hand.

“ My dear,” said she, entering, “I have just recol-
lecth that I have some of the ﬁnest old Constantia
wine, in the house, that ever was tasted—so I have
brought a glass of it for your sister. My poor husband!
how fond he was of it! Whenever he had it touch of
his old cholick gout, he said it did him more good
than anything ese in the world. Do take it to your
sister.”

“ Dear ma’am,” replied Elinor, smiling at the differ-
ence of the complaints for which it was recommended,
“how good you are! But I have just left Marianne
in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I think

sense AN'D msmu-m 33

nothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you
would give me leaw, I will drink the wine myself.”

Mrs Jennings, though regressing that she had not
been ﬁve minutes earlier, was tisﬁed with the com-
promise; and Elinor, as she swallowed the chid' of it,
reﬂected that, thou h its good effects on a cholicky gout
were at present 0 little importance to her, its healing
powers on a disappointed heart might be as msonahly
tried on herself as on her sister.

Colonel Brandon came in while the were at
tea, and by his manner of looking round e room for
Marianne, Elinor immediame funcied that he neither
expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short,
that he was already aware of what occasioned her
absence. Mrs Jennings was not struck by the same
thought; for, soon after his entrance, she walked across
the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided, and
whispered—“ The Colonel looks as grave as ever, you
' see. He knows nothing of it; do tell him, my dear."

He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers,
and, with a look which perfectly assured her of his good
infonnan'on, enquired after her sister.

“ Marianne is not well,’ ’ said she. “ She has been
ﬂisposedallday; and we havepersuaded hermgoto

“Perhaps, then," he hesitatingly replied, “what I '
heard this morning ma be true—there may be more
truth in it than I could lieve po-ihle at ﬁrst."

a What did you hear ? "

“ That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think—
in shon, that a man, whom I [new to be engaged—hut
how shall I tell you? If on know it already, as surely
you must, I may be ”

“ You man," answered Elinor, with forced calm-
ness, “Mr Willough ’s marriage with Miss Grey.
meedoknowital This seemstohaveheen I

II. c

34 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

day of general elucidation, for this very moming ﬁrst
unfolded it to us. Mr Willoughby is unfathomable!
Where did you hear it i ”

“ In a stationer’s shop in Pall Mall, where I had
business. Two ladies were waiting for their carriage,
and one of them was giving the other an account of
the intended match, in a voice so little attempting can-
cealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all.
The name of Willoughby, John Willoughby, uently
repeated, first caught my attenu'on, and what to owed
was a positive assertion that everything was now ﬁnally
settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey—it was
no longer to be a secret—it would take place even
within a few weeks, with many rticulars of p
tion and other matters. One ing, especially, re-
member, becuusc it served to identify the man still
more ;—as soon as the ceremony was over, they were
to go to Combe Magna, his seat in Somersetshire. My
astonishment] But it would be impossible to describe
what I felt. The communicative lady, I learnt on
enquiry, for I staid in the shop till they were gone, was
a Mrs Ellison, and that, as I have been since informed,
is the name of Miss Grey’s guardian.”

“ It is. But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey
has ﬁfty thousand pounds? In that, if in anything, we
may ﬁnd an explanation."

“ It may be so ; but Willoughby is capable—at least
‘I think ”——he stopped a moment; then added in a
voice which seemed to distrust itself, “ And your sister
,——how did she—”

“ Her sufferings have been very severe. I have only
to hope that they may be proportionally short. It has
been, it is a most cruel aﬂiiction. Till yesterday, I
believe, she never doubted his regard; and even now,

rhaps—but I am almost convinced that he never was
really attached to her. He has been very deceitful!

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 35

and, in some points, there seems a hardness of heart
about him.”

“Ah I ” said Colonel Brandon, “ there indeedl
But your sister does not—I think you said so—she does
not consider it quite as you do i”

" You know her disposition, and may believe how
eagerly she would still justify him if she could."

He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the
removal of the tea. things, and the arrangement of the
card parties, the subject was necessarily Mn
Jennings, who had watched them with plmure while
the were talking, and who expected to see the effect
of iss Dashwood’s communication, in such an instan-
taneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon’s side as might have
become a man in the bloom of youth, of hope and
happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole

everung more serious and thoughtful than usual.

nth-9m ﬂ”!-

ROM a night of more sleep than she had expected,
Marianne awoke the next morning to the same '
consciousness of misery in which she had closed

her eyes. ‘

Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of
what she felt; and before breakfast was ready, they
had gone through the subject again and again; with the
same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on
Elinor’l side, the lame impetuous feelings and varying
opinions on Marianne’s, as before. Sometimes she
could believe Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as
innocent as herself, and at others, lost every consolation
in the impossibility of acquitting him. At one moment
- she was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all

36 SENSE AND SINSIBILITY.

the world, at another she would seclude herself from it
for ever, and at a third could resist it with energy. In
one thing, however, she was uniform, when it woe to
the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the pre-
sence of Mrs Jennings, and in a determined silence
when obliged to endure it. Her heart was hardened
against the belief of Mrs Jennings’s entering into her
sorrows with any companion.

“ No, no, no, it cannot be," she cried ; “ she cannot
feel. Her kindness is not sympathy; her good-nature
is not tenderness. All that she wants is gossip, and she
only likes me now because I supply it.’ ’

Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the in-
justice to which her sister was often led in her opinion
of others, by the irritable reﬁnement of her own mind,
and the too grth importance placed by her on the deli-
cacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a polished
manner. Like half the rest of the world, if more than
half there be that are clever and good, Marianne, with
excellent abilities and an excellent disposition, was
neither reasonable nor candid. She expected from other

ple the same opinions and feelings as her own, and
she judged of their motives by the immediate eﬁect of
their actions on herself. Thus a circumstance occurred,
while the sisters were together in their own room after
breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mrs Jennings still
lower in her estimation; because, through her own
weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to
herself, though Mrs Jennings was governed in it by an
impulse of the utmost good-will.

With a letter in her outstretched hand, and counten-
ance gally smiling, from the persuasion of bringing com-
fort, she entered their room, saying—

“ Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am
sure will do you good.”

Marianne heard enough. in one moment her imag-

SENSE AND SENSlBlLITY. 37

ination plaCed before her a letter from Willoughby, full
of tenderness and contn'rion, explanatory of all that had
, satisfactory, convincing; and instantly followed

Willoughby himself, rushin eagerly into the room
to inforce, at her feet, by the e oquenee of his eyes, the
assurances of his letter. The work of one moment was
destroyed by the next. The handwriting of her mother,
never till then unwelcome, was before her; and, in the
acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an
Extasy of more than hope, she felt as if, till that instant,
she had never suffered.

The cruelty of Mrs Jennings no language, within her
reach in her moments of happiest eloquence, could have
expressed; Ind now she could reproach her only by
the tears which streamed from her eyes with passionate
violence—a roach, however, so entire] lost on its
object, that s er many expressions of pity, she with-
drew, ntill referring her to the letter for comfort. But
the letter, when she was calm enough to read it, brou ht
linle comfort. Willoughby ﬁlled every page. er
mother, still conﬁdent of her engagement, and relying as
warmly as ever on his constancy, had onl been mused
by Elinor’s application, to entreat from srianne greater
openness towards them both, and this, with such tender-
ness towards her, such aﬁ'ection for Willoughby, and
such a conviction of their future happiness in each other,
that she wept with agony through the whole of it.

All her impatience to be at home again now retumed ;
her mother was dearer to her than ever~dearer through
the very excess of her mistaken conﬁdence in Willough ,
and she was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor, unab e
herself to detemiine whether it were better for Marianne
to be in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her
own exc t of patience till their mother’s wishes could
could be nown; and at length she obtained her sister’ s
consent to wait for that knowledge.

3,8 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Mn Jenninga left them earlier than Mill; for ire
could not be euy till the Middleton. and Palmer- were
able to grieve In much u her-elf; and politively reﬁna-
ing Elinor’a offered attendance, went out alone for the
rent of the morning. Elinor, with a very heavy heart,
aware of the in she was going to communicate, and
Perceiving by arianne’l letter how ill the had rucceeded
m laying any foundation for it, then at dawn to write
her mother an account of what had paued, and intreat
her directiona for the future; while Marianne, who
came into the drawing-room on Mn Jenningl’e going
away, remained ﬁxed at the table where Elinor wrote,
watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over her
for the hardship of such a task, and grieving Kill more
fondly over its effect on her mother. .

In thin manner they had continued about a quarter of
an hour, when Marianne, whose nerve- could not then
hear any cudden noise, was startled by a rap at the
door.

“ Who can this be ?" cried Elinor. “ So early
tool I thought we bad been safe.”

Marianne moved to the window.

“ It is Colonel Brandon ! ” aaid ohe, with veamion.
“ We are never safe from bin."

“ He will not come in, as Mrs Jennings it from
home."

“ I will not mm to Ibul,” retreating in her own room.
“ A man who has nothing to do with his own time has
no comcience in his intrusion on that of others."

The event proved her conjecture right, though it Wu
founded on injustice and error, for Colonel Brandon did
come in ; and Elinor, who wan convinced that aolicitude
for Marianne brought him thither, and who saw (bat
Iolieitude in his disturbed and melancholy look, and in
hie anxioua though brief inquiry after her, could not for-
give her Iiater for esteeming him no lightly.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 39

“ I met Mrs Jennings in Bond Street,” girl be, after
the ﬁrst salutation, uancl she encouraged me to come
on; and I was the more easily encouraged, because I
thought it‘prohahle that I might ﬁnd you alone, which
I was very desirous of doing. My object—my wish-—
my Iole wish in desiring it—I hope, I believe it is—is to
be I means of giving comfort—no, I must not say com-
fort—not present comfort—but conviction, lasting con-
viction to your sister’s mind. My regard for her, for
yourself, for your mother—will you allow me to prove
it by relating some circumstances, which nothing but
a wry sincere regard—nothing but an earnest desire of
being useful—. I think I am justiﬁed—'dhough where
so many hours have been spent in convincing myself
thrrt I am right, is there not some reason to fear I may
be wrong i " He stopped.

“ I understand you,” said Elinor. “ You have
something to tell me of Mr Willoughby, that will open
his character farther. Your telling it will be the greatest
act of friendship that can he shewn Io Marianne. My
gratitude will be insured immediately by any information
tending to that end, and 5m must be gained by it in
time. I’ray, my, let me hear it.”

“ You slral ; nnd,to be brief, when I quiued Barton
last October—but this will give you no idea. I must go
farther back. You will ﬁnd me a very awkward narra-
oor, Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin.
A short account of myself, I believe, will be necessary,
and it (ball be a short one. On such a subject,"
sighing ,hcnvily, “I can have little temptation to be
di se.’

He stopped a moment for recollection, and then,
with another sigh, went on.

“ You have probably entirely forgotten a conversa-
tion—(it is not to be supposed that it could make any
impression on you)—4 conversation between us one

40 SENSE AND SENSlBlLlTY.

evening at Barton Park—4t w the evening of I dance
-—in which I alluded to a lady I had once known, as
resembling, in some measure, your liner Marianne."

" Ind " anewered Elinor, “I have not forgotten
it.” He looked pleased by thin remernbnoce, and
added—-

“ If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the
partiality of tender recollection, there is a very strong
resemblance between them, as well in mind as person—
the same warmth of heart, the same eagerneet of fancy
and Iyirits. This lady was one of my nearest relations,
an orphan from her infancy, and under the guardianshiy
of my father. Our ages were nearly the same, and
from our earliest years we were playfellowu and friends.
I cannot remember the time when I did not love Eliza;
and my affection for her, as we grew up, was such, an
perhaps, judging from my present forlorn and cheerleu

mvity, ou might think me inca ble of having ever
gelt. era, for me, was, I beieve, fervent u the
attachment of your sister to Mr Willoughby, and it
was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate.
At seventeen the was lost to me for ever. She was
married—married against her inclination to my brother.
Her fortune wu large, and our family estate much en-
cumbered. And this, I fear, is all that can be id for
the conduct of one who was at once her uncle and
guardian. My brother did not deserve her; he did
not even love her. I had hoped that her regard for
me would an rt her under any diﬂicult , and for
some time it id ;—bnt at last the misery 0 her situa-
tion, for she experienced great unkindnees, overcame
all her resolution, and though she had romieed me that
nothing—but how blindly I relate ! have neVer told
you how this we: brought on. We were within a few
hours of elopin together for Scotland. The treachery,
or the folly, o my cousin’n maid betrayed us. I was

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 41

banished to the house of a relation far distant, and she
was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement, till
my father's point was gained. I had depended on her
fortitude too far, and the blow was a severe one—but
had her marriage been happy, so young as I then was,
a few months must have reconciled me In it, or at least
I should not have now to lament it. This, however,
was not the case. My brother had no regard for her;
his pleasures were not what they ought to have been,
and from the first he treated her unkiudly. The con-
sequence of this, on a mind so young, so lively, so
inexperienced as rs Brandon’s, was but too natural.
She resigned herself at ﬁrst to all the misery of her
situation; and happy had it been if she had not lived
to overcome those regrets which the remembrance of
me occasioned. But can we wonder that with such a
husband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend
to advise or restrain her (for my father lived only I
few months after their marriage, and I was with m
regiment in the East Indies), she should fall? Had
remained in England, perhaps—43m I meant to promote
the happiness of both by removing from her for years,
and for that purpose had procured my exchange. The
shock which her marriage had given me,” he continued
in a voice of great agitation, “was of triﬂing weight—
vlas nothing—to what I felt when I heard, about two
years afterwards, of her divorce. It was that which
threw this gloom,—even now the recollection of what
I suﬂ'ered—”

He could so no more, and rising hastil walked for
a few minutes a ut the room. Elinor, a ected by his
relation, and still more by his distress, could not speak.
He saw her concern, and coming to her, took her hand,
pressed it, and kissed it with grateful respect. A few
minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed
with composure.

42 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ It was nearly three years after this unhappy period
before I returned to England. My first care, when I
did arrive, was of course to seek for her; but the
search was as fruitless as it was melancholy. I could
not trace her beyond her ﬁrst seducer, and there was
every reason to fear that she had removed from him
only to sink deeper in a life of sin. Her legal allow-
ance was not adequate to her fortune, nor sufﬁcient for
her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
brother that the power of receiving it had been made
over some months before to another person. He
imagined, and calmly could he imagine it, that her
extravagance and consequent distress had obliged her
to dispose of it for some immediate relief. At last,
however, and after I had been six months in England,
I M ﬁnd her. Regard for a former servant of my
own, who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me
to visit him in a spunging-hnuse, where he was con-
fined for debt; and there, in the same house, under a
similar confinement, was my unfortunate sister. So
altered—so faded—wom down by acute suffering of
every kind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and
sickly ﬁgure before me, to be the remains of the lovely,
blooming, healthful girl, on whom I had once doated.
What I endured in so beholding her—but I have no
right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe
it—I have pained you too much already. That she
was, to all appearance, in the last stage of a consumption,
ww—yes, in such a situation it was my greatest com-
fort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving
time for a better preparation for death; and that was
given. I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and
under proper attendants; I visited her every day during
the rest of her short life: I was with her in her last
moments."

Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor

SENSE AND SENSHHLITY. ’ 43

spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern
at the fate of his unfortunate friend.

“ Your sister, I hope, cannot be offend ,” said he,
“ by the resemblance I have fancied between her and
my poor disgraced relation. Their fates, their fortunes
cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet disposi-
tion of the one been guarded by a ﬁrmer mind, or I
happier marriage, she might have been all that you will
live to see the other be. But to what does Ill this
lad? I seem to have been distressing you for nothing.
Ah! Miss Dashwood—a subject such as this-—un-
touched for fourteen years—it is dangerous to handle it
at all I I will be more collected—more concise. She
left to my care her only little child, a little girl, the
offspring of her ﬁrst guilty connection, who was then
about three years old. She loved the child, and had
always kept it with her. It was a valued, a precious
trust to me; and gladly would I have discharged it
in the strictest sense, by watching over her education
myself, had the nature of our situations allowed it; but
I had no family, no home; and my little Eliza was
therefore placed at school. I saw her there whenever
I could, and after the death of my brother (which
happened about ﬁve years ago, and which left me the
possession of the fami y p rty), she frequently visited
me at Delaford. I called er a distant relation ; but I
am well aware that I have in general been suspected of
a much nearer connection with her. It is now three
years ago (she had 'ust reached her fourteenth year),
that I removed her rom school, to place her under the
care of a very respectable woman, residing in Dorset-
shire, who had the charge of four or ﬁve other girls of
about the same time of life; and for two years I had
every reason to be pleased with her situation. But Inst
Febniary, almost a twelvemonth back, the sudden]
disappeared. I had allowed her (imprudeutly, as it

44 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

has Iinoe turned out), at her earnest desire, to go to
Bath with one of her young friendc, who wan attending
her father there for hil health. I knew him to be I
very good can of man, and I thou ht well of his
daughter—better than the demed, or, with a moat
obninate and ill-judged Iecrecy, the would tell nothing,
would give no clue, though Ihe certainly knew all. He,
her father, a well-mning, but not a quick-igth man,
could really, I believe, give no information; for he had
been gencnlly conﬁned lo the house, while the girl:
were ranging over the town and making what acquaint-
mcel they chose; and he tried to convince me, an
thoroughly n he wan convinced himself, of hie daugh-
ler‘e being entirely unconcerned in the buaineu. In
Ihort, I could learn nothing but that she wu gone; all
the rent, for eight long months, wan left to conjecture.
What I thought, what I feared, may be imagined; and
what I luffered too.”

“Good heavena! ” cried Elinor, “could it he!
could Willoughby—"

“The ﬁrst new: that reached me of her,” he con-
tinued, “came in a letter from herself last October.
It wan forwarded to me from Delaford, and I received
it on the very morning of our intended party to Whit-
well; and thin wal the reason of my leaving Barton no
tuddenly, which I am lure mutt at the time have
appeared Itmngc to everybody, and which I believe
gave offence to come. Little did Mr Willoughby
imagine, I euppoee, when his look: censured me for
incivility in breaking up the party, that I was called
away to the relief of one whom he had made our and
minnhle; but bad he known it, what won! it have
availed? Would he have been le- gay or less happy
in the smile: of your sister? No, he hal already done
that which no man who can feel for another would do.
He had left the girl whose youth and innocence he had

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 45

seduced, in a situation of the utmost (lioness, with no
creditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his
address! He had left her, promising to return; he
neither returned, nor wrote, nor relier her."

“This is beyond everythingl ” exclaimed Elinor.

" His character is now before you—expensive, dissi-
pated, and worse than both. Knowing all this, as I have
now known it many weeks, guess what I must have felt
on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever, and on being
assured that she was to marry him; guess what I must
have felt for all your sakes. When I came to you last
week and found you alone, I came determined to know
the truth, though irresolute what to do when it Wu
known. My behaviour must have seemed strange to
you then ; but now you will comprehend it. To lufer
you all to be so deceived; to see your sister—hut what
could I do? I had no hope of interfering with success;
and sometimes I thought your sister’s inﬂuence might
yet reclaim him. But now, after such dishonounble
usage, who can tell what were his designs on her?
Whatever they may have been, however, she may now,
and hereafter doubtless wiﬂ, turn with gratitude towards
her own condition, when she compares it with that of
my poor Elia, when she considers the wretched and
hopeless situation of this 1‘ girl, and pictures her to
herself, with an aﬂ'ecn'on or him as strong, still as strong
as her own, and with a mind tormented by self-reproach,
which must attend hhr through life. Surely this com-
parison must have its use with her. She will feel her
own sufferings to be nothing. They proceed from no
misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the con-
trary, every friend must be made still more her friend
by them. Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for
her fortitude under it, must strengthen every attachment
Use your own discretion, however, in communicating to
her what I have told you. You must know best what

46 SENSE AND snusmru'rv.

will be its effect; but had I not seriously and from my
heart believed it might be of service, might lessen her
regrets, I would not have suffered myself to trouble
you with this account of my family slﬂictions, with a
recital which may seem to have been intended to raise
myself at the expense of others."

Elinor’s thanks followed this speech with grateful
earnestness; attended too with the assurance of her
expecting material advantage to Marianne, from the
communication of what had passed.

“ I have been more pained,” said she, “ by her en-
deavours to ac uit him than by all the rest; for it
irritates her min more than the most perfect conviction
of his unworthiness can do. Now, though at first Ilse
will suffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier.
Have on," she continued, after .1 short silence, “ ever
seen r Willoughby since you left him at Barton 2 ”

“Yes,” he replied gravely, “once I have. One
meeting was unavoidable.” .

Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,
saying—

“What! have you met him to—”

“I could meet him in no other way. Eliza had
confessed to me, though most reluctantly, the name of
her lover; and when he returned to town, which was
within a fortnight after myself, we met by a intment,
he to defend, I to punish his conduct. e rctumcd
unwounded, and the meeting, therefore, never got
abroad.”

Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this ; but
to a man and a soldier, she presumed not to censure
rt.

“ Such,” said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, “ has
been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of
mother and daughter! and so imperfectly have I
discharged my trust! ”

SENSB AND SENSIBILITY. 47

“ Is she still in town P ”

“No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in,
for I found her near her delivery, I removed her and
her child into the country, and there she remains.”

Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably
dividing Elinor from her sister, he put an end to ill!
visit, receiving from her again the ume grateful acknow-
ledgments, and leaving her full of compassion and
esteem for him.

@1119"! Sﬁﬁll

HEN the particulars of this conversation were
repeated by Miss Daahwood to her sister, as
they so soon were, their effect on her was

entirel such as e former had hoped to see. Not
that rianne appeared to diurust the truth of any part
of it, for she listened to it all with the most steady and
submissive attention, made neither objection nor remark,
attem ted no vindication of Willoughby, and seemed to
shew lay her tears that she felt it to be impossible. But
though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction
of his guilt um: carried home to her mind ; thou h she
saw with tisfaction the elfect of it, in her no longer
avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called, in her speak-
ing to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though she w her spirits
less violently irritated than before ; she did not see her
less wretched. Her mind did become settled, but it
was settled in a gloomy dejection. She felt the loss of
Willoughby’s character yet more heavily than she had
felt the loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of
Miss Williams, the misery of that poor girl, and the
doubt of what his designs might out: have been on her-

48 stars: urn msrsru'rv.

Ielﬁpreyedaltogetherlomueh on her qririu,that she
could not bring herelfto speak of what-he felt even to
Elinor; and brooding over her sorrows in ileuce, gave
morepaintohersisterthancmrldhave been communi-
cated by the most open and most frequent ooan of
them.

To give the feelings or the language of Mn Dad)-
wood on receiving and answering Elinor‘s letter, would
be only to give a repetition of what her daughters had
already felt and said; of a disappointment hardly lea
painful than Marianne’s, and an indignation even grater
than Elinor’s. Long letter: from her, quickly nucceed-
iug ach other, arrived to tell all that she suffered and
thought; to exprel her anxious aolicitude for Marianne,
and entreat she would bear up with fortitude under this
misfortune. Bad Indeed mutt the nature of Mariauue’s
aﬂliction be, when her mother could talk of fortioudel
mortifyiug and humiliating must be the origin of those
regrets, which .15: could wish her not to indulge!

A 'nrt the interest of her own individual comfort,
Mn ghshwood had determined that it would be better
for Marianne to be anywhere at that time, than at
Barton, where everything within her view would be
bringing back the past in the strongest and moot alllieb
ing manner, by constantly placing Willoughby before
her, ouch as she had always seen him there. She re-
commended it to her daughters, therefore, by all means
not to shorten their visit to Mn Jennings; the length
of which, though never exactly ﬁxed, had been expected
by all to comprise at least five or six week!» A
variety of occupations, of objects, and of company,
which could not be procured at Barton, would he inevit-
ahle therel and might yet, she hoped, chat Marianne,
at n'mel, into nome interest beyond hereelf, and even
into some amusement, much as the idea of both might
now be spurned by her.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 49

From, all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her
mother considered her to be at least equally safe in
town as in the country, since his acquaintance must now
be dropped by all who call themselves her friends.
Design could never bring them in each other’s way;
negligence could never leave them exposed to a surprise ;
and chance had less in its favour in the crowd of
London than even in the retirement of Barton, where
it might force him before her while pa 'ng that visit at
Allenham on his marriage, which Mrs Bashwood, from

. foreseeing at first as a probable event, had brought her-
self to expect as a certain one.

She had yet another reason for wishing her children
to remain where they were; a letter from her son-in-
law had told her that he and his wife were to be in
town before the middle of February, and she judged it
right that they should sometimes see their brother.

Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother’s
opinion, and she submitted to it therefore without op-
position, though it proved perfectly different from what
she wished and expected, though she felt it. to be
entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that
by requiring her longer continuance in London it
deprived her of the only possible alleviation of her
wretchedness, the personal sympathy of her mother, and
doomed her to such society and such scenes as must
prevent her ever ltnowin a moment’s rest.

But it was a matter 0 great consolation to her, that
what brought evil to herself would bring good to her
sister; and Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that
it would not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely,
comforted herself by drinking, that though their longer
stay would therefore militate against her own happiness,
it would be better for Marianne than an immediate
return into Devonshire.

Her carefulnus in guarding her sister from ever

I]. D

50 SENSE AND SBNSIBILITV.

hearing Willoughby‘l name mentioned, Wu not thrown
away. Marianne, though without knowing it hertelf,
reaped all in advantage; for neither Mn Jenningt, nor
Sir John, nor even Mrs Palmer her-elf, ever he of
him before her. Elinor wished that the name other-
ance could have extended towards herself, but that was
impossible, and she was 0in ed to lilten day after day
to the indignation of them I.

Sir John could not have thought it possible. “A
man of whom he had always had such reason to think
well! Such a good-natured fellow! He did not
believe there was a holder rider in England! It win
an unaccountable busineta. He wished him at the
devil with all his heart. He would not speak another
word to him, meet him where he might, for all the
worldl No, not if it were to be by the tide of Barton
covert, and they were kept waiting for two home
together. Such a ocoundrel of a fellow! tuch a deceit-
ful dog! It was only the last time they met that he
had oKend him one of Folly’s puppies! and thil wan
the end of it! ”

Mra Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. “She
was determined to drop hie acquaintance immediately,
and she was very thankful that she had never been
acquainted with him at all. She wished with all her
heart Combe- Magna was not I0 near Cleveland; but it
did not signify, for it war a great deal too far 03' to
vilit; the hated him so much that Ahe wan reeolved
never to mention hiu name again, and the should
tell everybody she saw, how good-for-nodring he
wat,’

The rest of Mrs Palmer’s sympathy was shown in
procuring all the rticularu in her power of the approach-
rng marriage, an communicating them to. Elinor. She
could soon tell at what coachmaker’e the new carriage
was building, by what painter Mr Willoughby’e portrait

SENSE AND SENSIBILH‘Y. 51

was drawn, and at what warehouse Miss Grey’s clothes
mi ht be seen.

he calm and polite unconcem of Lady Middleton
on the occasion was a happy relief to Elmer’s spirits,
o pressed as the often were by the clamorous kindness
o the others. it was a great comfort to her to be sure
of excitin no interest in one person at lean among their
circle of riends; a great comfort to know that there
was on: who would meet her without feeling an
curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety for her siste s
health.

Every qualiﬁcation is raised at times, by the circum-
stances of the moment, to more than its real value; and
she was somede worried down by oﬂicious con-
dolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to
comfort than good-nature. I

Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair
about once every day, or twice, if the subject occurred
ve often, by saying, “ It is very shocking indeed!”
an b the means of this continual though gentle vent,
was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the
first without the smallest emotion, but very soon to see
them without recollecting a word of the matter; and
having thus supported the dignity of her own sex, and
spoken her decided censure of what was wrong in the
other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to the in-
terest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined
ghough rather against the opinion of Sir John), as Mrs

' illoughby would at once be a woman of elegance and
fortune, to leave her card with her us soon as she
married.

Colonel Brandon’s delicate unobtrusive inquiries were
never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood. He had abun-
dant] earned the privilege of intimate discussion of her
sister}; disappointment, by the friendly zeal with which
11: had endeavoured to soften it, and they always con-

52 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

versed with conﬁdence. His chief reward for the pain-
ful extenion of disclosing past sorrows and present
humiliations, was given in the pitying eye with which
Marianne sometimes observed him, and the tleness of
her voice whenever (though it did not oft: happen)
she was obliged, or could oblige herself to speak to him.
Thu: assured him that his exertion had produced an
increase of good-will towards himself, and the: ve
Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented h r;
but Mn Jennings, who knew nothing of all this—who
knew only that the Colonel continued as grave u eve,
and that she could never prevail on him to make the
oﬁ'er himself, nor commission her to make it for him—
hegan at the end of two days to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not he married till Michael-
mas, and by the end of a week that it would not he
a match at all. The good underst'mding between the
Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare
that the honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the
yew arbour, would all be made over to Iver ,- and Mn
Jennings had for some time ceased to think It all of
Mr Ferraro.

Early in Fehmary, within a fortnight from the receipt
of Willoughhy’s letter, Elinor had the painful ofﬁce of
informing her sister that he was married. She had
taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to herself,
as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as
she was desirous that Marianne should not receive the
ﬁrst notice of it from the public papers, which she saw
her eagerly examining every morning.

She received the news with resolute composure;
made no observation on it, and at ﬁrst shed no tears;
but after a short time they would burst out, and for the
rest of the day she was in a state hardly less pitiahle
than when she ﬁrst learnt to expect the event.

The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 53

married; and Elinor now h as there could be no
danger of her seeing either-0 them, to prevail on her
sister, who had never yet left the house since the blow
ﬁrst fell, to go out again by degrees as she had done
before.

About this time, the two Miss Steeles, latel arrived
at their cousin's house in Bartlett’s Buildings, lblbom,
presented themselves again before their more grand
relations in Conduit and Berkeley-street, and were
welcomed by them all with great cordiality.

Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence
always gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to make
a very gracious return to the overpowering delight of
Luc in ﬁnding her Mill in town.

“ should have been quite disappoian if I had not
found you here dill,” said she re redly, with a strong
emphasis on the word. “ But I ways thought I :bauld.
I was almost sure you would not leave London Ly?
awhile ; though you told me, you know, at Barton, t
you should not stay above a month But I thought, at
the time, that you would most likely change your mind
when it came to the point. It would have been such a
great pity to have went away before your brother and
sister came. And now, to be sure, you will be in no
burr] to be gone. I am amazingly glad you did not
keep to your war .”

Elinor rfecdy understood her, and was forced to use
all her sel -command to make it appear that she did MI.

"Well, my dear,” said Mrs Jennings, “ and how did
you travel i’

“ Not in the stage, I assure you,” replied Miss Steele,
with quick exultalion; “ we came post all the way, and
had a very smart beau to attend us. Dr Davies was
coming to town, and so we thought we’d join him in s
post-chaise; and he behaved very genleeﬂy, and paid
ten or twelve shillings more than we did.”

54 SENSE AND SBNSIBILITV.

“Oh, ohl" cried MnJenningI.“very ,in-
deedl and the doctor is a single man, I warrrnﬁyon."

“ There now,” said Miss Steele, aﬂw‘ecredly simpen'ng;
“everybody laughs at me so about the Doctor, and I
cannot think why. My cousins y they are sure I have
made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never
think about him from one hour’s end to another.
‘ Lord! here comes your beau, Nancy,’ my cousin said
t’other day, when she saw him crossing the street to the
house. ‘My beau, indeed!’ said I, ‘I cannot think
who you mean. The Doctor is no bau of mine.‘ "

“ AB 3y, that is very pretty talking—hut it won’t do
—the octor is the man, I see.”

“ No, indeed!” replied her cousin, with affected
earnestness, “and I beg you will contradict it, if you
ever hear it talked of."

Mru Jenningu directly gave her the gratifying assur-
ance that she certainly would not, and Miss Steele was
made completely happ .

“ I suppose you go and stay with your brother
and sister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to town,”
said Lucy, returning, after a cessation of hostile hints, to
the charge.

“ No, I do not think we shall.”

“ Oh, yes, I dare say you will.”

Elinor would not humour her by farther 0 position.

“ What a charming thing it is that Mrs Bashwood
can I re you both for so long a time together!”

“ ong a time, indeed!” interposed Mrs Jennings.
“ Why, their visit is but begun! ”

Lucy was silenced.

“ I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dash-
wood," said Miss Steele. “ I am sorry she is not well ;”
for Marianne had left the room on their arrival.

“ You are very good. My sister will be equally
sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she has

I

SENSE AND snusxmurv. 55

been very much pl ed lately with nervous headaches,
which make her un t for company or convesntion.”

“ Oh, dear, that is I great pityl but such old friends
as Lucy and me !—I think she might see In ; and I nm
are we would not speak a word.” ‘

Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal.
“ Her sister was perha laid down upon the bed, or in
her dressing-gown, m5. therefore not able to come to
them.”

" Oh, if that’s all,” cried Miss Steele, “ we can just
as well go and tee brr."

Elinor began to ﬁnd this impertinence too much for
her temper; but she was saved the trouble of checking
it, by Lucy’s sharp reprimand, which now, as on many
occuions, though it did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sister, was of advantage in governing
those of the other.

chapter ﬁﬁﬁlll

FTER some opposition, Marianne yielded to her
sister's entreaties, and consented to go out with
her and Mrs Jennings, one morning for half an

hour. She expressly conditioned, however, for paying
no visits, and would do no more than accompany them
to Gray’s in Sackville-street, where Elinor was carrying
on a negotiation for the exchange of a few old-fashioned
jewels of her mother.

Vt’hen they stopped at the door, Mn Jennings recol-
lected that there was a lady at the other end of the
street on whom she ought to call; and as she had no
business at Gray's, it was resolved, that while her young
friends tnnsacted theirs, she should pay her visit, and
return for them.

56 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

0n ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoodl found
so many people before them in the room, that there was
not a person at liberty to attend to their orders; and
they were obliged to wait. All that could be done was,
to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to
promise the quickest succession; one gentleman only
was standing there, and it is probable that Elinor was
not without hope of exciting his politeness to a quicker
de tch. But the correctness of his eye, and the

‘ delicacy of his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness.
He was giving orders for a toothpick-case for himself,
and till its size, sha , and ornaments were determined,
——all of which, aiizr examining and debating for a
quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the
shop, were ﬁnally arranged by his own inventive fancy,
—he had no leisure to bestow any other attention on
the two ladies, than what was comprised in three or
four very broad stares; a kind of notiCc which served
to imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and
face of strong, natural, sterling ins-ignilicance, though
adorned in the ﬁrst style of fashion.

Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings
of contempt and resentment, on this impertinent exami-
nation of their features, and on the puppyisrn of his
manner in deciding on all the different horrors of the
different toothpick-cases resented to his inspection, b
remaining unconscious ofp it all; for she was as we
able to collect her thoughts within herself, and be as
ignorant of what was passing around her, in Mr Gray's
slug, as in her own bed-room.

t last the affair was decided. The ivory, the gold,
and the pearls, all received their appointment, and the
gentleman having named the last day on which his
existence could be continued without the possession of
the toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisume
care, and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dash-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 57

woods, but such a one as seemed rather to demand than
express admiration, walked off with an happy air of real
conceit and affected indiﬁ'erence.

Elinor lost no time in bringing her buliness forward,
and was on the point of concluding it, when another
gentleman presented himself at her ride. She turned
her eyes towards his face, and found him with some
su rise to be her brother.

heir affection and plealure in meeting was just
enough to make 3 ve% creditable appearance in Mr
Gray’s shop. John asth was really far from
being sorry to Ice his sisters again ; it rather gave them
satisfaction; and his inquiries after their» mother were
respectful and attentive.

Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town
two days.

“I wished very much to call upon you yesterda ,”
said he, “ but it was impossible, for we were ohli to
take Harry to see the wild beam at Exeter Exchange:
and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs Ferrars.
Harry was vastly pleased. TH: morning I had fully
intended to call on you, if I could possibly ﬁnd a spare
half-hour, but one has always so much to do on ﬁrst
coming to town! I am come here to bespealt Fanny a
seal. But to-morrow I think I shall certainly be able
to call in Berkeley-street, and be introduced to your
friend Mrs Jennings. I understand she is a woman of
very good fortune. And the Middletons too, you must
introduce me to Ilmu. As my mother-in-lnw's rela-
tions, I shall be happy to slww them every respect.
They are excellent neighbours to you in the county, I
undemd."

“ Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfort,
their friendliness in every particular, is more than I can
express.”

“I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word;

58 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

extremely glad indeed. But so it ought to be; they
are peep e of large fortune, they are related to you, and
every civility and accommodation that can serve to make
your situation pleannt, might be reasonably ex

And so you are most comfortably settled in your little
cottage, and want for nothing. Edward brought us a
most charming account of the place; the most complete
thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you all
seemed to enjoy it beyond anything. It was a great
Bﬁlfaﬂion to us to hear it, I assure you."

Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and
was not sorry to be red the necessity of answering
him, by the arrival of rs Jennings’s servant, who came
so tell her that his mistress waited for them at the

oor.

Mr Dashwood attended them down stairs, was inno-
duced to Mrs Jennings at the door of her carriage, and
repeating his hope of being able to call on them the next
day, look leave.

His visit was duly paid. He came with a pretence
at an arlogy from their sister-in-law, for not coming
too ; “ ut she was so much engaged with her mother,
that really she had no leisure for going anywhere.”
Mn Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she
should not stand upon ceremony, for they were all
cousins, or something like it, and she should certainly
wait on Mrs John Dashwood very soon, and bring her
sisters to see her. His manners to limit, though calm,
were perfectly kind; to Mrs Jennings, most attentiver
civil; and on Colonel Brandon's coming in soon after
himself, he eyed him with a curiosity which seemed to
say, that he onl wanted to know him to be rich to be
equally civil to im.

After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor
to walk with him to Conduit-street, and introduce him
to Sir John and Lady Middleton. The weather was

smsn mm smsmu'ry. 59

remarkably ﬁne, and she readily consented. As soon as
they were out of the house, his inquiries began.

“Who is Colonel Brandon? Is he a man of for-
tune l "

“ Yes; he has a v ood m in Dorsetshire."

“ I am glad of it. a‘ige seeihs mat gentlemanlike
man, and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the
prospect of a very respectable establishment in life.”

“ Me, brother—what do you mean i "

“ He likes you. I observed him nan-owl , and am
convinced of it. What is the amount of his ortune i"

“ I believe about two thousand a-year.”

“ Two thousand a-year;" and then working himself
up to a pitch of enthusiastic generosity, he added a

“ Elinor, I wish with all my heart it were min as
much, for our sake.”

“ Indeed, I believe you,” lied Elinor, “ but I am
very sure that Colonel Bran on has not the smallest
wish of marrying me.”

“ You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mis-
taken. A very little trouble on your side secures him.
Perhaps just at resent he may be undecided ; the small-
ness of your [Fortune may make him hang back; his
friends may all advise him against it. But some of those
little attentions and encouragements which ladies can so
elsil give, wiﬂ iix him, in spite of himself. And there
can no reason why you should not try for him. It
is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your
side—in short, you know as to an attachment of that
kind, it is quite out of the question, the objections are
insurmountable—you have too much sense not to see all
that. Colonel Brandon must be the man ; and no
civility shall be wanting on my part, to make him pleased
with you and your famil . It Is a match that must give
universal satisfaction. {11 short, it is a kind of thing
that "—lowering his voice to an important whisper—

60 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ will he exceedingly welcome to all parties.” Recol-
lecting himself, however, he added, “That is,’I mean
to say—your friends are all tmly anxious to see you well
settled, Fanny garticularly, for she has your interest very
much at heart, mire you. And her mother too, Mn
Ferrars, a very good—natured woman, I am one it would
give her great pleasure, the said so much the other day."

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

“ It would be something remarkable now,” he con-
tinued, “ something droll, if Fanny should have a brother
and I a sister settling at the same time. And yet it is
not very unlikely.”

“Is Mr Edward Ferrars,” said Elinor with resolu-
tion, “ going to be married 3 ”

“ It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing
in agitation. He has a most excellent mother. Mrs
Fermrs, with the utmost liberality, will come forward,
and settle on him a thousand a-year, if the match takes
place. The lady is the Honourable Miss Morton, only
daughter of the late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand
pounds—a very desirable connexion on both sides, and I
have not a doubt of its taking place in time. A thousand
a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, to make
over for ever ; but Mrs Ferraro has a noble irit. To
give you another instance of her liberality:— he other
day, as soon as we came to town, aware that money
could not be very plenty with us just now, she put bank-
notes into Fanny’s hands to the amount of two hundred
pounds. And extremely acceptable it is, for we must
ive at a great expense while we are here."

He paused for her assent and compassion; and the
forced herself to say—

“ Your expenses both in town and country must
certainly be considerable, but your income is a large
one."

“ Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.

SENSE AND SENSlBlLlTY. 61

I do not mean to complain, however! it is undoubtedly
a comfortable one, and, I hope, will in time be better.
The enclomre of Norland Common, now carrying on, is
a most serious drain. And then I have made a little
purchase within this half-year——-East Kingham Farm,
on must remember the place, where old Gibson used to
ive. The land was so very desirable for me in every
res ct, so immediately adjoining my own property, that
I elt it my duty to buy it. I could not have answered
it to my conscience to let it fall into any other hands.
A man must pay for his convenience, and it by cost me
a vast deal of money.”

“ More than you think it really and intrinsically
worth ? ”

“ Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again,
the next day, for more than 1 gave: but with regard to
the purchase-money, I might have been very unfortunate
indeed ; for the stocks were at that time so low, that ii
I had not happened to have the necessary sum in m
banker’s hands, I must have sold out to very great loss. '

Elinor could only smile.

“ Other great and inevitable expenses too we have
had on ﬁrst coming to Norland. Our respected father,
a you well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill ell'ecu
that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother. Far be it for me to repine at his
doing so; he had an undoubted right to dispose of his
own property as he chose. But, In consequence of it,
we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen,
china, &c., to supply the place of what was taken awa .
You may guess, after all these expenses, how very
we must be from being rich, and how acceptable Mn
Ferrar‘s kindness is.”

" Certainly," said Elinor; “and assisted by her
liberslitylhopeyoumayyetlivetobeinwy

curcnnunncel.’

6 2 SENSE AND SENSlBILlTY.

“ Another ear or two may do much towards it,"
he ravelyrepied; “ but however there is still a greet
d to be done. There it not a stone laid of Fanny’-
greenhouse, and nothing but the plan of_ the ﬂower-
garden marked out."

“ Where is the house to be i ”

“ Upon the homindthe house. The old walnut-
treet are all come down to make room for it. It will
be a very ﬁne object from many pans of the park, and
the ﬂower-garden will slope down just before rt, and be
excaedingly pretty. We have cleared away all the old
thorns that grew m patches over the brow.’

Elinor kept her concern and her censure to henelf,
and was very thankful that Marianne was not present to
share the provocation.

Having now said enough to make his poverty clear,
andto do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-
rings for each of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray’s,
his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began to
congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs
Jennings.

“She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her
house, her style of living, all bespeak an exceedin good
income, and it is an acquaintance that has not orify been
of great use to you hitherto, but in the end may prove
materially advantageous. Her inviting you to town is
certainly a vast thing in your favour; and, indeed, it
speaks altogether so great in regard for you, that in all
probability when she dies you will not be forgotten.
She must have a great deal to leave.”

“Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for the has
only her jointure, which will descend to her children.”

“But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to
her income. Few people of common rudence will
dry-urban and whatever the caves, she wil be able to
dispose of,”

sense AND ssusmrurv. 63

“ And do you not think it more likely that she should
leave it to her daughters, than to us ? ”

" Her daughters are both exceedingly well married,
snd therefore I cannot peroeive the necessity of her
remembering them farther. Whereas, in my opinion,
by her taking so much notice of you, and treating you
in this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim
on her future consideration, which a conscientious woman
would not disregard. Nothing can be kinder than her
behaviour ; and she can hardly do all this, without being
aware of the expectations she raises."

“ But she raises none in those most concerned. Indeed,
brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity
can'ies you too far.”

“ Why to be sure," said he, seeming to recollect him-
self, “people have little, have very little in their power.
But, my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne?
—she looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is
grown quite thin. Is she ill?" '

" She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint
on her for several weeks.”

" I am sorry for that. At her time of life, anything
of an illness destroys the bloom for ever! Hers has
been a very short onel She was as handsome a girl
last September as any I ever saw, and as likely to attract
the men. There was something in her style of bauty ‘
to please them particularly. I remember Fanny usedto
say that she would marry sooner and better than you
did; not but what she is exceedingly fond of Jon—but
so it happened to strike her. She will be mistaken,
however. I question whether Marianne now will marry
a roan worth more than ﬁve or six hundred a-year at
the utmost, and I' am very much deceived if 1w do not
do better. Dorsetshirel I know very little of Dorset-
shire, hut, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad
to know more of it; and I think I can ansv‘m for your

64 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

having Fanny and myself among the earlth and hen
pleased of your visitors.”

Elinor tried ve seriously to convince him that there
was no likelihoody of her marrying Colonel Brandon;
but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to him-
self to be relinquished, and he was really molved on
seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting
the marriage by every 'ble attention. He had
compunction enough l3” having done nothing for his
sisters himself, to be exceedingly anxious that everybody
else should do a great deal; and an offer from Colonel
Brandon, or a legacy from Mrs Jennings, was the easiest
means of atoning for his own neglect.

They were lucky enough to ﬁnd Lady Middleton at
home, and Sir John came in before their visit ended.
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides. Sir John
was ready to like anybody, and though Mr Dashwood
did not seem to know much about horses, he soon set
him down as a very good-natured fellow; while Lady
Middleton saw enough of fashion in his a pealance to
think his ac uaintance worth having ; and N}: Dashwood
went away lighted with both.

" I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny,”
said he, as he walked back with his sister. “ Lady
Middleton is really a most elegant woman l such a
woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know. And
Mrs Jennings too, an exceeding well-behaved woman,
though not so elegant as her daughter. Your sister need
not have any scruple even of visiting bar, which, to say
the truth, has been a little the case, and very naturally;
for we only knew that Mrs Jennings was the widow of
a man who had got all his money in a low way; and
Fanny and Mrs Ferrari were both strongly yrepouessed
that the nor her daughters were such kind of women as
Fanny would like to associate with. But now I can
carry her a most satisfactory account of both.”

sense AND suusmru-rv. 65

chapter iﬂﬂiv.

RS JOHN DASHWOOD had so much con-
ﬁdence in her husband’s judgment, that she
waited the very next do both on Mrs Jennings

and her daughter; and her con dence was rewarded by
ﬁnding even the former, even the woman with whom
her sisters were staying, b no means unworthy her
notice ; and as for Lady Myiddleton, she found her one
of the most charming women in the worldl

Lady Middleton was equally pleated with Mn
Dashwood. There was a kind of cold-hearted eelﬁsh-
ness on both sides, which mutually attracted them; and
they lympathised with each other in an insipid mpriety
of demeanour, and a general want of unde 'ng.

The some manners, however, which recommended
Mrs John Dashwood to the good inion of Lady
Middleton, did not suit the fancy of rs Jenningl, and
to bar she appeared nothing more than a little proud-
loolring woman of unwrdial address, who met her
husband’s sinlcre without any nll‘cction,nml nlmont with-
out having uuything to so to them i for of the qunrtcr
of an hour bestowed on llerkeley-rtreet, she sat at leaet
seven minutes and a half in silence.

Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did
not chuse to ark, whether Edward was then in town;
but nothing would have induced Fanny volunnrily to
mention his name before her, in able to tell her that his
marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till
her husband’s expectations on Colonel Bundon were
anlwered; because she believed them still so very much
attached to each other, that they could not be too
aedulously divided in word and deed on ever occasion.
The intelli encc, however, which :be woul not give,
soon ﬂow from another quarter. Lucy came very

u. E

66 SENSE AND sensrnru-n'.

shortly to claim Elinor’s companion on being unable to
see Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr
and Mrs Dashwood. He dared not come to Bartlett’s
Buildings for fear of detection, and though their mutual
impatience to meet was not to be told, they could do
nothing at present but write.

Edward assured them himself of his being in town,
within a very short time, by twice calling in Berkeley-
street. Twice was his urd found on the table, when
they returned from their moming’s engagements. Elinor
was pleased that he had called, and still more planed
that she had missed him.

The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with
the Middletons that though not much in the habit of
giving anything, they determined to give them a dinner,
and soon after their acquaintance begun, invited them to
dine in Hurley-street, where they had taken a very good
house for three months. Their sisters and Mrs Jennin s
were invited likewise, and John Dashwood was are
to secure Colonel Brandon, who, always glad to be
where the Miss Dashwoods were. received his eager
civilitiet with some surprise, but much more pleasure.
They were to meet Mrs Ferrars; but Elinor could not
learn whether her sons were to be of the party. The
expectation of seeing bar, however, was enough to make
her interested in the engagement; for though she could
now me: Edward’s mother without that strong anxiety
which had once promised to attend such an introduction,
though she could now see her with perfect indiiference,
as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being in com-
pany with Mrs Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she
was like, was as lively as ever.

The interest with which she thus anticipated the
party, was soon afterwards increased, more werfnlly
than pleasantly, by her hearing that the us Steeles
were also to be at it.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 67

So well had they recommended themselves to Lady
Middleton, so agreeable had their assiduities made them
to her, that though Lucy was certainly not elegant, and
her sister not even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John
to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduitstreet y
and it happened to be rticularl convenientto the Miss
Steeles, as soon as the ashw ’ invitation was known,
that their visit should begin a few days before the party
took place.

Their claims to the notice of Mrs John Dashwood,
at the nieces of the gentleman who for many years had
had the care of her brother, might not have done much,
however, towards procuring them seats at her table; but
as Lady Middleton’s guests they must be welcome; and
Luc , who had long wanted to be .rsonally known to
the firmily, to have a nearer view 0 their characters and
her own difﬁculties, and to have an opportunity of
endeavouring to please them, had seldom been ha ier
in her life than she was on receiving Mrs John ash-
wood’s card.

0n Elinor its effect was very diﬂerent. She began
immediately to determine that Edward, who lived with
his mother, must be asked, as his mother was, to a party
given b his sister ; and to see him for the ﬁrst time,
after that passed, in the company of Lucy l—ehe
hardly knew how she could bear it!

These apprehensions perhaps were not founded en-
tirely on reason, and certainly not at all on truth. They
were relieved, however, not by her own recollection, but
by the goodwill of Lucy, who believed herself to be in-
ﬂicting a severe disappointment when she told her that
Edward eeminly would not be in Harley-street on
Tuesdn , and even hoped to be carrying the pain will
farther y rounding her, that he was kept away by that
extreme a ection for herself, which he could not con-
cul when they were together.

68 sense sun SENSIBILITY.

The important Tuesday came that was to introduce
the two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-law.

“ Pity me, dear Miss Daahwood! ” aid Lucy, as

walked up the stairs together—for the Middlem-
amved so directly after Mrs Jennings, that they all
followed the servant at the same time—“ There is no-
body here but you, that can feel for me. I declarel
can hardly stand. Good graciousl—In a moment I
shall see the person that all my happiness depends on—
that is to be my mother! "—

Elinor could have given her immediate relief
euggesting the possibility of its being Miss Mortons
mother, rather than her own, whom they were about to
behold; but instead of doing that, she ﬂoured her, and
with great sincerity, that she did pity hen—tn the utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable
herself, hoped at least to be an object of irrepressible
envy to Elinor. *

Mrs Fen-are was a linle, thin woman, upright, even
to formality, in her ﬁgure, and serious, even to sour-nus,
in her aspect. Her complexion was sallow: and her
features small, without beauty, and naturally without
expression: but a lucky contraction of the brow had
rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, _
by giving it the strong characters of pride and ill-nature.
She was not a woman of many words; for, unlike people
in general, Ill: proportioned them to the number of her
ideas: and of the few syllables that did escape her, not
one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom the eyed
with the spirited determination of disliking her at all
events.

Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this be-
haviour. A few months ago it would have hurt her
exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs Ferrarl’ power to
distress her by it now 3 and the difference of her man-
ners to the Miss Steeles—a difference which seemed

suns: AND sensmu'rv. 69

gun-poser made to humble her more—only amused her.
he could not but smile to see the graciousnem of both
mother and daughter towards the very person—for Lucy
was particularly distinguished—whom of all others, had
they known as much as she did, they would have been
most anxious to mortify; while she herself, who had
compmtively no power to wound them, sat pointedly
slighted b both. But while she smiled at a graciousness
so minpp ied, she could not reﬂect on the mean-spirited
folly from which it spnmg, nor observe the studied
attentions with which the Miss Steeles courted in con
tinuancc, without thoroughly deqrising them all four.

Lucy was all exultation on being so honourany dis-
tinguished; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teszed
about Dr. Davi[e]s to be perfectly happy.

The dinner was a grand one, the servants were
numerous, and everything bespoke the Mistress’s inclina-
tion for shew, and the Master’s ability to support it. In
spite of the inn )mvcmcnts and additions which were
making to the orland estate, and in spite of its owuer
having once been within some thousand pounds of being
obliged to sell out at a loss, nothing gave any s mpwm
of that indigence which he had tried to infer rom it:
no of so kind, ex t of conversation, a red
—b’::'e:li{re thz deﬁcienzeyp was considerableypazhn
Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was
worth hearing, and his wife had sn'll less. But there
was no peculiar disgrace in this, for it was very much
the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost all
laboured under one or other of these disqualiﬁcation!
for being agreeable—want of sense, either natural or
improved, want of elegance, want of spirits, or want of
mm I’-

hen the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after
dinner, this povert was particularly evident, for the
gentlemen bad supp ied the discourse with some variety

70 SW5! AND SENSIBILITY.

—the variety of politics, iodosing land, and breaking
horses—but then it was all over, and one only
engaged the ladies till coffee am in, which was the
comparative heights of H Dashvmod, and Lady
Middleton’s second son Wailﬁam, who were nearly of
the ame age.

Had both the children been there, the affair might
have been determined too easily by measurin them at
once; but as Harry onl was present, it was eon'ec-
tuml assertion on both sides, and everybody had a right
to be equally positive in their opinion, and to reth it
over and over again as often as they liked.

The parties stood thus:

The two mothers, though each really convinced tlnt
her own son was the tallest, politely decided in favour
of the other.

The two grandmothers, with not less partiali , but
more sincerity, were equally earliest in support a their
own descendant.

Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one
parent than the other, thought the boys were both re-
markably tall for their age, and could not conceive that
there could be the smallest difference in the world be-
tween them; and Miss Steele, with yet greater address,
gave it. as fast as she could, in favour of each.

Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William's
side, by which she oﬁended Mrs Fem-us, and Fanny
still more, did not see the necessity of enforcing it by
any farther assertion; and Marianne, when called on
for hen, offended them all by declaring that she had no
opinion to give, as she had never thought about it.

Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted
a very pretty pair of screens for her sister-in-law, which
being now just mounted and brought home, ornamented
her present drawing-room; and these screens catching
the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7K

gentlemen into the room, were oﬂiciouely handed by
him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration.

“Theee are done by my eldeIt either,” laid he;
“and you, as a man oftaate,will, I dare lay, hepleued
with them. I do not know whether it ever happened
to see any of her performances heart, but the it in
general reckoned to dnw extremely well.”

The Colonel, though dioclaiming all preteoaione to
connoiueunhip, warmly admired the screens, as he would
have done anything painted by Miss Daohwood; and
the curiolity of the other: being of course excited, they
were handed round for general inspection. Mn Fen-art,
not aware of their being Elinor'a work, particularly
requelted to look at them; and after they had received
the gratifying teetimony of Lady Middleton’l approba-
tion, Faun presented them to her mother, comiderately
informing er at the same time that they were done by
Miss Dashwood.

“ Hum "—said Mrs Ferrare—“ very pretty,”— and
without regarding them at all, returned them to her
daughter.

Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother
had been uite rude enough,—for, colouring a little, the
immediate y aid,

“ They are very pretty, mn’am—an’t they?" But
then again, the dread of having been too civil, too
encouraging herself, probably came over her, for Ihe
pre9ently added,

" Do you not think they are Iornething in Miss
Morton'l It.er of painting, ma’nmi Site dot: paint
most delightfully. How beautifully her laat landscape
it done! ’ .

" Beautifully indeed. But :6: doe: everything well."

Marianne could not bear this. She was already
greatly displeased with Mn Fer-rare; and Illcll ill-timed
praiee of another, at Elinor’s expenae, though the had

72 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

not any notion of what wan principally meant by it,
provoked her immediatel to any with warmth,

“This it admiration o a very rn'cular kind! What
is Mine Morton to In? Who own or who are: for
her? It in Elinor of whom we think and Ipeolt."

And lo ing, she took the ocrecna out of her iner-
in-law’a hnndli to admire them hele a. they ought to
be admired.

Mn Fermrs looked exceedingly angry, and drawing
henelf up more Itillly than ever, pronounced in retort
this bitter phillippic: “ Mien Morton in Lord Morton’l
danghter.’

Fanny looked very angry too, and her hueband was
all in a fright at his sister’s audacity. Elinor wan much
more hurt by Marianne’s warmth, than she had been by
what produced it; but Colonel Brandon’a eyes, an they
were ﬁxed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only
what was amiable in it; the affectionate heart which
could not bear to see a sister slighted on the smallett

mt.

PoMarianne’a feelings did not stop here. The cold in-
oolence of Mn Ferrarl’ general behaviour to her inner,
aeemed, to her, to foretell such diﬁicultiet and distreuel
to Elinor, in her own wounded heart taught her to think
of with horror; and urged by a strong impulle of alien-
tionate nenaihility, she moved, after a moment, to her
litter’l chair, and putting one am! round her neck, and
one check clone to here, said in a low, but ca er voice :

“ Dear, dear Elinor, don’t mind them. on’t let
them make you unhappy.”

She could lay no more; her a iritx were quite over-
come, and hiding her face on linor’l lhouldcr, she
burst into team. Everybody’i attention was called, and
almost everybody wu concemed. Colonel Brandon role
It and went to them without knowing what he did.

r: Jennings, with a very intelligent “ Ah! poor dear,”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 73

immediately gave her her salts; and Sir John felt so
desperately enraged against the author of this nervous
distress, that he instantly changed his seat to one close
by Lucy Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief
account of the whole shocking affair.

In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered
enough to ut an end to the hustle, and sit down among
the rest; ough her spirits retained the impression of
what had passed, the whole evening.

“ Poor Marianne!” said her brother to Colonel
Brandon in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his
attention, “ She has not such good health as her sister,
—she is very nervorrs,—she hns not Elinor’s constitu-
tion; and one must allow that there is something very
trying to a young woman who bar been a beauty, in the
loss of her rsonal attractions. You would not think
it perhaps, grit Marianne war remarkably handsome a
few months ago—quite as handsome as Elinor. Now
you see it is all gone.”

‘cbspnr new.

LINOR'S curiosity to see Mrs Ferrars was satis-
ﬁed. She had found in her everything that
could tend to make a farther connexion between

the families undesirable. She had seen enough of her
pride, her meanness, and her determined rejudice
against herself, to comprehend all the diﬂicu ties that
must have rplexed the engagement, and retarded the
marriage 0 Edward and herself, had he been otherwise
free; and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for
her own sake, that one greater obstacle preserved her
from sullering under any other of Mn Ferrars’ creation,
preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice, or

74 sans: urn sursmmv.

any aolicitude for her good Or at lean, if die
did not bring heraelf quite to rejoice in Edward'a being
fenered w Lucy, ahe determined, that had Lucy been
more amiable, the ugh no have rejoiced.

She wondered that Lucy’s ‘nu could be an very
much elevated by the eivili 0 Mn Ferrari, that her
intern: and her vanity ahou d In very much blind her,
um make the mention which aeemed onlypaid her
because she was not Elinor, appear a compliment lo her-
nlf—or to allow her to derive encouragement ﬁrm a
preference only given her, because her real dilution W
unknown. Butchat itwn an,had not onlybeen de-
clared by Lucy’s eye. at the time, but waldeclared over
again the next morning more openly; for, at her parti-
cular desire, Lady Middleton cut her down in Berkeley-
strcct on the chance of seeing Elinor alone, to tell her
how happy Bill: Win.

The chance proved a lucky one, for a from
Mrs Palmer, noon after she an-ived, carried Mn enninga
away.

“ My dear friend,” cried Lucy as soon a: they were
by themselves, “ I come to talk to on of my happinel.
Could anything be so ﬂattering an n Fenan' way of'
heating me yesterday? So exceedingly affable an Ihe
was I You know how I dreaded the though: of Ieeing
her; but the very moment I was introduced, [here was
such an aﬁability in her behaviour av really almuld teem
to say, the had quite took a fancy to me. Now wan
amino? You sawitall; andwaanot youquirenruck
with it?"

“ She was certainly very civil to Wu."

“ Civil i—Did you ate nothing but only civility? I
saw a van deal more—such kindness a: fell to the share
of nobody but me i No pride, no hauteur, and your
tin/er the lame—all sweetness and allability! "

Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
still ressed her to own that she had reason for her
happiness, and Elinor was obliged to go on.

" Undoubtedly, if th had known your engagement,”
nid she, “nothing co d be more ﬂattering than their
treatment of you ; but as that was not the case—"

“ I guessed you would say so,” lied Luc quickly;
" but there was no reason in the wor d why Myra Ferraro
should seem to like me, if she did not—and her liking
me is everything. You shan’t talk me out of my tis-
faelian. am sure it will all end well, and there will
be no difﬁculties at all, to what I used to think. Mrs
Ferrari is a charming woman, and so is your sister.

Th are both delightful women indeed !‘—I wonder I
the d never hear you say how agreeable Mrs Dashwood
was ? " -

To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not
attem t any.

" re you ill, Miss Dashwood P—you seem low—
you don’t speak ;—sure, you an’t well. ’

“ I never was in better health."

“ I am glad of it with all my heart, but really you did
not look it. I should be so so to have you Ill,—you,
that have been the greatest com ort to me in the world!
—Heaven knows what I should have done without your
friendship.”

Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting
her own success. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for
she directly replied:

“ Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for
me, and next to Edward I love, it is the greatest com-
fort I have. Poor Edward! But now, there is one
good thing—we shall be able to meet, and meet retty
often, for La‘dy Middleton ’s delighted with Mrs Bash-
wood, so we shall be a good deal in Harley-street, I
dare I: , and Edward spends half his time with his
sister—Lida, Lady Middleton and Mrs Ferrari will

76 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

visit now ; and Mrs Fen-an and your sister were both
so good to say more than once, they should always be
glad to see me.—They are such charming women l—l
am sure if ever on tell your sister what I think of her,
you cannot too high.”

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to
hope that she .rlumld tell her sister. Lucy continued :

“I am sureI should have seen it in a moment, if
Mrs Fermrs had took a dislike to me. If she had only
made me a formal curtsey, for instance, without saying a
word, and never after had took any notice of me, and
never looked at me in a pleasant way—you know what
I mean,-—if I had been treated in that forbidding sort of
way, I should have gave it all up in despair. I could not
have stood it. For where she doe: dislike, I know it is
most violent.”

lClinor was prevented from making any reply to this
civil triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the ser-
vant’s announcing Mr Femrs, and Edward’s imme-
diately walking in. »

It was a very awkward moment ; and the countenance
of each showed that it was so. They all looked ex—
ceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed to have as great
an inclination to walk out of the room again, as to ad-
vance farther into it. The very circumstance, in its
unpleasantest fonn, which they would each have been
most anxious to avoid, had fallen on them—they were
not only all three together, but were together without
the relief of any other person. The ladies recovered
themselves ﬁrst. It was not Lucy's business to put
herself forward, and the appearance of secrecy must still
be kept up. She could therefore only loo! her tender-
ness, and after slightly addressing him, said no more.

But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she,
for his sake and her own, to do it well, that she forced
herself after a moment’s recollection, to welcome him,

sense AND snusxsru‘rv. 77

with a look and manner, that were almost easy and
almost n; and another struggle, another eﬂ'ort eu'll
improv them. She would not allow the presence of
Lucy, nor the consciousness of some injustice towards
herself, to deter her from saying that she was ha y to
see him, and that she had very much regrettedpbeing
from home, when he called before in Berkeley-street.
She would not be frightened from paying him those
attentions which, as a friend and almost a relation, were
his due, by the observant eyes of Lucy, though she soon
perceived them to be narrowly watching her.

Her manners gave some reassurance to Edward, and
he had courage enough to sit down ; but his emban-sss-
ment still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion
which the ease rendered reasonable, though his sex might
make it rare; for his heart had not the indifference of
Lucy’s, nor could his conscience have quite the ease of
Elinor’s.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed deter-
mined to make no contribution to the comfort of the
others, and would not say a word; and almost every-
thing that was said, )rocecdcd from Elinor, who was
obliged to volunteer all1 the infonnntion about her mother's
health, their coming to town, 6a., which Edward ought
to have inquired about, but never did.

Her exertions did not no here; for she soon after-
wards felt herself so heroica y disposed as to determine, '
under pretence of fetching Marianne, to leave the others
by themselves; and she really did it, and {bat in the
handsomest manner, for she loitered away seveml minutes
on the landing place, with the most high-minded forti-
tude, before she went to her sister. When that was
once done, however, it was time for the raptures of
Edward to cease; for Mnrianne’s jo hurried her
into the drawin -room immediatel . er pleasure in
seeing him was ike every other 0 her feelings, strong

78 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

in itself and Itrongly ken. She met him with a
handthatwmlldbeta andnvoicethatexpreued
the affection of a liner.

“Dear Edward I " Ihe cried, “this in e moment of
great happinell l—Thir would nlrnoot make amends for

ev?thm l "

'dward tried to return her kindneu at it deterred,
but before Inch witneuea he dared not II half what he
really felt. Again they all at down,“ fora moment
or two all were silent; while Marianne wan looking
with the moat upeaking tenderneu, nometimen at Edward
and lornetimea at Elinor, regrening only that their de-
light in each other should be checked by any'l unwel-
come pretence. Edward wan the lint to Ipeak, and it
will to notice Marianne’t altered loolu, and expreu hit
fear of her not ﬁnding London agree with her.

“ Oh l don’t think of me ! " ulu: replied, with Ipirited
eammneu, though her eyes were ﬁlled with tear: an
she spoke, “ don’t think of III] health. Elinor in well,
you see. That mun be enough for u- both.”

Thin remark was not calculated to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the good-will of
Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant
expression.

“Do you like London?" raid Edward, willing to
By an thing that might introduce another Iubject.

1‘ at at all. I expected much plearure in it, but I
have found none. The light of you, Edward, in the
only comfort it has afforded ; and, thank Heaven ! you
are what you alwayl were! ”

She panned—no one spoke.

“I think, Elinor," the presently added, “we mun:
employ Edward I» take care of no in our mum :9
Damn. In a week or two, I Iuppooe, we shall be
going; and, I (run, Edward will not be very unwilling
to accept the diary."

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 79

Poor Edward muttered somethin ; but what it was,
nobody knew, not even himself. gut Mnrianne, who
saw his agitation, and could easily trace it to whatever
cause best pleased herself, was perfectly ntisﬁed, and
soon talked of something else.

“We spent such I day, Edward, in Harley-street,
yaterdnyl So dull, so wretchedly dulll But I have
much, to say so you an that head, which cannot be said
now. ’

And with this admirable discretion did she defer the
assurance of her ﬁnding their mutual relatives more dis-
agreeable than ever, and of her being particularly disgusted
with his mother, till they were more in private.

“ But why were you not there, Edward ?—Why did
you not come ? ”

“ I was engaged elsewhere.”

“ Engaged !—But what was that, when such friends
were to be met 2 "

“Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to
take some revenge on her, “ you think young men never
stand u n engagements, if they have no mind to keep
them, little as well as great.”

Elinor was very angry, but Marinnne seemed entirely
insenrible of the sting ; for she calmly )lied,

" Not so, indeed ; for, seriously speaking, I am very
sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley-
street. And I reall believe he bar the most delicate
conscience in the wor d ; the most scrupulous in perform-
ing eve engagement, however minute, and however it
my e against his interest or Insure. He is the must
fearful of giving pain, of woun 'ng ex tation, and the
most incapable of being selﬁsh of an dy I ever saw.
Edward, it is so, and I will say it What! are you
never to hear yourself praised? Then you must be no
friend of mine; for those who will accept of my love
and esteem, must submit to my open commendation."

80 sense AND snusranr'r-v.

The nature of her commendation in the recent
case, however, happened to be particularly ill-suited to
the feelings of two-thirds of her auditors, and was so
very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon got up
to go away.

“ Going I!) soon!” said Marianne; “ my dear
Edward, this must not be." . -

And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her
persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer. But
even this encouragement failed, {or he would go; and
Lucy, who would have outetaid him had his visit luted
two home, soon afterwards went away.

“ What can bring her here so often I " said Marianne,
on her leaving them. ‘“ Could the not see that we
wanted her gone? How teazing to Edward! ”

“ Why so i—we were all his friends, and Lucy has
been the longest known to him of any. It is but
natural that Ire should like to see her as well as
ourselves."

Marianne looked at her steadily, and “You
know, Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I
cannot hear. If you only hope to have your Insertion
contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case, you
ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world
to do it. I cannot descend to be tricked out of mu-
ances that are not really wanted.”

She then left the room; and Elinor dared not fol-
low lrer to say more, for bound as the was by her pro-
mise of secrecy to Lucy],I she could give no information
that would convince arianne; and painﬁrl as the
consequences of her still continuing in an error might
be, she was obliged to submit to it. All that she
could hope, was that Edward would not often expose
her or himself to the distress of hearing Mariannc'l
mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other
part of the pain that bird attended their recent meeting
—and this she had every reason to expect.

SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY. 81
‘ .

chum: $5517].

ITHIN a few days after this meeting, the
newspapers announced to the world, that the
lady 0 Thomas Palmer, Esq., was safely

delivered of a son and heir; a very interesting and
satisfactory paragraph, at least to all those intimate
connections who knew it before. '

This event, hi hly important to Mrs Jennings’s
happiness, produc a temporary alteration in the dis-
posal of her time, and inﬂuenced in a like degree the
engagement: of her young friends 3 for as’she wished to
be as much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither
every morning as soon as she was dressed, and did not
return till late in the evening; and the Miss Dash-
woods, at the particular request of the Middletons, t
the whole of every day in Conduit-street. For '
own comfort, they would much rather have remained,
at least all the morning, in Mrs Jennings’s house; but it
was not a thing tobe urged against the wishes of eve -
bod . Their hours were therefore made over to L13
Mi dleton and the two Miss Stet-lea, by whom their
company was in fact as little valued, as it was professedly
sou t.

'f‘hey had too much sense to be desirable compan-
ions to the former; and by the latter they were con-
sidered with a jealous eye, as intruding on their ground,
and sharin the kindness which they wanted to mono-
lise. ugh nothing could be more polite than
ady Middleton’s behaviour to Elinor and Marianne,
she did not really like them at all. Because they
neither ﬂattered herself nor her children, she could not
believe them good-natured ; and because they were food
of reading, she fancied them satirical: perhaps without
exactly knowing what it was to be satirical; but lbs:
rr. rr

82 sens: AND SENSIBILITY.

did not signify. It was censure in common use, and
given.

heir resence we a restraint both on her and on
Lucy. t checked the idleness of one, and the busineu
of the other. Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing
nothing before them, and the ﬂattery which Lucy vial
proud to think of and administer at other times, she
cared they would despise her for offering. Miss Steele
was the least discomposed of the three by their presence 5
and it was in their power to reconcile her to it entirely.
Would either of them only have given her a full and
minute account of the whole affair between Marianne
and Mr Willoughby, she would have thought herself
amply rewarded for the sacriﬁce ' of the belt place
by the ﬁre after dinner, which their arrival occasioned.
But this conciliation was not granted; for though she
often threw out expressions of pity for her sister to
Elinor, and more than once dro ped a reﬂection on the
inconstancy of beaux before arianne, no effect was
produced, but a look of indifference from the former or
of disgust in the latter. An effort even yet lighter
might have made her their friend. Would they only
have laughed at her about the Doctor! But so little
were they, any more than the others, inclined to oblige
her, that if Sir John dined from home, she might spend
a whole day without hearing any other iaillery on the
subject than what she was kind enough to bestow on
herself.

All these jealousies and discontents, however, were
so totally unsuspected by Mrs Jennings, that she thought
it a delightful thing for the girls to be together; and
generally congratulated her young friends every night,
on having escaped the company of a nu id old woman
so long. She joined them sometimes at ir John's, and
sometimes at her own house; but wherever it was, she
nlways came in excellent spirits, full of delight and im-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 83

portance, attributing Charlotte’s well-doing to her own
care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detail of
her situation, as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough
to desire. One thing M disturb her; and of that she
made her daily complaint. Mr Palmer maintained the
common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex, of all
infants bein alike; and though she could plainly per-
ceive at di rent times the most striking resemblance
between this baby and every one of his relations on both
sides, there was no convincing his father of it; no per-
suading him to believe that it was not exactly like
a Every other baby of the same age; nor could he even
brought to acknowledge the simple proposition of its
being the ﬁnest Child in the world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune which
about this time befell Mrs John Dashwood. It so
happened that while her two sisters with Mrs Jennings
were ﬁrst calling on her in Harley-street, another of
her acquaintance had dropped in—a circumstance in
itself not apparently like] to produce evil to her. But
while the imaginations 0 other people will carry them
away to form wrong judgments of our conduct, and to
decide on it by slight appearances, one’s happiness must
in some measure be always at the mere of chance. 1n
the present instance, this last-arrived ady allowed her
fancy so far to outrun truth and probability, that on
'merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods, and '
V understanding them to be Mr Dashwood’s sisters, she
immediate] concluded them to be staying in Harley
street; an this misconstruction produced within a da
or two afterwards cards of invitation for them, as we
as for their brother and sister, to a small musical party
at her house. The consequence of which was, that
Mrs John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to
the exceedineg reat inconvenience of sending her
carriage for the iss Dashwoods, but, what was still

84 sens: AND SENSIBILITY.

worse, must be subject to all the unpleanntness of
up ring to treat them with attention : and who could
tel that the might not expect to go out with her I
second timely The power of disappointing them, it was
true, must always be hers. But that was not enou ;
for when people are determined on a mode of con uct
which they know to be wrong, they feel injured by the
ex wetntion of anything better from them.
arianne had now been brought by degrees so much

into the habit of going out every day, that it wss become
a matter of indifference to her whether she went or not:
and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every
evening's engagement, though without expecting the
smallest amusement from any, and very often without
knowing till the last moment where it was to take her.

To her dress and appearance she was growing so
perfectly indifferent, as not to bestow half the considera-
tion on it, during the whole of her toilette, which it
received from Miss Steele in the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of
their being together, when it was ﬁnished. Nothing
escaped Izer minute observation and general curiosity;
she saw everything, and asked everything; was never
easy till she knew the price of every rt of Marianne’s
dress; could have guessed the num r of her gowns
altogether with better judgment than Marianne herself,
and was not without hopes of ﬁnding out before they
parted, how much her washing cost per week, and how
much she had every year to spend upon herself. The
impertinence of these kind of scrutinles, moreover, was
generally concluded with a compliment, which though
meant as its douceur, was considered by Marianne as
the greatest impertinence of all ; for after undergoing an
examination into the value and make of her gown,
the colour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her
hair, she was almost sure of being told that upon “ her
word she looked vastly smart, and she dared to say
would make a great many conquests.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 85

With such encouragement as this, was the dismissed
on the present occasion to her brother’s carriage; which
they were ready to enter ﬁve minutes after it stopped at
the door, a punctuality not very agreeable to their
dater-in-law, who had preceded them to the house of
her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay
on their part that might inconvenience either herself or
her eoachman.

The events of the evening were not very remarkable.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended a
great many people who had real taste for the perfor-
mance, and a great many more who had none at all;
and the perfomrcrs themselves were, as usual, in their
own estimation, and that of their immediate friends, the
ﬁrst private performers in England.

As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be
so, she made no scnrple of turning away her eyes from
the gland pianoforte, whenever it suited her, and unre-
strained even by the presence of a harp, and a violen-
cello, would ﬁx them at pleasure on any other object in
the room. In one of these excursive glances she perceived
among the group of young men, the very he who had given
them a lecture on toothpick-cases at Gray’s. She per-
ceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, and
speaking familiarly to her brother; and had deter-
mined to ﬁnd out his name from the latter, when they
both came towards her, and Mr Dashwuod introduced
him to her as Mr Robert Fen-an.

He addressed her with easy civility, and twitted his
head into a bow which assured her as plainly as words
could have done, that he was exact] the coxcomb she
had heard him described to he by ucy. Happy had
it been for her if her regard for Edward had depended
lean on his own merit, than on the merit of his nearest
relations. For then his brother’s how must have given
the ﬁnishing stroke to what the ill-humour of his mother

86 sense mo sznsrsru-rv.

and sister would have begun. But while she wondered
at the difference of the two young men, she did not ﬁnd
that the emptiness and conceit of the one put her at all
out of charity with the modesty and worth of the other.
Why they were diﬁ‘erent, Robert explained to her him-
self in the course of a gunner of an hour’s conversation ;
for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extreme
gum-hm} which he really believed kept him from mixing
in proper society, he candidly and generously attributed
it much less to any natural deﬁciency, than to the mis-
fortune of a private education ; while he himself, though
probably without any particular, any material superior-i

y nature, merely from the advantage of a public schoo ,
was as well ﬁtted to mix in the world as any other
man.

“Upon my soul," he added, “ I believe it is nothing
more : and so I often tell my mother, when she is
grieving about it. ‘My dear madam,’ I always y to
her, ‘yuu must make yourself easy. The evil is now
irremediable, and it has been entirely your own doing.
Why would you be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert,
against your own judgment, to place Edward under
private tuition, at the most critical time of his life? If

on hud only sent him to Westminster as well as myself,
instead of sending him to Mr Pratt’s, all this would
have been rreventcd.’ This is the way in which I
always consider the matter, and my mother is perfectly
convinced of her error.”

Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because what-
ever might be her general estimation of the advantage of
a public school, she could not think of Edward's abode
in Mr Pratt's famil with any satisfaction.

“ You reside in sevenshire, I think,” was his next
observation, “in a cottage near Dawlish.”

Elinor set him right as to its situation, and it seemed
rather surprising to him that anybody could live in

sense AND szusrsru-rv. 87

Devonshire without living near Dawlish. He bestowed
his hearty approbation, however, on their species of
house.

“For my own part," said he, “I am excessively
fond of a cottage ; there is always so much comfort, so _
much elegance about them. And I retest, if I had
any money to s re, I should buy a li e land and build
one myself, wi ‘n a short distance of London, where 1
might drive myself down at any time, and collect a few
friends about me and be ha y. I advise everybody
who is going to build, to brulld a cottage. My friend
Lord Courtland came to me the other day on urpose
to ask m advice, and laid before me‘three iﬂ'erent
plans of nomi’s. I was to decide on the best of
them. ‘ My dear Courtlaud,’ said I, immediately
throwing them all into the ﬁre, ‘do not ado t either of
them, but b all means build -a cottage.’ And that, I
fancy, will the end of it.’ '

“Some people imagine that there can be no accom-
modations, no e in a cottage; but this is all a
mistake. I was st month at my friend Elliott’s near
Dnnford. Lady Elliott wished to give a dance. ‘ But
how can it be done? ’ said she; ‘ my dear Fermi-I, do
tell me how it is to be managed. There is not a room
in this cottage that will hold ten couple, and where can
the an be P ’ I immediawa saw that there could be
no diﬂty in it, so I said, ‘My dear Lady Elliott,
do notbe uneasy. The dinin parlour will admiteighteeu
couple with ease; card-tabes may be placed in the
drawing-room; the library may be 0 for tea and
other refreshments; and let the supper set out in the
saloon.’ Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought.
We measurcd_thc dining-room, and found it would
hold exactly eighteen couple, and the aﬁair was ar-
ranged precisely after my plan. So that in fact, you
see, if people do but know how to set about it, every

88 sense AND scusrsu‘u'v.

comfort may be as well enjoyed in a cottage as in the
most spacious dwellin .”

Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he
deserved the compliment of rational opposin'on.

As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music
than his eldest liner, his mind was equall at liberty to
ﬁx on anything else; and I thought Itmci him during
the evening, which he communicated to his wife, for
her a rohation, when they got home. The considera-
tion is? Mrs Dennison’s mistake, in supposing his sisters
their guests, had suggested the propriety of their being
really invited to become such, while Mrs Jennings’s en-
‘ gagements kept her from home. The expense would
be nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was
altogether an attention which the delicacy of his con-
science inted out to be requisite to its complete
enfranchisement from his promise to his father. Fanny
was startled at the proposal.

“ I do not see how it can be done,” said she, “with-
out aﬁ'ronting Lady Middleton, for they spend every
day with her; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad
to do it. You know I am always ready to pay them
any attention in my power, as my taking them out this
evening shews. But they are Lady Middleton’s visitors.
How can I ask them away from her 2 ”

Her husband, but with gmat humility, did not see the
force of her objection. “They had already spent a
week in this manner in Conduit-street, and Lady
Middleton could not be disple at their giving the
same number of days to such near relations."

fanny paused a moment, nnd then, with fresh vigour,
m —

“ My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it
was in my power. But I had just settled within myself
to salt the Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us.
They are very well-behaved, good kind of girls ; and I

snusn AND smsrnru'rv. 89

think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so
very well by Edward. We can ask your sister: some
other year, you know; but the Miss Steele: may not
bein town an more. I am sure you will like them;
indeed, you 1 like them, you know, very much already,
and so does my mother; and they are such favourite:
with Harry! "

Mr Daahwood was convinced.- He saw the neces-
sity of inviting the Miss Steele: immediately, and his
conscience was paciﬁed by the resolution of inviting his
sister: another year; at the same time, however, al ly
arr-pectin that another year would make the invitation
needless bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's
wife, and 'anne as Iber'r visitor.

Fanny, re'oicing in her escape, and proud of the ready
wit that ha procured it, wrote the next morning to
Lucy, to treat her company and her sister’ s for some
days in Har ey-street, as soon as Lady Middleton could
spare them. This was enough to make Lucy really
and reasonably happy. Mrs Dashwood seemed actually
working for her herself, cherishing all her hopes, and
promoting all her views! Such an opportunity of being
with Edward and his family was, above all things, the
most material to her interest, and such an invitation the
most gratifying to her feelings ! It was an advantage that
could not be too gratefuly acknowledged, nor too speedily
made use of ; and the visit to Lady Middleton, which
had not before had any precise limits, was instantly
discovered to have been always meant to end in two
da s’ time.

{When the note was shown to Elinor, a: it was
within ten minutes aﬁer its arrival, it gave her, for the
lint time, some share in the expectations of Lucy; for
such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsnfed on‘so
short an acquaintance, scented to declare that the good-
will towards her arose from something more than merely

9O SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

malice againtt herself, and might be brought, by time
and addrela, to do everything that Lucy wiahed. Her
ﬂattery had already nibdued the pride 0 Indy Middle- ,
ton, and made an entry into the done heart of Mn
John Duhwood; and these were eﬂ'ecta that laid open
the Probability of greater.

'lhe Min Steelea removed to Harley-meet, and all
that reached Elinor of their inﬂuence there, ttren
her expectation of the event. Sir John, who on
them more than once, brought home such account: of
the favour they were in an must be univernlly Itriking.
Mn Daehwood had never been so much pleased with
any young women in her life an the wan with them;
had given each of them a needle-book, made by Dome
emigrant; called Lucy by her Chriatian name; and did
not know whether she should ever be able to part with
them.

chapter 9595931713.

RS PALMER was to well at the endofa forb-
night, that her mother felt it no longer neceuary
to give up the whole of her time to her; and

contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day,
returned from that period to her own home, and her own
habits, in which she found the Mill Daahwoodt very
ready to reaaxume their former share.

About the third or fourth morning after their being
thus re-settled in Berkeley-street, Mrs Jenninga, on re-
turning from her ordinary visit to Mn Palmer, entered
the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting by herself,
with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her
to hear something wonderful; and giving her time only
to form that idea, began directly to justify it by saying,

 

mwz

ﬁgurmxwxmmy

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. ' 9!

"Lordl my dur Miss Duhwoodl have you heard
the news 2 "

"No, ma’sm. What is it?"

'“ Something so strange! But on shall hear it all.
When I got to Mr Palmer’s, I and Charlotte quite
in a fuss about the child. She was sure it was ve ill
—it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples. o I
looked at it directly, and ' Lord! my dear,’ says I, ‘it
is nothing in the world but the red-gum;’ and nurse
id 'ust the same. But Charlotte, she would not be
saris ed, so Mr Donavan was sent for; and luckily he
happened to be just come in from Harley-street, so he
"ﬁlmed over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the
c d, he said just as we did, that it was nothing in the
world but the red—gum, and then Charlotte was easy.
And so, just as he was going away again, it came into
my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to
think of it, but it came into my head to ask him if there
was any news. So upon that, he smirked, and simpered,
and looked grave, and seemed to know something or
other, and at last he said in a whisper, ‘ For {ear any
unpleasant report should reach the oung ladies under
your care as to their sister’s indispoution, I think it ad-
visable to say, that I believe there is no great reason for
alarm; I hope Mrs Dashwood will do very well.’ "

“What! is Fanny ill 3”

“That is exactly what I said, my dear. ‘ Lordl ’
says I, 'is Mrs Dashwood illi’ So then it all me
out; and the long and the short of the matter, by all I
can learn, seems [to] be this :—Mr Edward Ferrars,
the very young man I used to joke with you about (but
however, as it turns out, I am monstrous glad there
never was anything in it), Mr Edward F errars, it seems,
has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my cousin
Lucy l—There’s for you, my dear l—And not a crea-
ture knowing a syllable of the matter except Nancy !—

92 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Could you have believed such a thing possible !—There
is no great wonder in their liking one another ; but that
matters should be brought so forward between them, and
nobody suspect it! Tba: is strange !—I never happened
to see them together, or I am sure I should have ound
it out directly. Well, and so this was kept a glut
secret, for fear of Mrs F erran; and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter,—
till this very morning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a
well-meaning creature, but no conjuror, p0 t it all out.
‘ Lord ! ’ thinks she to herself, ‘they are I so fond of
Lucy, to be sure they will make no difﬁculty about it ; '
and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all
alone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to
come—for she had just been saying to your brother, onl

ﬁve minutes before, that she thought to make a match
between Edward and some lord's daughter or other, I
forget who. So you may think what a blow it was to
all her vanity and pride. She fell into violent hysteric-
immediately, with such scream as reached your brother’s
ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-er down-
stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the
country. So up he ﬂew directly, and a terrible scene
took place, for Lucy was come to them by that time,
little dreaming what was going on. Poor soul! I pity
IIII'. And I must suy,l think she was used very hardly;
for your sister scolded like any fury, and won drove her
into a fainting ﬁt. Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and
cried bitterly; and your brother, he walked about the
room, and said he did not know what to do. Mrs
Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer
in the house, and your brother was forced to go down
upon lu': knees too, to persuade her to let them stay till
they had packed up their clothes. Then she fell into
hysterics again, and he was so frightened that he would
send for Mr Donavan, and Mr Donavan found the

SENSE AND snusrsru'nr. 93

house in all this uproar. The marriage was at the door
ready to take my poor cousins away, and they were just
stepping in as he came of; poor Lucy in such a condi-
tion, he uys, she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she
was almost as bad. I declare, I have no patience with
your sister; and I hope, with all my heart, it will be a
match in spite of her. Lord! what a taking.er Mr
Edward will be in when he hears of it! To have his
love used so scornfully! for they say he is monstrous
fond of her, as well he may. I should not wonder, if
he was to be in the greatest of a passion! and Mr
Donavan thinks just the same. He and I had a great
deal of talk nboutit; and the best of all is, that he is
gone back again to Harley-street, that he may be within
call when Mrs Ferrars is told of it, for she vras sent for
as soon as ever In cousins left the house, for your sister
was sure :5: woul¥i be in hysterics too; and so she may,
for what I care. I have no pity for either of them. I
have no notion of people’s making such a to-do about
man and greatness. There is no reason on earth why
Mr Edward and Lucy should not marry; for I am sure
Mrs Ferraro may afford to do very well by her son;
and though Lucy has next to nothing herself, she
knows better than anybody how to make the most of
everything; and I dare say, if Mrs Fenars would only
allow him ﬁve hundred a-year, she would make as good
an appearance with it as anybody else would with eight.
Lord] how snug the might live in such another cottage
as yours—-or a little 'gger—with two maids and two
men; and I believe I could help them to a housemsid,
for my Betty has a sister out of place, that would ﬁt
them exactly."

Here Mrs Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had
time enough to collect her thoughts, she was able to give
such an answer, and make such observations, as the lub-
ject might naturally be supposed to produce.—Happy to

94 SRNSB AND SENSIBILITY.

lindthatahewalnotanectedofanyextraordmary
inmrutinit; tlnt Mn caning: nahehadoflate

often might be the cane) cared to irrngine
her at attached to Edward; and happy above allthc
rent, in the abeuce of Marianne, she felt very well able
to Teak of the aﬂr without ernbarraannent, and to give
her Judgment, a the believed, with impartiality on the
conduct of every one concerned in it.

She could hardly determine what her own -
ion of it! event really was ;—though the nrn'e‘ly tried
to drive aw: the notion of it: being Mk to end
otherwise at art, than in the rmrriage of Edward and
Lucy. What Mn F emn would my and do, though
there could not be a doubt of its nature, the val anxioua
to hat; and still more anxious to know how Edward
would conduct himselﬁ—For H— she felt much corn-
passion ;——for Lucy we little—and it cost her tome
pains to irocum that lit e;—for the res of the party
none at l.

AI Mrs Jennings could talk on no other
Elinor noon saw the neceuity of preparing Marianne for
its discussion.—No time was to be loot in undeceiving
her, in making her acquainted with the real truth,and in
endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by othen,
without betraying that she felt any uneasinen for her
sister, or any raentment against Edward.

lilinor'l ofﬁce was a painful onc.—Shc was going to
remove what she really believed to be her Eater's chief
conuolation,—to give such particular! of Edward, M the
feared would ruin him for ever in her good opinion,—
and to make Marianne, by a reaemblauce in their situa-
tions, which to her fancy would seem strong, feel all her
own dinppointrnent over again. But unwelcome as luch
a rank mun be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor
therefore hastened to perform it.

She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own

SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y. 95

feelings, or to represent herself as suffering rnnch, any
otherwise than as the self-command she had practised
since her ﬁrst knowledge of Edward’s enga ment, mi ht
snggest a hint of what was practicable to arianne. er
narration was clear and simgle; and though it could not
be given without emotion, it was not accompanied by
violent agimtion, nor im griefZ—Tlm: belonged
rather to the hearer, for arianne listened with horror,
and cried excessively. Elinor was to he the comforter
of others in her own distresoes, no less than in theirs;
and all the comfort that could be given by asunrances of
her own composure of mind, and a very earnest vindica-
tion of Edward from every charge but of imprudence,
was readil offered.

But Mirianne for some time would 've credit to
neither. Edward seemed a second Willoughby; and
acknowledging as Elinor did, that. she had loved him
most sincerely, could she feel less than herself I As for
Luc Steele, she considered her so totally unamiahle, so
abso utely incapable of attaching a sensible man, that she
could not be persuaded at ﬁrst to believe, and afterwards
to pardon, any former affection of Edward for her. She
would not even admit it to have been natural ; and
Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that
which only could convince her, a better knowledge of
mankind.

Her ﬁrst communication had reached no farther than
to state the fact of the engagement, and the length of
time it had existed. Marianne’s feelings had then broken
in, and put an end to all regularity of detail; and for
some time all that could be done was to soothe her dit-
tress, lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment.
The ﬁrst qncstion on her side, which led to farther
pnm'culars, was-—

“How long has this been known to you, Elinor?
Has he written to you ?”

96 sums: AND snusrmu-rv.

" I have known it these four months. When Lucy
ﬁrst came to Barton-park last November, she told me in
conﬁdence of her engagement.”

At these words, Marianne’l eyes expreseed the ac-
toniahment which her li could not utter. After a
pause of wonder, the exc aimed-

“ Four months l—Have you known of this four
months 2"—

Elinor conﬁrmed it.

“What l—while attending me in all my misery, In.
this been on your heart? and I have reproached you for
beingI happy 1 "—

“ twao not ﬁt that you should then know how much
I was the reverse.”—

“ Four months! " cried Marianne again. “ So calm !
so cheerful! How have you been supported?”

“ By feeling that I was doing my duty. My
)romiu: to Lucy, obliged me to be secret. I owed it to

er, therefore, to avoid giving an hint of the truth ;
and I owed it to my family and friends not to create in
them a solicitude about me, which it could not be in
my power to satisfy.”

Marianne seemed much struck.

“ I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and
my mother,” added Elinor ; “ and once or twice I
have attempted it ;—but without betraying my trust, I
never could have convinced you”

“ Four months !—and yet you loved him

“Yes. But I did not love only him ;—and while
the comfort of others was dear to me, I was glad to
spare them from knowing how much I felt. Now, I
can think and speak of it with little emotion. I would
not have you suffer on my account; for I assure you I
no longer suffer materially myself. I have many things
to support me. I am not conscious of having provoked
the disappointment by any imprudence of my own, and

SENSE AND SENSIBILI'IY. 97

I have borne it as much as possible without spreading it
farther. I acquit Edward of all essential miseonduet.
I wish him very happy ; and I am so sure of his always
doing his duty, that though now he may harbour some
regret, in the end he mun become so. Lucy does not
want sense, and that is the foundation on which every-
-thing good may be built. And after all, Marianne,
after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and
constant attachment, and all that can be said of one’s
happiness depending entirely on any‘particular person, it
is not meant—it is not ﬁt——it is not possible that it
should be so. Edward will marry Lucy ; he will marry a
woman superior in rson and understanding to half her
sex; and time an habit will teach him to forget that
he ever thought another superior to Inr."

“ If such is your way of thinking,” said Marianne, “ if
thelossofwhatismostvaluedis so easilyto be made
up b something else, our resolution, your self-com-
mand: are perhaps a ittle less to be wondered at.
They are brought more within my comprehension.”

“I understand you. You do not In that I have
ever felt much. For four months, arinnnc, I have
had all this ban ing on my mind, without being at
liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that
it would make you and my mother most unhappy when-
ever it were explained to you, et unable to prepare you
for it in the least. It was to] me—-it was in a manner
forced on me by the very person herself whose prior
engagement mined all my respects ; and told me, as I
thought, with triumph. Tibia person’s suspicions, there-
fore, I have had to oppose, by endeavouring to appear
indifferent where I have been most deeply interested.
And it has not been only once; I have had her hopes
and exultation to listen to again and again. I have known
myself to be divided from Edward for ever, without
hearing one circumstance that could make me less desire

H. G

98 SENSE AND SENSHHLITY.

the connexion. Nothing has proved him unworth ; nor
hu anything declared him indifferent to me. have
had to contend ngaioet the unkindneas of his liner, and
the insolence of his mother, and have suffered the pun-
ishment of an attachment without enjoying its advantages.
And all this has been going on at a time when, as you
too well know, it has not been my only unhap ' ens.
If you can think me capable of ever feeling y you
may suppose that I have suffered am. The oompoeure
of mind with which I have brought myselfat pment to
consider the matter, the consolation that I luve been .
willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and
painful exertion ;—they did not spring up of themselves 5
they did not occur to relieve m spirits at ﬁne—no,
Marianne. Tom, if I had not been bound to silence,
perhn u nothing could have kept me entirely—not even
what owed to my dearest friends—from openly showing
that I was oer] unhappy.”

Marianne was guite subdued.

“ Oh I Elinor, ’ she cried, “ you have made me hate
myself for ever. How barbarous have I been to youl .
—you, who have been my only comfort, who have
home with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be
only suffering for me l—Is this my gmu'tudei Is this
the only return I can make you? Because your merit
cries out upon myself, I have been trying to do it away."

The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In
such a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor had no
diﬂicul in obtaining from her whatever promise she
xequire ; and, at her request, Marianne engaged never
to speak of the affair to any one with the least appar-
ance of bitterness ;-—to meet Lucy without betraying the
smallest increase of dislike to her ;—and even to lee
Edward himself, if chance should bring them together,
without any diminution of her runs] cordiality. These
were great concessions, but where Marianne felt that she

SENSE AND SENSHIHJTY-
had injured, no reparation could be too much for her to

e.

She performed her romise of being discreet to ad-
miration. She attende all that Mrs Jennings had to'
say upon the subject with an unchanging complexion,
dissented from her in nothing, and was heard three times
to say, “Yes, ma’am." She listened to her praise of
Lucy with only moving from one chair to another, and
when Mn Jennings talked of Edward’- aﬁection, it cost
her only a spasm in her throat." Such advances towards
heroism in her sister, made Elinor feel equal to anything
herself.

The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a
visit from their brother, who came with a most serious
aspect to talk over the dreadful affair, and bring them
new: of his wife.

‘ " You have heard, I suppose," said he with great

aolemnity, as soon as he was seated, “of the very

shocking discovery that took place under our roof
rda .’

They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a
moment for speech.

“ Your sister,” he continued, “ has suffered dread-
fully. Mrs F errars too—in short1 it has been a scene
of such complicated distress; but I will hope that the
storm may be weathered without our being, any of us,
quite overcome. Poor Fanny! she was in hysteria all

esterday. But I would not alarm you too much.
onavan says there is nothing materially to be ap-
prehended; her constitution is a good one, and her
resolution equal to anything. She has borne it all with

, the fortitude of an angel! She says she never shall
think well of anybody again; and one cannot wonder
at it, aﬂer being so deceived !—-—meeting with such in-
gratitude, where so much kindness had been shown, so
much conﬁdence had been placed. It was quite out of

200 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

the benevolence of her heart that she had asked these
young women to her house; merely because she thought
they deserved some attention, were harmlen, well-
‘behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions; for
otherwise we both wished very much to have invited
you and Msrisnne to be with us, while your kind ﬁ'iend
there was attending her daughter. And now to be so
rewarded! lI wish with all my heart,’ says poor '
Fanny in her affectionate way, ‘ that we had asked your
sisters instead of thern.’ "

Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done,
he went on.

“What poor Mrs Ferrars suffered when ﬁm Fanny
broke it to her, is not to be described. While she with
the truest affection had been planning a most eligible
connexion for him, was it to be supposed that he could
be all the time secretly engaged to another person I—
such a suspicion could never have entered her head I If
she su ted an repossession elsewhere, it could not
be in if; quartz: ‘ The, to be sure,’ said she, ‘I
might have thought myself safe.’ She was quite in an
agou . We consulted together, however, as to what
shou d be done, and at last she determined to send for
Edward. He came. But I am sorry to relate what .
ensued. All that Mrs Ferrars could ﬂy to make him
put an end to the engagement, assisted, too, as you may
well suppose. by my arguments, and Fanny’s enu'caties,
was of no avail. Duty, affection, everything was dis-
regarded. I never thought Edward so stubborn, so
unfeeling, before. His mother explained to him her
liberal designs, in case of his marrying Miss Morton;
told him she would settle on him the Norfolk estate,
which, clear of land-tax, brings in a good thotmnd a-
year; offered even, when matters grew desperate, to
make it.twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if he
still persisted in this low connexion, represented to him

SENSE AND SENS] BILITY. l O I

the certain penury that must attend the match. His
own two thousand pounds she protested shOuld be his
all ; she would never see him again ; and so far would
she be from aﬂ'ording him the smallest assistance, that
if he wereto enter into any profession with a view of
better support, she would do all in her power to prevent
his advancing in it.”

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped
her hands together and cried, “ Gracious Godl can
this be possiblel "

“ Well may you wonder, Marianne,” replied her
brother, “ at the obstinacy which could resist such
arguments as these. Your exclamation is very natu ."

Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered
her promises, and forbore.

" All this, however,” he continued, “ was urged in
vain. Edward said ve little; but what he did say
was in the most determined manner. Nothing could
prevail on him to give up his engagement. He would
stand to it, cost him what it might.”

“ Then,” cried Mrs Jennings, with blunt sincerity, no
longer able to be silent, “ he has acted like an honest
man. I beg your pardon, Mr Dashwood, but if he had
done otherwise, I should have thought him a rascal. I
have some little concem in the business, as well as your-
self, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there
is not a better kind of girl in the world, nor one who
more deserves a good husband.”

John Dashwood was greatly astonished ; but his
nature was calm, not open to provocation, and he never
wished to offend anybod , especially anybody of good

, fortune. He therefore rep ied, without any resentment—‘

“ I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any
relau'on of yours, madam. Miss Lucy Steele rs, Idare
say, a very deserving young woman, but in the present
case, you know, the connexion must be impossible. And

[02 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

to have entered into a secret engagement with a young

' man under her uncle’s care, the son of a woman upeci-
ally of such very large fortune as Mrs Ferrari, is'perhaps
altogether a little extraordinary. In short, I do not
mean to reﬂect upon the behaviour of an n whom
you have a regard for, Mrs Jennings. e all wish her
extremel happy, and Mrs Ferrars’s conduct throughout V
the who e has been such as every conscientious, good
mother, in like circumsmnces, would adopt. It has
been digniﬁed and liberal. Edward has drawn his own
lot, and I fear it will be a bad one."

Marianne sighed out her similar a rehenlion; and
Elinor’s heart wrung for the feelings 1‘)? Edward, while
braving his mother’s threats, for a woman who could not
reward him.

“Well, sir," said Mm Jennings, “and how did it
end P"

“ I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rup-
ture—Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's ‘.
notice. He left her house yesterday, but where he is
gone, or whether he is still in town, I do not know;
for we of course can make no inquiry."

“ Poor young man ! and what is to become of him i "

“ What indeed, ma’am! It is a melancholy con-
sideration. Born to the prospect of such nﬂ'lnencel I
cannot conceive a situation more deplorable. The interest
of two thousand pounds—how can a man live on it !—
and when to that is added the recollection that he might,
but for his own folly, within three months have been in
receipt of two thousand ﬁve hundred a-year (for Miss
Morton has thirty thousand pounds), I cannot picture to
myself a more wretched condition. We must all feel
for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of
our power to assist him.”

" Poor young man!" cried Mrs Jennings, “ I am
sure he should be very welcome to bed and board at my

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 103

house; and so I would tell him, if I could see him. It
is not ﬁt that he should be living about at his own charge
now, at lodging: and taverns.”

Elinor’s heart thanked her for such kindness towards
Edward, though she could not forbear smiling at the
form of it.

“If he would only have done as well by himself,"
said John Duhwood, “ as all his friends were disposed
to do by him, he' might now have been in his roper
situation, and would have wanted for nothing. at u
it is, it must be out of anybody’s power to assist him.
And there is one thing more preparing against him,
which must be worse than all—his mother has deter-
mined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settle 11ml
estate u n Robert immediately, which might have been
Ed ’I on proper conditions. I left her this morning
with her law er, talking over the business.”

“ Well I ’ said Mn Jennings, “ that is hr revenge.
Everybod hai a way of their own. But I don’t think
’mine would be to make one son independent because
another had plagued me.”

Marianne got up, and walked about the mom.

" Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a
man," continued John, “ than to see his ounger
brother in possession of an estate which mig t have
been his own? Poor Edward! I feel for him rin-
cerely." '

A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effu-
sion, concluded his visit; and with repeated Insurances
to his sisters that he really believed there was no material
danger in Fanny’s indisposition, and that they need not
therefore be very unasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanimous in their 'sentimenta
on the present occasion, as far at least as it regarded
Mrs Ferrars’a conducti the Dashwoods’, and Edward’s.

Marianne’s indignation burnt forth as soon as he

104 SENSE AND SENSIBILI‘I'Y.

quittcdthe room; and ashervehemenoemsde reserve
impodble in Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs Jmningl.
they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party.

Chitin: ﬁlly]?!-

RS JENNINGS was very warm in her praise
of Edward’s conduct, but only Elinor and
Marianne understood its true merit. T557 only

knew how little he had had to tempt him to be dis-
obedient, and how small was the consolation, beyond the
consciousness of doing right, that could remain to him
in the loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried in
his integrity; and Marianne forgave all his olfenoes in
compassion for his punishment. But though conﬁdence
between them was, by this public discovery, restored to
its proper state, it was not a subject on which either of
them were fond of dwelling when alone. Elinor avoided
it upon principle, as tending to ﬁx still more upon her
thoughts, by the too warm, too positive assurances of
Marianne, that belief of Edward 3 continued affection
for herself, which she nther wished to do away; Ind
Marianne's courage soon failed her, in trying to con-
verse upon a topic which always left her more dis-
satisﬁed with herself than ever, by the comparison it
necessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and her
own.

She felt all the force of that comparison ; but not as
her sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now ; she
felt it with all the pain of continual self-reproach, re-
gretted most bitterly that she had never exerted herself
before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,
without the hope of amendment. Her mind was so
much weakened that she still fancied present exer-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 105

tion impossible, and therefore it only dispirited her
more.

Nothing new was heard by them for a da or two
afterwards, of affairs in Harley-street, or srtlett’s
Buildings. But though so much of the matter was
known to them already, that Mrs Jennings might have
had enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther,
without seeking after more, she had resolved from the
first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to her cousins
as soon as she could; and nothing but the hindrance of
more visitors than usual, had prevented her going to
them within that time.

The third day succeeding their knowledge of the
particulars, was so ﬁne, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw
many to Kensin ton Gardens, though it was only the
second week in ﬁlarch. Mrs Jennings and Elinor were
of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the
Willoughbys were again in town, and had a constant
dread of meeting them, chose rather to stay at home,
than venture into so public a place.

An intimate acquaintance of Mrs Jennings 'oined
them soon after they entered the Gardens, and l‘Iinor
was not sor that by her continuing with them, and
engaging all %rs Jennings’s conversation, she was her-
self eft to quiet reﬂection. She saw nothing of the
Willoughbys, nothing of Edward, and for some time
nothing of anybody who could by any chance, whether
grave or gay, be interesting to her. But at last, die
found herself, .with some surprise, accosted by Miss
Steele, who, though looking rather shy, expressed great
ntisfsction in meeting them, and on receivin encoun e-
_ men: fi'om the particular kindness of Mrs ennings, lzeﬁ
her: own party for a short time, to Xjoin theirs. Mrs
Jennings immediately whispered to Elmor—

“Get it all out of her, my dear. She will tell you any-
thing ifyou ask. You see I cannot leave Mrs Clarke.”

106 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

It was lucky, however, for Mrs Jenniuge’l curiou'ty,
and Elinor’s too, that she would tell anything with!
being asked, for nothing would otherwiee have been learnt.

“ I am so glad to see you,” said Miss Steele, taking
her familiarly by the arm, “ for I wanted to see you of
all things in the world ; ” and then lowering her voice,
“ I suppose Mrs Jennings has heard all about it. II she
ang . ’

" Not at all, I believe, with you."

“That is a good thing. And Lady Middleton, is
:11: angry ?"

“I cannot suppose it 'ble that she should."

“ I am monstrous glamit. Good gracious I. I have
had such a time of it! I never saw Luc in ouch a rage
in my life. She vowed at ﬁrst she woul never trim me
up a new bonnet, nor do anything else for me again, so
long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we
are as good friends as ever. Look, she made me this
how to my hat, and put in the feather last night. There
now, you are going to laugh at me too. But why should
not I wear pink ribbons? I do not care if it i: the
Doctor’s favourite colour. I am sure, for my part, I
should never have known he rﬁd like it better than any
other colour, if he had not happened to say. Io. My
cousins have been so plaguing me ? I declare sometimes
I do not know which way to look before them."

She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor
had nothing to say, and therefore soon judged it ex-
pedient to ﬁnd her way back again to the ﬁrm.

“ Well, but, Miss Dashwood," speaking trium )hantly,
“people may say what drey chuse about Mr en‘are’s
declaring he would not have Lucy, for it’s no such a
thing, I can tell you; and it’s quite a Ihame for such
ill-natured reports to be spread abroad. Whatever Lucy
might think about it herself, you know it was no busi-
ness of other people to set it down for certain."

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY. 107

“ I never heard anything of the kind hinted at before,
I assure on," said Elinor.

"0h did not you? But it was mid, I know 7
well, and by more than one; for Miss Godby told
Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses could expect
Mr Femrs to give u a woman like Miu Morton, with
thirty thousand pou to her fortune, for Lucy Steele,
that had nothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks
myself. And besides that, my cousin Richard said
himself, that when it rams to the point, he was afraid
Mr Ferrars would be of; and when Edward did not
come near us for three days, I could not tell what to
think myself p and I believe in my henrt Lucy gave it
all up for lost; for we came awn from your brother’s
Wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not all
Thursday, Friday, and Saturda , and did not know
what was become with him. (Knee Lucy thou ht to
write to him, but then her spirit rose against that ow-
ever, this morning he came, just as we came home from
church; and then it all came out, how he had been sent
for Wednesday to Harley-street, and been talked to by
his mother and all of them, and how he had declared
before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and
nobody but Lucy-would he have. And how he had
been so worried by what passed, that as soon as he had
went away from his mother's house, he had got upon

1 his horse, and rid into the country somewhere or other;
and how he had staid about at an inn all Thursday and
Friday, on purpose to get the betmr of it. And after
thian it all over and over again, he laid it seemed to
him as If, now he had no fortune, and no nothing at all,
it would be quite unkind to k her on to the engn e-
ment, because it must be for her on, for he had nothing
but two thousand pounds, and no hope of anything else;
and if he was to go into orders, as he had some thought),
he could get nothing but a curacy, and how was they

108 sense AND simsmiu-rv.

to live upon that i—He could not bear to think of her
doing no better, and so he begged, if she had the least
mind for it, to ut an end to the matter directly, Ind
leave him to shi for himself. I heard him say all this
as plain as could possibly be. And it was entirely for
btr sake, and upon bet account, that he laid a word
about being 05', and not u n his own. I will take my
oath he never dropt a syl able of being tired of her, or
of wishing to marry Miss Morton, or anything like it.
But, to be sure, Lucy would not 've ear to such kind
of talking; so she told him direc y (with a gmt deal
about sweet and love, you know, and all that—Oh, la!
one can’t repeat such kind of things, you know)—ehe
told him directly, she had not the least mind in the
world to be off, for she could live with him upon such
a trifle, and how little socver he might have, she should
be very glad to have it all, you know, or somethin of
the kind. So then he was monstrous ha )py, and ked
on some time about what they shoul do, and they
agreed he should take orders directly, and they must
wait to be married till he got a living. And' 'ust then
I could not hear any more, for my cousin called from
below to tell me Mrs Richardson was come in her
coach, and would take one of us to Kensington Gar-
dens; so I was forced to go into the room and interrupt
them, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she did
not care to leave Edward ; so I just run upstairs and put
on a pair of silk stockings, and came off with the
Richardsons.”

“ I do not understand what you mean by interrupting
them," said Elinor; “ you were all in the same room
together, were not you 2 ”

"No indeed! not us. La! Miss Dashwood, do
you think people make love when anybody else is by?
Oh! for shame !——To be sure, you must know better
than that. (Laughing aﬂ'ectedly.)—No, no; they were

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 109

shut up in the drawing-room together, and all I heard
was only by listening at the door.” '

“ How I " cried Elinor; “have you been repeating
to me whet you only learnt yourself b listening at the
door? I am sorryI did not know It before; for I
certainly would not have suffered you to give me par-
ticulars of a conversation which you ought not to have
known yourself. How could you behave so unfairly by
your sister? ” -

“Oh, la! there is nothin in dust. I onl stood at
the door, and heard what could. And am sure
Lucy would have done 'ust the same by me; for, a
year or two luck, when artha Sharpe and I had so
many secrets together, she never made any bones of
hiding in s closet1 or behind I chimney-board, on
puiEose to hear what we said.”

linor tried to talk of something else; but Miss
Steele could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes
from what was uppermost in her mind.

“ Edward talks of going to Oxford soon,” said she,
" but now he is lodging at No. —, Pall Mall. What In
ill-natured woman his mother is, isn’t she? And your
brother and sister were not very kindl However, I
shm’t say anything against them to you ; and to be sure
they did send us home in their own chariot, which was
more than I looked for. And for my part, I was all
in : fright for fear your sister should ask us for the
huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but
however, nothing was said about them, and I took care
to keep mine out of sight. Edward have got some busi-
ness at Oxford. he says, so he must go there for a
time: Ind after (bat, ss soon us he can light upon a
bishop, he will be ordained. I wonder whst curacy he
will get l—Good graciousl (giggling as she spoke) I ’d
lay my life I know what In cousins will say, when they
'hear of it. They will tel me I should write to the

I [O SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Doctor, to get Edward the curse of his new living. I
know they will; but I am sure Iwould not do such a
thing for all the world.—‘ Lal ’ I shall say dilectly,
‘ I wonder how you could think of such a thing. I write
unite to the Doctor, indeed! ’ ” ‘

“Well,” said Elinor; “ it is a comfort to be pre-
pared against the worst. You have got your answer
ready.”

Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject,
but the approach of her own party made another more
nece .

"oh, la! here come the Richardson; I had a
vast deal more to say to you, hut I must not stay away
from them not anyI longer. I assure you they are very
genteel people. e makes a monstrous deal of money, '
and they keep their own coach. I have not time to

ml: to Mrs Jennings about it myself, but pray tell her
I am quite happy to hear she is not in anger against us,
and Lady Middleton the same ; and ifanything should
happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs ennings
should want company,I am sure we should be very glad
to come and stay with her for as long a time as she likes.
I suppose Lady Middleton won’t ask us any more this
bout. Good-bye ; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not
here. Remember me kindly to her. La! if you have
not got your best spotted muslin onl—I wonder you
was not afraid of its being torn.”

Such was her parting concern; for after this, the
had time only to pay her farewell com limenu to Mrs
Jennings, before her company was t: 'med by Mrs
Richardson: and Elinor was left in possession of know-
ledge which might feed her powers of reﬂection some
time, though she had learnt ve little more than what
had been already foreseen and ore-planned in her own
mind. Edward’s maniage with Lucy was as ﬁrmly
determined on, and the time of its taking place remained

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. l l l

as abnolutely uncertain, as Ihe had concluded it would
hey—everything depended, exactly after her expecta-
tion, on his etting that preferment, of which, at preterit,
there seem not the Imzllest chance.

As coon as they renamed to the carriage, Mrs Jen-
ning wu eager for infomation ; but no Elinor wiehed to

read no little no poeeible intelligence that had in the

rat place been so unfairly obtained1 the conﬁned herself
to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, as she felt
assured that Lucy, for the lake of her own consequence,
would chuse to have known. The continuance of
their engagement, and the mean: thnt were to be taken
for promotin its end, was all her communication; and
thin produ from Mn Jennings the following natural
remark :—

" Wait for his having a living l—ny, we all know
how Ibo! will end ;—the will wait a twelvemonth, and
ﬁnding no good comes 0 it, will set down upon a curacy
of ﬁfty pounds a-yar, with the interelt of his two thou-
nnd poundl, and what little matter Mr Steele and Mr
Pratt can give hen—Then they will have a child every
yearl and Lord help ’ernl how poor they will be I—
I must lee what I can give them towarda furnishing their
houee. Two maid: and two men indeed 1—.“ I talked
of t’other dz .—No, no, they mutt get a stout girl of
all workn— tty'e deter would never do for them
W."

The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-
penny poet, from Lucy hereelf. It wan It follows :—

Buru-rr’r Burmncs, Marc/J.

I ho? my dear Mics Duhwood will excuse the
liberty take of writingto her ; but I know your friend-
ship or me will make you pleased to hear luch I good
account of mylelf and my dear Edward, after all the
trouble: we have went through lately, therefore will make

l l 2 SENSE AND SENSIBILI“.

no more apologies, but proceed to say that, thank God!
though we have sulfered dreadfiilly, we are both quite
well now, and as happy as we must always be in one
another’s love. We have had great trials, and greet
persecutions, but however, at the same time, gratefull
acknowledge many friends, yourself not the least among
them, whose great kindness I shall always thankfully
remember, as will Edward too, who I have told of it.
I am surelyou will be glad to hear, as likewise deaers
Jennings, spent two happy h‘éiirs with him yesterday
afternoon, he would not hear of our parting, though
earnestly did I, as I thought my duty required, urge
him to it for pmdence sake, and would have parted for .
ever on the spot, would he consent to it ; but he said it
should never be, he did not regard his mother's anger,
while he could have my aﬁ'ections; our prospects are
not very bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and h
for the best; he will be ordained shortly, and should it
ever be in your power to recommend him to anybody
that has a living to bestow, am very.sure you will not forget
us, and dear Mrs Jennings too, trust she will break a
good word for us to Sir John, or Mr Palmer, or any
friend that may be able to assist urn—Poor Anne was
much to blame for what she did, but she did it for the
best, so I say nothing; hope Mrs Jennings won’t think
it too much trouble to give us a call, should she come
this way any morning, ’twould be a great kindness, and
my cousins would be proud to know hen—My paper
reminds me to conclude, and begging to be most grate-
fully and respectfully remembered to her, and to Sir
John and Lady Middleton, and the dear children, when
you chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,

I am, &e., &c.

As soon as Elinor had ﬁnished it, she performed
what she concluded to be its writer's ml design, by

SENSE AND SENSIBILXTY. II3

placing it in the hand- of Mr: Jennings, who read it
aloud with many comments of Iatiafaction and praise.

“ Very well indeed l—how prettin the write. I—aye,
that was Lluite proper to let him be off if he would.
That wan uat like Luc .—-Poor eoull I wiah I could
get him a iving with al my heart—She call: me dear
Mn Jennings, you lee. She is a good-hearted girl u
ever lived—Very well, upon my Word. That sentence
in very prettin turned. Yes, yes, I will go and see her
sure enou . How attentive she is, to think of every-
bodyl— hank you, my dear, for chewing it me. It
in a: pretty a letter as ever I saw, and does Luey’e
head and heart great credit."

chum: ﬁﬁﬁ‘ﬂ.

HE Min Danhwooda had now been rather more
than two months in town, and Marianne’e im-
. ‘ tience to be one increased every day. She
_ Iighcd r the air, the li rty, the quiet of the country;
and fancied that if any place could give her cue, Barton
' must do it. Elinor wu hardl lees anxiout than her-
self for their removal, and o y to much less bent on
it: being eﬂ'ected immediately, at that the was conecieua
of the difﬁculties of so long a joumey, which Marianne
could not be brought to acknowledge. She began,
however, seriously to turn her droughts towards it!
accorn liehment, and had already mentioned their wilhee
to their kind hostess, who reaieted them with all the
eloquence of her good-will, when a plan was suggested,
which though detaining them from home yet a few
weelu longer, appeared to Elinor altogether much more
eligible than any other. The Palmer: were to remove
to Cleveland about the end of March, for the Eam
n. H

H4 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

holidays; and Mn Jenningl, with both her friends,
received 3 ve warm invitation from Charlotte to go
with them. |K‘his would not, in itself, have been
Iuﬁicient for the delicacy of Miss Daahwood;—bnt it
was enforced with so much real politeneu by Mr
Palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amend-
ment of his manners towards them since her liner had
been known to be unhappy, induced her to accept it
with pleaeure.

When she told Marianne what the had done, how-
ever, her lim reply wu not very auspicious.

" Cleveland! ’ — she cried, with great agitau'on.
“ No, I cannot go to Cleveland.”

" You forget,” id Elinor gently, “that its titration
in not . . . . that it is not in the neighbourhood
of . . . ."

“ But it in in Somcractahirc.—I cannot go into Somer-
ueuhim.—'l‘hcrt-, where I looked forward to going . . .
No, Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there."

Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of over-
coming Iuch feeling: ;—ahc only endeavoured to coun-
teract them by working on other: ;-—— and represented it,
therefore, an a measure which would ﬁx the time of her
returning to that dear mother, whom she so much
wished to see, in a more eligible, more comfortable man-
ner, than any other plan could do, and perhaps without
any greater delay. From Cleveland, which was within
a few miles of Bristol, the distance to Barton wan not
beyond one day, though a long day’ I journey ; and their
mother’s servant might easily come there to attend
them down; and as there could be no occasion for their
staying above a week at Cleveland, they might now be
at home in little more than three weeks’ time. As
Marianne’s affection for her mother was sincere, it
mun triumph, with little diﬂicnlty, over the imaginary
evil the had started.

SENS! AN D SENSIBILI". I I 5

Mrs Jennings was so far from being weary of her
guests, that she reused them very earnestly to return
with her again om Cleveland. Elinor was grateful
for the attention, but it could not alter their design;
and their mother’s concurrence being readily
everything relative to their return was arranged as far as
it could be ;—and Marianne found some relief in draw-
ing u a statement of the hours that were yet to divide
her rom Barton.

“Ahl Colonel, I do not know what you and I
shall do without the Miss Dashwoods,”—was Mrs
Jennings's address to him when he ﬁrst called on her,
after their leaving her was settled—“ for they are quim
resolved upon omg home from the Palmers ;—and how
forlorn we shail be, when I come hackl—Lordl we
shall sit and pe at one another as dull as two cats.”

Perha Lil: Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous
sketch 0 their future ennui, to provoke him to make
that offer which might give himself an escape from it—
and if so, she had soon afterwards good reason to think
her object gained; for, on Elinor’s moving to the
window to take more ex 'tiously the dimensions of
a rint which she was going to co y for her friend, he
fo lowed her to it with a look a pam'cular meaning,
and convened with her there for several minutes. The
eﬂ'ect of this discourse on the lady too, could not escage
her observation ; for though she was too honourable to
listen, and had even changed her seat on purpose that
she mi ht not hear, to one close by the pranoforte on
which rianne was playing, she could not kee herself
from seeing that Elinor changed colour, atten ed with
agitation, and was too intent on what he said, to punue
her em loyment.—Still farther in conﬁrmau'on of her
hopes, III the interval of Marianne’s turning from one
lesson to another, some words of the Colonel’s inevitably
reached her ur, in ,which he seemed to he apologising

116 smstt AND seusxnru-nr.

for the hadneas of his house. This set the matter
beyond a doubt. She wondered indeed at his thinking
it neceuary to do so ;——but supposed it to be the mper
etiquette. What Elinor said in reply the co d not
distinguish, but jud ed from the motion of her lips that
she did not think I at any material objection ;—and Mrs
Jennings commended her «ﬁrst or being so honest.
They then talked on for/a few minutes longer without
her catching a syllable, when another lucky top in
Marianne’s erformance brought her these words in the
Colonel's e m voice—

“ I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.”

Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,
the was almost ready to cry out, “ Lord! what should
hinder it! "—hut checking her desire, conﬁned herself
to this silent ejaculation— V

“ This is very strange l—aure he need not wait to be
older.”

This delay on the Colonel’s side, however, did not
seem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the
least; for on their breakin up the conference soon
afterwards, and moving di erent ways, Mn Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and in a voice which
showed her to feel what she said—

“ I shall always think myself very much obliged to

cu.”

y' Mrs Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and
on] wondered, that after hearing such a sentence, the
Co one] should be able to take leave of them, as he
immediately did, with the utmost Iang-froid, and go
without making her any reply l—She had not thought
her old friend could have made so indifferent a suitor. .

What had really passed between them was to this
eﬂ‘ect—

“ I have heard," said he, with great compassion, “ of
the injustice your friend Mr Femn has suffered from

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. ! l 7

his family; for if I understand the matter rightI he has
been entirely cast oi? by them for persevering in his
engagement with I very deserving young woman.—
Have I been rightly informed P—Is it so?

Elinor told him that it was.

“The cruelty, the impolitic cmelty,” he replied, with
great feelin , “ of dividing, or attempting to divide, two
mug peop e long amehed to each other, is terrible ;—

Ferran does not know what she may be doing—
what she may drive her son to. I have seen Mr
Ferrars two or three times in Harley-street, and am
much pleased with him. He is not a young man with
whom one can be intimately acquainted in a short time,
but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for his
own sake, and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.
I understand that he intends to take orders. Will you
be so good as to tell him that the living of Delnford,
now vacant, as I um informed by this day’s post,
is his, if he think it worth his acceptance ;——l1ut Ibal,
perhaps, so unfortunately circumstanCed as he is now, it
may be nonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it
were more valunble.———It is n rectory, but a small one;
the late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than
200 pounds per annum, and though it is certainly caps-
hle of improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as to
afford him a very comfortable income. Such as it is,
however, my leasure in presenla'ng him to it will be
verg great. ray assure him of it”

linor’s. astonishment at this commission could hardly
have been greater, had the Colonel been really making
her an offer of his hand. The referment, which only
two da s before she had considered as hopeless for
Edward}; was already provided to enable him to marry;
—-and 15:, of all people in the_world, was ﬁxed on to
bestow it l—Her emotion was such as Mrs Jennings
had attributed to a very different cause ;—-but whatever

118 SENSE AND SENSIHILITY.

minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, might have a
share in that emotion, her esteem for the genunl be-
nevolence, and her gratitude for the 'cular friend-
ship, which together rompted Colone Brandon to this
set, were strongly elt, and warmly expressed. She
thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke of
Edward's principles and disposition with that praise
which she knew them to deserve, and promised to
undertake the commission with pleasure, if it were
reall his wish lo put off so agreeable an ofﬁce to
another. But, at the same time, she could not help
thinkin that no one could so well perform it as him-
self. ft was an oﬂiee, in short, from.which, unwilling
to give Edward the pain of receiving an obligau'on from
bar, the would have been very glad to be spared her-
eelf;—but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal
delicac declining it likewise, still seemed so dellrous
of its in given through her means, that she would
not on any account make farther 0 position. Edward,
she believed, was still in town, an fortunately she had
heard his address from Miss Steele. She could under-
take therefore to infomi him of it in the course of the
day. After this had been settled, Colonel Brandon
began to talk of his own advantage in securing so
respectable and agreeable a neighbour; and tlmr it was
that he mentioned with regret, that the house was
small and indiﬁ‘erenn—an evil which Elinor, as Mrs
Jennings had supposed her to do, made very light of,
at least as far as regarded its size. .

“ The Imallness of the house," said she, “I cannot
imagine any inconvenience to them, for it will be in
pro nion to their family and income.”

y which the Colonel was surprised to ﬁnd that lb:
was considering their marriage as the certain conse-
quence of the genntation; for he did not suppose it
possible that elafurd living could supply such an

E I'
sense. AND smsrmu'rv. t [9

income as anybody in their style of life would venmre
to settle on—and he said so.

“This little rectory can do no more than make Mr
Ferrans comfortable as a bachelor; it mnot enable
him to marry. I am sorry to say that my patronage
ends with this; and my intent is hardly more ex-
tensive. If, however, by any unforeseen chance it
should he in my power to serve him farther, I must
think very differently of him from whatI now do, if
Iain not asreadyto beuseﬁil to him then,aal sin-
cerely wish I could be at present. What I am now
doing indeed seems nothing at all, since it can advance
him so little towards what must be his' principal, his
only object of hap iness. His man-iage must still he a
distant good ;—-at least I am afraid it cannot take place
ve soon.”

\Ich was the sentence which, when misunderstood,
so justly offended the delicate feelingn of Mrs Jennings;
but after this narration of what really passed between
Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the
window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their
parting may perhaps appear, in general, not less reason-
ably excited, nor less properly worded, than if it had
arisen from an oﬁ'er of marriage.

Chums ﬂ...

V “ ELL, Miss Dashw " said Mrs Jennin s,
aagacioualy smiling, I: soon as the gen e-

- man had withdrawn, “I do not ask you
what the Colonel has been saying to you; liar though,
upon my honour, I tried .to keep out of hearing, I
could not help canching enough so undemnd his
business. And I assure you I never was better

l 20 SENSE AND SBNSIBILITV.

pleased in my life, and I wish you joy of it with all
my heart."

“Thank you, ma’am,” mid Elinor. “ It i: I matter
of great joy to me; and I feel the goodneu of Colonel
Brandon moat sentibly. There are not many men who
would act as he has done. Few people have so com-
panionate a heart! I never was more atonithed in
my life.”

“Lord! my dear, you are ve modest! I an’t
the lean astonished at it in the wor d, for I have often
thought, of late, there was nothing more likely to
happen."

“ You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel’-
geneml benevolence; but at least you could not foresee
that the opportunit would so very soon occur.”

“0 portunity! ’ reputed Mrs JenningI—“Ohl
an to rat, when a man has once made up his mind to
Inch 1: thing, somehow or other he will Ioon ﬁnd an
opportunity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it
again and again; and if ever there was a happy couple
in the world, I think I shall soon know where to look

for them."

“ You mean to go to Delaford after them, I
euppoae,” said Elinor, with a faint amile.

“Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. And as to the
house being a bad one, I do not know what the
Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one as ever I
saw."

“ He spoke of its being out of repair.”

“ Well, and whose fault is that? why don’t he
repair it ?—who should do it but himself?”

They were interrupted by the semnt’l coming in,
to announce the curriage being at the door; and Mr:
Jennings, immediatel preparing to go, said—

“Well, my dear, must be gone before I have had
half my talk out. But, however, we may have it all

SENSE AND SENS!!! MTV. 1 1 I

over in the evening, for we shall be quite alone. I do

not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your mind is

too full of the matter to care for company; and beside,

you must long to tell your sister all about it."

begMarianne had left the room before the eonveraation
an.

“ Certainly, ma’am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but

- I Ihall not mention it at present to anybody else."

“ Oh ! very well," said Mrs Jennings, rather dis-
appointed. “ Then you would not have me tell it
Lucy, for I think of going as far as Holborn to-day."

“No, ma’am, not even Lucy, if you please. One
day’s delay will not be ve material; and till I have
written to Mr F errars, I think it ought not to be men-
ﬁoned to anybody else. I shall do that directly. It is
of im mnee that no time should be lost with him, for
he will, of course, have much to do relative to his
ordination.”

This ech at ﬁrst puzzled Mrs Jennings exceed-
ingly. y Mr Fer-rm was to be written to about it
in such a hurry she could not immediately com rehend.
A few moments' reﬂection, however, pioduc a very

- happ idea, and she exclaimed—-

“ h, hol I understand you. Mr Fenara is to be
the man. Well, so much the better for him. A , to
be lure,he mun be ordained in readineaa; and am
.very glad to ﬁnd things are so forward between you.
But, my dear, is not this rather out of character!
Should not the Colonel write'himself? Sure, he in
the roper person."

linor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs
Jennings’s speech; neither did she think it worth inquiring
into; and therefore only replied to its conclusion.

“ Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather
wished any one to announce his intentions to Mr Ferraro
than himself.”

122 SW5]: AND SENSIBILITY.

“ And so you are forced to do it. Well, tbat is an
odd kind of delicacy! However, I will not diwurb
you (seeing her preparing to write). You know your
own concerns best. So good-bye, my dear. I have
not heard of anything to please me so well since Charlotte
was brought to bed.”

And away she went, but returning again in a
moment— -

“ I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear.
Ishould be very glad to get her so good a mime“.
But whether she would do for a lady’s maid, I am sure
I can’t tell. She is an excellent housemaid, and works
very well at her needle. However, you will think of
all that at your leisure.” ‘

“ Certainly, ma’am," replied Elinor, not hearing much
of what she said, and more anxious to be alone than to
be mistress of the subject.

How she should begin—how she should express her-
self in her note to Edward was now all her concern.
The particular circumstances between them made I
diﬂiculty of that which to any other person would have
been the easiest thing in the world; but she equally
feared to say too much or too little, and t deliberating
over her paper, with the n in her hand, till broken in
on b the entrance of E ward himself.

[1- had met Mrs Jennin s at the door in her way to
the carriage, as he came to cave his farewell card ; and
she, after apologising for not returning herself, had
obliged him to enter b saying that Miss Duhwood
was above, and wanted, to speak with him on very
particular business.

Elinor had just been congratulating herself in the
midst of her perplexity, that however diﬁicult it might
be to express herself properly by letter, it was at least
preferable to giving the information by word of mouth,
when her visitor entered, to three her upon this greatest

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 123

exertion of all. Her astonishment and confusion were
very great on his so sudden appearance. She had not
seen him before since his engagement became public,
and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquainted
with it ; which, with the consciousness of what she had
been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made
her fa! particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
He too was much distressed, and they sat down together
in a most promising state of embarrassment—Whether
he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on ﬁrst coming
into the room, he could not recollect; but determining
to be on the safe side, he made his n logy in form us
soon as he could say anything, nﬂer 1: ing a chair.

“ Mrs Jennings told me," said he, “ that you wished
to speak with me, at least I understood her so—or I
certainly should not have intruded on you in such a
manner ; though, at the same time, I should have been
extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you
and your sister; especially as it will most likely be some
time—4t is not probable that I should soon have the
pleasure of meeting you again. I go to Oxford to-
morrow.”

“ You would not have gone, however,” said Elinor,
recovering herself, and determined to get over what she
so much dreaded as soon as possible, “ without receiv-
ing our good wishes. even if we had not been able to
give them in person. Mrs Jennings was quite right in
what she said. I have something of consequence to
inform you of, which I was on the point of communi-
cating by paper. I am charged with a most agreeable
olﬁce (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke).
Colonel Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago,
has desired me to say, that, understanding you mean to
take orders, he has great pleasure in offering you the
living of Delaford, now 'ust vacant, and onl wishes it
were more valuable. A ow me to congrat te you on

124 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.

having so respectable and well-judging a ﬁ-iend, and to
join in his with that the living-4t is about two hundred
u-year—were much more considerable, and such I:
might better enable you to—u might be more than a
temporary accommodation to younelf—such, in short,
as might establish all your views of happineu."

What Edward felt, as he could not lay it himself, it
cannot be expected that any one else should lay it for
him. He lash/l all the astonishment which sud: unex-
pected, which such unthought-of information could not
fail of excitin ; but he said only these two words—-

“ Colonel randon ! "

“ Yet,” continued Elinor, gathering more resolution.
as some of the worst was over; “ Colonel Brandon
means it as a testimony of his concern for what has
lately —-for the cruel situation in which the un-
justiﬁa le conduct of your family has placed you—a
concern which, I am sure, Marianne, myself, and all your
friends must share; and likewise as a proof of his hi h
esteem for your general character, and his particulgar
approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion."

“Colonel Brandon give me a living! —Can it be

ssible ? ” i

“The unkindness of your own relations has made
' you astonished to ﬁnd friendshi anywhere.”

“ No,” replied he, with su den consciousness, “not
to ﬁnd it in ynu ,- for I cannot be ignorant that to you,
to your goodness, I owe it all. I feel it—I would
express it if I could—hut, as you well know, I am no
orator.”

“ You are very much mistaken. I do assure you that
you owe it entire] , at least almost entirely, to your own
merit, and Colone Brandon's discernment of it. I have
had no hand in it. I did not even know, till I under-
stood his design, that the living was vacant ; nor had it
ever occurred to me that he might have such a living in

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 1'25

his As a friend of mine, of my family, he may
amps—indeed I know he bar, still greater pleasure in

towing it; but, upon my word, you owe nothing to
my solicitation."

Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share
in the action ; but she was at the same time so unwilling
to appear as the benefactress of Edward, that she acknow-
ledged it with hesitation; which probably contributed
to ﬁx that suspicion in his mind which had recently
entered it. For a short time he sat deep in thought,
after Elinor had ceased to speak; at last, as if it were
rather an effort, he said—

“ Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and
respectability. Ihave always heard him spoken of as
such, and your brother, I know, esteems him highly.
He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners
perfectly the gentleman.”

. “ Indeed," replied Elinor, “ I believe that you will

ﬁnd him, on farther acquaintance, all that you have
heard him to be; and as you will be such very near
neighbours (for I understand the parsonage is almost
close to the mansion-house), it is particularly important
that he :Imlld be all this."

Edward made no answer ; but when she had turned
away her head, gave her a look so serious, so earnest,
so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter
wish the distance between the parsonage and the mansion-
house much greater.

“ Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St James’s-
street," said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.

Elinor told him the number of the house.

“I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks
which you will not allow me to give you ; to assure
him that he has made me a very—an exceedingly happy
man-,7

Elinor did not alter to detain him 3 and they parted,

r 26 srmss AND sessrsru'rv.

with I very earnest insurance on bar side of her unmeas-
ing good wiehes for his happiness in every cbsnge of
situation that might befall him; on In}, with rather an
attempt to return the same good-will, than the power of
expressing it.

“ When I see him again," said Elinor to herself, as
the door shut him out, “ I shall see him the husband of
Lucy.”

And with this plea-in anticipation, she sat down to
reconsider the past, rec the words, and endeavour to
comprehend all the feelings of Edward; and, of course,
to reﬂect on her own with discontent.

When Mrs Jennings came home, though she returned
from seeing people whom she had never seen before,
and of whom therefore she must have 3 gm: deal to
say, her mind was so much more occupied by the im-
portant secret in her possession, than by anything else,
that she reverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared.

“Well, my dear,” she cried, “I sent ou up the
young man. Did not I do right ?—And' I suppose
you had no great dilliculty.—You did not ﬁnd him very
unwilling to accept your proposal ?"

“ No, ma’am; {but was not very likely."

“Well, and how soon wﬂl he be ready ?—For it

seems all to depend upon that.”
‘ “Really,” id Elinor, “I know so little of these
ltind of forms; that I can hardly even conjecture so to
the time, or the preparation necessary; but I su pose
two or three months will complete his ordinntion.’

“Two or three months?” cried Mrs Jennings;
“ Lord! my dear, how calmly you talk of itl and can
the Colonel wait two or three months! Lord bless
me !——I am sure it. would ut me quite out of patience.
—And though one would be very glad to do a kindness
by poor Mr F errars, I do drink it is not worth while to
wait two or three months for him. Sure, somebody

SENSE AND msrsrurv. 127
else might be found that would do as wdl—Imnebody
that is in orders alreld ."

“My dear ma’am,’ said Elinor, “what can you be
thinkin ofi—Why, Colonel Brandon’s only object is
to be 0 use to Mr Ferraro.”

“ Lord bless you, my dear l——Sure you do not mean
to persuade me that the Colonel only marries you for
the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr Femrsl "

The deception could not continue after this; and an
explanation immediame took place, by which both
gained considerable amusement for the moment, without
an material loss of ha iness to either, for Mrs Jennings
on exchanged one arm of deli ht for another, and
mi] without forfeiting her expectaan of the lint.

" Aye, aye, the ' nnge is but a-small one," said
she, after the lint ullition of surprise and satisfaction
was over, “and very likely may be out of repair; but to
hear a man a logising, as I thought, for-a house that
to my ltnowl ge has live sitting-rooms on the ground-
ﬂoor, and, I think the house-keeper told me, could make
up ﬁﬁeen bcdsl—And to you to that had been used to
live in Barton Cottage! It seen’ied quite ridiculous.—
But, my dear, we must touch up the Colonel to do
something to the parsonage, and make it comfortable
for them, before Lucy goes to it.”

“ But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any

‘ idea of; the livind being enough to allow them to

;%e Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has
two thousand a-year himself, he thinks that nobody
else can marry on less. Take my word for it, that, if
I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Delnford Parson-
age before Michaelmas; and I an: sure I shan’t go if
Lu an't there.” '

E 'nor was quite out of her opinion, as to the prob- \Q

ability of their not waiting for anything more.

n8 sans: nu) sensrmm.

Chsout ﬁll].

DWARD having carried his thanks to Colonel
Brandon, proceeded with his ha 'ness to Lucy;
and such was the excess of it y the time he

reached Bartlett’s Buildings, that she was able to snare
Mn Jennings, who called on her again the next day
with her congratulations, that she had never seen him
in such spirits before in her life.

Her own happineu, and her own spirits, were at
least very certain; and Ihe joined Mrs Jennings most
heartily in her expectation of their being all comfombly
together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas. So
far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness
to give Elinor that credit which Edward would give
her, that she spoke of her friendship for them both with
the most grateful warmth, was ready to own all their
obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertion
for their good on Miss Dashwood’s rt, either present
or future, would ever surprise her, or she believed her
capable of doing anything in the world for those she
really valued. As for olonel Brandon, she was not
only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover
truly anxious that he should be treated as one in all
worldly concerns; anxious that his tithes should be
raised to the utmost; and secretly resolved to avail
herself at Dclaford, as far as she possibly could, of his
servants, his carriage, his cows, and his pouln$

It was now above a week since John asth
had called in Berkeley-street, and as since that time
no notice had been taken by them of his wife’s indis-
position, beyond one verbal inquiry, Elinor began to feel
it necessary to pay her a visiL—This was an obligation,
however, which not only opposed her own inclination,
but which had not the assistance of any encouragement

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. [29

from her companions. Marianne, not contented with
absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent to
prevent her sister's going at all; and Mn Jennings,
though her carriage was alwa I at Elinor’s service, so
very much disliked Mrs John Bashwood, that not even
her curiosity to see how she looked after the late dis-
covery, nor her strong desire to affront her by mking
Edward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be
in her company again. The consequence was, that
Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit, for which no _
one could really have less inclination, and to run the
risk of .1 téte-El-téte with a woman whom neither of the
others had so much reason to dislike.

Mrs Dashwood was denied ; but before the carria
could turn from the house, her husband occidental y i
came out. He expressed great pleasure in meeting
Elinor, told her that he had been just going to all in
Berkeley-meet, and assuring her tlut Fanny would be

glad to see her, invited her to come in. '
hey walked up stain into the drawing-room—No-
body was there.

“ Fanny is in her own room, I suppose,” said he ;—
“ I will go to her presently, for I am sure she will not
have the least objection in the world to seeing you—very
far from it indeed. Now es ially there cannot be—
but however, on and Marianne were always great
fovuuritem— hy would not Marianne come?"

Elinor made what excuse she could for her.

“ I am not sorry to see you alone,” he replied, “ for
I have a good deal to say to you. This living of
Colonel andon’Hnn it be tme l—has he really
given it to Edward ?—--I heard it yesterday by chance,
and was coming to you on purpose to inquire farther

'nbout it.”

“ It is tly true.—Colonel Brandon has given the
living of elaforrl to Edward.”

H. l

I30 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ Really !—Well, this is very astonishing !—no
relationship l—no connexion between them l—ood now
that livings fetch ouch a price l—what was the value of
this i "

“ About two hundred 1-year.”

“ Very well—and for the next presentation to a living
of that value—so posing the late incumbent to have
been old and sickly nod likel to vacate it soon—he
might have got, I dare lay—gluten hundred pounds.
And how came he not to have settled that matter before
this person’s death i—Now indeed it would be too late
to sell it, but a man of Colonel Brandon's sense !—I
wonder he should be so improvident in a point of such
common, such natural concern !—Well, I am convinced
that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every
human character. I luppooe, however—on recollection
—-that the case may rohably be (Mr. Edward is only
to hold the living tillI the person to whom the Colonel
has really sold the presentation in old enough to take it
— e, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."

E inor contradicted it, however, very positively; and
by relating that she had herself been emplo ed in con-
veying the olfer from Colonel Bnndon to ward, and
therefore must understand the terms on which it was
given, obliged him to submit to her authority.

“ It is tnily astoniehing! "—he cried, after hearing
what she said—“ what could be the Colonel’s motive l "

“ A very simple one—to be of use to Mr Femrs.”

“Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be,
Edward is a very lucky man! You will not mention
the matter to Fann , however; for though I have broke
it to her, nnd the it vastly well, she will not like
to hear it much talked of.”

Elinor had some difﬁculty here to refrain from
observing, that she thought Fanny might have home
with compocure an acquisition of wealth to her brother,

SENSE AND SENS! EILITY. l 3 l

by which neither she nor her child could be possibly
impoverished.

“ Mrs Ferrars,” added he, lowering his voice to the
tone becoming so important a sub'ect, “ knows nothing
about it It present, and I believe it will be best to keep
it emirer concealed from her as long as may be.—When
the manisge takes place, I fear the must hear of it
all.”

“ But wh should such precaution be used ?—Though
it is not to supposed that Mrs chrs can have the
smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son has money
enough to live upon,—for that must be quite out of the
quesuou ; yet wh , after her late behaviour, is she supposed
to feel at all? he has done with her son, she has.cast
him of! for ever, and has made all those over whom she
had any inﬂuence cast him off likewise.‘ Surely, aﬁer
doing so, she cannot be imagined liable to any impres—
sion of sorrow or of joy on his accouthe cannot be
interested in anything that befalls him. She would not
be so weak as to throw sway the comfort of a child, and

retain the anxiety of a parent] ”

“ Ahl Elinor,” said John, “ your reasoning is very

, but it is founded on ignorance of human nature.
hen Edward’s unhap y match takes place, depend
upon it his mother will cl as much as if she had never
discarded him; and therefore every circumstance that
may accelerate that dreadful event, must be concealed
from her as much as possible. Mrs Ferran can never
forget that Edward is her son.”
' “ You surprise me ; I should think it must nearly
have escaped her memory by Ibis time."

“You' wrong her exceedingly. Mrs Fennrs is one
of the most affectionate mothers in the world."

Elinor was silent.

“ We think now," said Mr Dashwood, after a short
pause, “ of Robert’: marrying Miss Morton.”

132 SENSE AND SENSIBILILY.

Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance
of her brother’s tone, calmly replied-—

“ The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair.”

“ Choice !——how do you mean t"

“ I only mean, that I suppose from your manner of

king, It must be the mine to Miss Morton whether
she marry Edward or Robert.”

“Cemrinly, there can be no difference; for Robert
will now to all intents and purposes be considered as the
eldest son; and as to anything else, they are both very
agreeable young men—'I do not know that one is
superior to the other.”

Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short
time silent. His reﬂections ended thus—

“Of one thing, my dear sister,” kindly taking her
hand, and aking in an awful whisper, “ I may assure
you: and I12»?! do it, because I know it must glatif
you. I have good reason to think—indeed I have It
from the best authority, or I should not repeat it, for
otherwise it would be very wrong to say anything about
it—but I have it from the very best authority—not that
I ever precisely heard Mrs Ferrars say it herself, but her
daughter M and I have it from her—That, in short,
whatever objections there might be against a certain—a
certain connexion—you understand rue—it would have
been far preferable to her, it would not have her
half the vexation that lb!) dons. I was exceedingly
pleased to hear that Mrs Ferrars considered it in that
light—u very gratifying circumstance, you know, to us
all. ‘ It would have been beyond comparison,’ she said,
‘the least evil of the two, and she would be glad to
compound now for nothing worse.’ But, however, all
that is quite out of the question—not to be thought of
or mentioned; as to any attachment, you' know—it
never could lie—all that is gone by. But I thought I
would just tell you of this, because I knew how much

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. I33

it must please you. Not that you have any reason to
regret, my dear Elinor. There is no doubt of your
doing exceedingly well—quite as well, or better, per-
haps, all things considered. Has Colonel Brandon been
with on lately?”

Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity
and raise her self-importance, to agitate her nerves and
ﬁll her mind; and she was therefore glad to be ared
from the necessity of saying much in reply hersel , and
from the danger of hearing anything more from her
brother, by the entrance of Mr Robert Ferraro. After
a few moments’ chat, John l):mhwoo(l, rccollecting that
Fanny was yet uninformed of his sister being there,
quitted the room in nest of her; and Elinor was left
to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the
gay unconcern, the ha py self-complacency of his manner
while enjoying so u air a division of his mother’s love
and liberality, to the prejudice of his banished brother,
earned only by his own dissipated course of life, and that
brother’s integrity, was conﬁrming her most unfavourable
opinion of his head and heart.

They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves,
before he began to speak of Edward; for he too had
heard of the living, and was very inquisitive on the
subject. Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as she had
given them to John, and their effect on Robert, though
very different, was not less striking than it had been on
him. He laughed most immoderately. The idea of
Edward’s being a clergyman, and living in a small par-
sonage-house, diverted him beyond measure ; and when
to that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward
reading prayers in a white surplice, and publishing the
bannl of marriage between John Smith and Mary Brown,
he could conceive naming more ridiculous.
~ Elinor, while she waited in silence, and immovable

gravity, the conclusion of such folly, could not restrain

I34 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

her eyes from being fixed on him with a look that spoke
all the contempt it excited. It was a look, however,
very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings, and
gave no intelligence to him. He was recalled from wit
to wisdom, not by any reproaf of hen, but by his own
sensibility.

“ We may treat it as a joke,” said he at last,
recovering from the affected laugh which had conlider-
ably lengthened out the genuine gaiety of the moment—
“ but, u n my soul, it is a most serious business. Poor
Edw ! he is mined for ever. I am extremely sorry
for it—for I know him to be a very good-hearted
creature; as well meaning a fellow, perhaps, as any in
the world. You must not judge of him, Min Dash-
wood, from your slight acquaintance. Poor Edward]
His mnnnen are certainly not the happien in nature.
But we are not all born, you know, wiﬂi the some

were— the same address. Poor fellowl to lee him
In a circle of atmngersl—to be sure it was pitiable
enough !—lmt, upon my soul, I believe he has so good
a heart as any in the kingdom; and I declare and
protest to you I never was so shocked in my life, as
when it all burst forth. I could not believe it. M
mother was the ﬁrst person who told me of it, and
feeling myself called on to act with reoolution. im-
mediately said to her, ‘ M dear madam, I do not know
what on may intend to 0 on the occasion. but as for
mysclz, I must say, that if Edward does marry this
young woman, I never will see him ngain.’ That was
what I said immediately,—I was most uncommonly
shocked indeedl—Poor Edwardl—he has done for
himself completely !—shut himself out for ever from all
decent society !—but as I directly said to my mother, I
am not in the least surprised at it; fmm his style of
education it was always to be expected. My poor
mother was half frantic."

sense AND sensrmurr. r3 5

“ Have you ever seen the lady i ”

“ Yes, once; while she was staying in this house. I
happened to drop in for ten minutes; and I saw quite
enough of her. The merest awkward country girl,
without style or elegance, and almost without beauty.
I remember her perfectly. Just the kind of girl I
should suppose likely to captivate poor Edward. I
oﬂ'ered immediatel ,as soonas m mother related the
affairto me,to kto him m Land dismade him
from the match; butitwastoolatetben,1 found,todo
anything, for unluckily, I was not in the way at tint,
and knew nothing of it till after the breach had taken

lace, when it was not for me, you know, to interfere.

t had I been informed of it a few hours earlier, I
think it is most probable that something might have
been hit on. I certainly should have resented it to
Edward in a very strong light. ‘ Myljiear fellow,’ I
ehould have said, ‘consider what you are doing. You
are making a most disgraceful connexion, and such I
one as your famil are unanimous in disappmving.’ I
cannot help thinking, in short, that means might have
been found. But now it is all too late. He must be
urved, you know; that is certain ; absolutely tuned."

He had settled this point with great composure,
when the entrance of Mrs John Dashwood put an end
to the subject. But though :5: never spoke of it out of
her own family, Elinor could see its Inﬂuence on her
mind, in the something like confusion of countenance
with which she entered, and an attempt at cordiality in
her behaviour to herself. She even proceeded so far
as to be concerned to ﬁnd that Elinor and her sister
wereso soon to leave mwn,as she had ho to see
more of them ; an exertion in which her h nd, who
attended her into the room, and hung enamoured over
her accents, seemed to distinguish everything that was
most affectionate and graceful.

:36 stars: ‘nm snusrsierv.

Cblpt" ’1‘!!-

NE other short call in Harley-street, in which
Elinor received her brother’s congratulation, on
their trnvellin so Far towards Barton without

any expense, and on solonel andon'l being to follow
them to Cleveland in a day or two, completed the
intercourse of the brother and listen in town; and a
faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland
whenever it should happen to be in their way, which of
all things was the most unlikely to occur, with a more
warm, though less public assurance, from John to Elinor
of the rom titude with which he should come to see
her at Belali’srd, was all that foretold any meeting in
the country.

It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed
determined to send her to Dclaford; a place in which,
of all others, she would now last chuse to visit or wish
to reside ; for not only was it considered as her ﬁrm
home by her brother and Mrs Jennings. but even Lucy,
when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to vilit
her there.

Very early in April, and tolerably arly in the day,
the two parties from Hanover-square and Berkeley-
strect, set out from their respective homeo, to meet by
a pointment on the road. For the convenience of

harlottc and her child, they were to be more than
two days on their journ , and Mr Palmer, travelling
more ex 'tiously with olonel Brandon, was to join
them at leveland mu after their arrival.

Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in
London, and eager as she had long been to quit it,
could not, when it came to the int, bid adieu to the
house in which she had for the at time enjoyed those
hopes and that conﬁdence in Willoughby, which were

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 137

now extinguished for ever, without great pain. Nor
could she lave the place in which Willoughby re-

mained in new engagements, and new schemes,
in which l could have no share, without shedding
many tars.

Elinor’s. satisfaction at the moment of removal, was
more positive. She had no such object for her linger-
ing thoughts to ﬁx on, she left no creature behind from
whom it would give her a moment’s regret to be divided
for ever, she was pleased to be free herself from the

rsecution of Lucy’s friendship, she was grateful for

ringing her sister away unseen by Willoughby since
his marriage, and she looked forward with hope to
what a few months of tranquillity at Barton mi ht do
towards restoring Marianne’s peace of mind, a con-
ﬁrming her own.
- Their journey was safely performed. The second
day brought them into the cherished, or the prohibited
county of Somerset, for as such was it dwelt on by
turns in Marianne’s imagination; and in the forenoon
of the third they drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland was a spacious, modem-built house, situated
on a sloping lawn. It had no park, but the pleasure-
graunds were tolerahly extensive ; and like every other
place of the same degree of importance, it had its open
shmbbery, and closer wood-walk; a road of smooth
gravel winding round a plantation, led to the front; the
lawn was dotted over with timber; the house itself was
under the guardianship of the fir, the mountain-ash, and
the Iccacia, and a thick screen of them altogether, in-
terspersed with tall Lombardy poplars, shut out the
ofﬁces. .

Marianne entered the house with an heart swelling
with emotion from the consciousness of being only
ei hty miles from Barton, and not thirty from Con-Abe

gm; and before she had been ﬁve minutes within

138 SENSE AND SENSXBILI‘I'Y.

its walls, while the others were busily helping Charlene
shew her child to the house-keeper, she quiﬁed it again,
stealing away through the winding shrubberies, new
beginning to be in beauty, to gain a distant eminence;
where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wandering
over a wide rmct of country to the south-east, could
fondl rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon,
and any that from their summits Combe Magna might
be seen.

In such moments of precious, of invaluable milery,
she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland; and
as she returned by a different circuit to the house,
feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty, of
wandering from lace to place in free and luxurious
solitude, she reso ved to spend almost every hour of
every day while she remained with the Palmers, in the
indulgence of such solita rambles.

She returned just in time to join the others as they
quitted the house, on an excursion through its more
immediate premises; and the rest of the morning was
easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchen
garden, examining the bloom upon its walls, and
hatching to the gardener's lamentations upon blights,
—in dawdling through the green-house, where the loss
of her favourite lants, unwarin exposed, and hi
by the lingering giant, raised the laughter of Char one,
—and in visiting her poultry-yard, where in the dis-
appointed hopes of her dairy-maid, by hens forsakiug
their nests, or being stolen by a fax, or in the rapid
decease of a promising young brood, she found fresh
sources of merriment.

The morning was ﬁne and dry, and Marianne, in
her plan of employment abroad, had not calculated for
w change of weather during their stay at Cleveland.

ith great surprise, therefore, did she ﬁnd herself
prevented by a settled rain from going out again after

SENSE AND SENSIBILX'I'Y. 139

dinner. She had depended on a twilight walk to the
Grecian temple, and perhaps all over the grounds, and
an evening merely cold or damp would not luve
deterred her from it; but a her and settled rain
even :5: could not fancy dry or peasant weather for
walking.

Their was small, and the hours pinned quietly
away. rs Palmer had her child, and re Jennings
her carpet-work; they talked of the friends they had
left behind, arranged Lad Middleton’s en agemenu,
and wondered whether r Palmer an Colonel
Brandon would get farther than Reading that night.
Elinor, however little concerned in it, joined in their
diocourue, and Marianne, who had the knack of ﬁnding
her way in every house to the library, however it might
be avoided by the family in general, soon procured
herself a book.

Nothing was wanting on Mrs Palmer’s side, that
constant and friendly good humour could do, to make
them feel themselves welcome. The nness and,
heartiness of her manner more than atoned or that want
of recollection and elegance, which made her often
deﬁcient in the forms of politeness; her kindness, rc-
commended by so pretty a face, was engaging; her
folly, though evident, was not disgusting because it was
not conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every-
thin but her laugh.

he two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very
late dinner, affording a pleaeant enlargement of the
party, and a very welcome variety to their conversation,
which along morning of the some continued rain had
reduced very low.

Elinor had seen so little of Mr Palmer, and in that
little had seen so much variety in his address to her sister
and herself, that she knew not what to expect to find
him in his own family. She found him, however, per-

140 SENSE AND SENSIBILIT‘I.

fectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors,
and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother;
she found him very capable of being a pleasant com-
panion, and only cprevented from being so always, by
too great an aptitu e to fancy himself as much superior
to eople in general, as he must feel himself to be
to bin Jennings and Charlotte. For the rest of
his character and habits, they were marked, as far as
Elinor could rceive, with no traits at all unusual
in his sex an time of life. He was nice in his
ting, uncertain in his hours ; fond of his child, though
affecting to slight it; and idled away the momingl at
billiards, which ought to have been devoted to business.
She liked him, however, u on the whole; much better
than she had expected, an in her heart was not sorry
that she could like him no more ; not sorry to be
driven b the observation of his epicurirm, his selﬁsh-
ness, an his conceit, to rest with complacency on the
remembrance of Edward’s generous temper, simple
taste, and diﬂident feelings.

of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she
now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who
had been into Dorsetshire lately; and who, treating her
at once as the disinterested friend of Mr Ferrars, and
the kind conﬁdante of himself, talked to her a great deal
of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deﬁciencies,
and told her what he meant to do himself towards re-
moving them. His behaviour mher in this as well as
in every other particular. his open pleasure in meeting
her after an absence of only ten days, his readiness to
converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,
might very well justify Mrs Jennings’s persuasion of his
attachment, and would have been enough, perhaps, had
not Elinor still, as from the ﬁrst, believed Marianne his
real favourite, to make her suspect it herself. But as it
was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head,

 

,v/M/{m ﬂ/ﬂmw "(Ma

I x.,., a;

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 14!

ex by Mrs Jennings’s suggestion ; ml the could not
help lieving heneif the nicent observer of the two ;
she watched his eyes, while Mrs Jennings thought only
'of his behaviour; and while his looks of anxious solici-
tude on Marianne's feeling in her head and throat the
beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by
‘wordt, entirely escaped the latter lady’s observation, :5:
could discover in them the quick feelings and needless
alarm of a lover.

Two delightful twilight walks on the third and
fourth evenings of her being there, not merely on the
dry gmvel of the shruhbery, but all over the grounds,
and especially in the most distant parts of them, where
there was something more of wildness than in the rest,
where the trees were the oldest, and the grass was the
longest and wettest, had—assisted by the still greater
imprudence of sitting in her wet shoes and stockings—-
given Marianne a cold so violent, as though for a day
or two triﬂed with or denied, would force itself b in-
creasing ailment on the concern of everybody, an the
notice of herself. Prescri tions poured in from all
quarters, and as usual were ali declined. Though heavy
and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, a cough, and a
sore throat, a good night’s rest was to cure her entirely ;
and it was with diﬁiculty that Elinor prevailed on her,
when she went to bed, to try one or two of the simplest
of remedies.

chum: 513]].

ARIANNE got up the next morning at her
_ usual time; to every inquiry replied that she
was better, and tried to prove herself so, by
engaging in her accustomary employments. But a day

l42 SENS! AND SENSIBILITY.

will sitting shivering over the lire with a hook in
herhandwﬁich she vna unable to read,or in lying,

and ' onasofa,didnot muchin
mr of bug‘s-trim” and when, amidst, she went
early to bed, more and more indispoIed, Colonel Bran-
don war only amnished at her sister's composure, who
though attending and nursing her the wholeda , agaim
Mnrianne’s inclination, and forcing proper icines on
her at night, trusted like Marianne to the certainty and
efﬁcacy of sleep, and felt no real alarm.

A very reales- and feverish night, however, die-
a pointed the expectation of hath ; and when Marianne,

r persisting in rising, oonfeaaed heraelf unable to sit
up, and returned voluntarilyto her bed, Elinor was very
ready to adopt Mra Jenninga’s advice, of sending for the
Palmers’ apothecary.

He came, examined his patient, and though encourag-
ing Miss Dashwood to expect that a very few days
would restore her sister to halth, yet by pronouncing
her diaorderto have a putrid tendency, and allowin the
word “ infection " to pass his lips, gave instant arm
to Mrs Palmer on her baby’s account. MrI Jenninga,
who had been inclined from the ﬁrst to think Marianne’s
complaint more serious than Elinor, now looked very
grave on Mr Harris’a report, and conﬁrming Charlene a
can and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate
removal with her infant; and Mr Palmer, though treat-
ing their apprehensions as idle, found the anxiety and
imponunity of his wife too great to be withstood. Her
departure therefore wat ﬁxed on; and within an hour
after Mr Harris’r an'ival, she set off, with her little boy
and his nurle, for the house of a near relation of Mr
Palmer’s, who lived a few milea on the other tide of
Bath ; whither her husband promised, at her earnest
entreaty, to join her in a day or two ; and whither she
was almost equally urgent with her mother to accom-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. I43

ny her. Mrs Jennings, however, with a kindness of
hurt which made Elinor really love her, declared her
resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as
Marianne remained ill. and of endeavouring, by her own
attentive are, to supply to her the lace of the mother
she had taken her from; and Einor found her on
every occasion a most willing and active hel mate,
desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often, her
better ex 'en'ce in nursing, of material use.

Poor arianne, languid and low from the nature of
her malady, and feeling herself universally ill, could no
longer ho that to-morrow would ﬁnd her recovered;
and thei ea of what to-morrow would have produced,
but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment more
severe; for on that day they were to have begun their
journey home, and, attended the whole way by a servant
of Mrs Jennings, were to have taken their mother by
In rise on the following forenoon. The little that she
said, was all in lamentation of this inevitable delay;
though Elinor tried to raise her spirits, and make her
believe, as she rim- really believed herself, that it would
be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no alteration in the
state of the patient; she certainl was not better, and
except that there was no amen ment, did not appear
worse. Their party was now ﬁrther reduced ; for Mr
Palmer, though very unwilling to go, as well from real
humanity and good-nature, as from a dislike of appear-
ing to be frightened away by his wife, was persuaded at
last b Colonel Brandon, w perfonn his promise of ’
followtng her: and while he was pmpnring to go,
Colonel Brandon himself, with a much greater exer-
tion, be to talk of going likewise. Here, however,
the ltin ness of Mrs Jennings interposed most acceptably;
for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so
much uneasiness on her sister‘s account, would be to

I44 SENSE AND SENSIBIIJTY.

'vethemboth,drethought,of oornibrt;and
more telling him at once that at Cleveland
vlaa nece-aryto henelf,that she rhoul want him to
play at piquet of an evening while Min Daahwood wan
above with her sister, Bee, the urged him In moneg to
remain, that he, who wan gratifying the ﬁrst wiah ofhia
own heart by a compliance, could not long even alias:
to demur; eepecially an Mrs Jenningl’l entratywaa
warmly aeconded by Mr Palmer, who Ieerned to feel
a relief to himself in leaving behind him a penon to
well able to assist or advise Miss Daahwood in any
emergence.

Marianne was of coune kept in ignorance of all'theee
arrangements. She knew not that ahe had been the
means of sending the ownerl of Cleveland away, in about
aeven days from the time of their arrival. It gave her
no surprise that ahe saw nothing of Mn Palmer! and
a: it gave her likewiae no concern, the never mentioned
her name.

Two dayan away from the time of Mr Palmer’l
departure, an her situation continued, with little varia-
tion,the same. Mr Harris, who attended herev day,
still talked bold] of a speedy recovery, and Min uh-
wood was equallyy sanguine ; but the expectation of the
other: was by no meant so cheerful. Mn Jennings
had determined very early in the aeisure that Mari-
anne would never get over it, and Colonel Brandon,
who was chieﬂy of use in listening to Mrs Jenningl'a
forebodings, was not in a ante of mind to reaiat
their inﬂuence. He tried to reason himqu out
of fears which the different judgment of the apathe-
cary seemed to render abeurd; but the many hourl of
ach day in which he wan left entirely alone were but
too favourable for the admission of every melancholy
idea, and he could not expel from hi- mind the per-
auaaion that he ahould nee Marianne no more.

SENSE AND SENSIBXLITY. 145

On the morning of the third day, however, the
gloomy anticipations of both were almost done away;
or when Mr Harris arrived, he declared his patient
materially better. Her pulse was much stronger and
every symptom more favourable than on the preceding
visit. Elinor, conﬁrmed in every pleasant hope, was all
cheerfulness; rejoicing that in her letters to her mother,
she had pursued her own judgment rather than her
friend’s, in making very light of the indisposilion which
delayed them at Cleveland, and almost ﬁxing on the
time when Marianne would be able to travel.

But the day did not close so auspicioust as it began.
Towards the main Marianne became ill again, grow-
ing more heavy, res ess, and uncomfortable than before.
Her sister, however, still sanguine, was willing to attri-
bute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of
having set u]; to have her bed made; and carefully

‘ administering the cordiala prescribed, saw her with satis-

faction link at last into a slumber, from which she
expected the most beneﬁcial eﬁ'ects. Her sleey, though
not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted a con-
siderable time; and anxious to observe the result of it
herself, she resolved to sit with her during the whole of
it; Mrs Jennings, knowing nothing of any change in
the patient, went unusually early to bed; her maid, who
was one of the principal nurses, was recreating herself
in the housekeeper’s room, and Elinor remained alone
with Marianne.

The repose of the latter became more and more dis-
turbed; and her sister, who watched with unremitting
attenh'on her continual change of posture, and heard the
frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint which
passed her li was almost wishing to muse her, from
so painﬁrl a umber when Marianne, suddenl awakened
by some accidental noise in the house, mtethastily up,
and, with feverish wildness, cried out——

n. K

I46 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

“Is mama coming 1’"

“Not yet," replied the other, conceding her terror,
and assimg Mananne to lie down again; “but shewill
be here I hope, before it is long. It is a great way,
you know, from hence to Barton."

“But she must not go round by London,” cried
Marianne, in the sumo hurried manner. “I shall never
see her, if she goes to London.”

Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite
herself, and while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt
her pulse. It was lower and quicker than ever; and
Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, her alarm
increased so rapidly, as to determine her on cending
inuantly for Mr Harris, and despatching a messenger to
Barton for her mother. To consult with Colonel
Brandon on the best means of effecting the latter, was
a thou ht which immediawa followed the resolution of
it; performance; and as soon as she had rung u the
maid to take her place by her sister, she hastened wn
to the dnwing-room, where she knew he was generally
to he found at a much later hour than at present.

It was no time for hesitation. Her fears and her
difﬁculties were immediately before him. Her fears,
he had no courage, no conﬁdence to attempt the re-
monl of ;—he listened to them in silent detpondence;
-hut her difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a
readiness that seemed to speak the occasion, and the
service pre-amnged in his mind, he offered himself as
the messenger who should fetch Mrs Dashwood.
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome.
She thanked him with a brief, though fervent gratitude,
and while he went to hurry olf his servant with a
mecca e to Mr Harris, and an order for pomhmses
direct? , she wrote a few lines to her mother.

The comfort of such a friend at that moment as
Colonel Brandon—of such a companion for her mother,

smrss AND sensrnru-rv. 147

—how grateftu was it felt l—a companion whose judg-
ment would guide, whose attendance mutt relieve, and
whose friendship might sooth her l—-an far as the shock
of such a summons could be lessened to her, his presence,
his manners, his assistance, would lessen it.

He, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with
all the ﬁrmness of a collected mind, made every neces-
sary amngement with the utmost despatch, and calcu-
lated with exscmess the time in which she might look
for his return. Not a moment was lost in delay of any
kind. The horses arrived, even before they were ex-
pected, and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand
with a look of solemnity, and a few words spoken too
low to reach her ear, hurried into the carrriage. It
was then about twelve o’clock, and she returned to her

_ sister's a at to wait for the arrival of the apothe-
cary, an to watch by her the rest of the night. It
was a night of almoat equal suffering to both. Hour
after hour passed awa in sleepless pain and delirium on
Marianne’s side, and] in the most cruel anxiety on
Elinor’s, before Mr Harris appwnd. Her apprehen-
sions once raised, paid by their excess for all her former
security, and the servant who sat up with her, for she
would not allow Mrs Jennings to be ﬁlled, only
tortured her more, by him: of what her had

alwa thou ht.

hidiannegs ideas were still, at intervals, ﬁxed inco-
herently on her mother, and whenever she mentioned
her name, it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor,
who, maching herself for having triﬂed with so man
days 0 illness, and wretched for some immediate relic ,
fancied that all relief might soon be in vein, that every-
thing had been delayed wo long, and pictured to herself
her suﬂ'ering mother, arriving too late to see this darling
child, or to see her radonal.

She was on the point of sending again for Mr Harris,

148 saxsa: arm snusrmu-rv.

or if I): could not come, for some other advice, when
the former -—- but not till after five o’clodt— an'ived.
His opinion, however, made some little amends for his
dela , for though acknowledging a very unexpected and
up easant alteration in his patient, he would not allow
the danger to be material, and talked of the relief which
a fresh mode of treatment must procure, with a con-
ﬁdence which, in a lesser degree, was communicated to
Elinor. He promised to call again, in the course of
three or four hours, and left both .the patient and her
anxious attendant more composed thanhehad found them.

With strong concern, and with many reproaches for
not being called to their aid, did Mrs enmngl hear in
the morning of what had paued. Her former appre-
hensions, now with greater reason restored, left her no
doubt of the event ;—and though trying to tpeak com-
fort to Elinor, her conviction of her sister’s danger
would not allow her to offer the comfort of hope.
Her heart wan really grieved. The rapid decay, the
early death of a girl to young, so lovely :5 Marianne,
must have utmck it lets interetted person with concern.
On Mrs Jennin t’a companion she had _other claims.
She had been for three months her companion, was
still under her care, and the waa known to have been
greatly injured, and long unhappy. The diatreu of her
sister too, particularly a favourite, was before her ;—and
as for their mother, when Mrs Jennings contidered that
Marianne might probably be to her what Charlotte was
to herself, her sympathy in Im- suifen'ngs was very
sincere. .

Mr Harris was punctual in his second viait ;—hut he
came to be dieappointed in his hopes of what the lat
would produce. Hia medicines had failed ;—the fever
was unabated ; and Marianne only more quiet—not
more herself-remained in an heavy stupor. Elinor
catching all, and more than all, his fears In a moment,

SENSE AND SlNSlBXLlTY. 149

propoeed to call in farther advice. But he judged it
unneceua ; he had nil] Iomething more to try, come
freah app ication, of whose aucoeu he war almolt an
conﬁdent u the last, and his virit concluded with en-
couraging auurancee which reached the ear, but could
not enter the heart of Miss Daahwood. She was calm, .
except when ahe thought of her mother, but the me
almost hopeleu; and in this «are the continued till
noon, Icarcely stirring from her sister’s bed, her thouth
wandering from one image of grief, one eulfering friend
to another, and her spirit: 0 ressed to the utmost by
the conversation of Mrs Jennings, who sampled not to
attribute the severity and danger of thin attack to the
many weeka of previous indirpoaila'on which Marianne’t
diuppointrnent had brought on. Elinor felt all the
reaaonahleneu of the idea, and it gave fresh miaery to
her reﬂection. \

About noon, however,‘ she began —but with a
caution, a dread of some diaapporntrnent, which for
tome time kept her silent, even to her friend—to fancy,
to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
deter a pulee i—ehe waited, watched, examined it again
and again ;-—-and at laet, with an agitation more difﬁcult
to bury under exterior calmness than all her foregoing
distress, ventured to communicate her hopea. Mn
Jennings, though forced on examination to acknow-
ledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young ﬁnd
from indulging a thought of in continuance ; and
Elinor, conning over every in'unetion of dietruat, told her-
Ielf likewise not to hope. lint it waa too late. Hope
had already entered ; and feeling all its anxioua ﬂutter,
the bent over her sister to watch—she hardly knew for
what. Half an hour passed away, and the favourable
lyrnptom yet blessed her. Others even arose to conﬁrm
it. Her breath, her skin, her li all ﬂattered Elinor
with sign! of amendment, an Marianne ﬁxed her

150 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Xe: on her with a rational though gaze.
nxiety and hope now pressed her in equal degrees,
and left her no moment 0 tranquillity till the arrival of
Mr Harris at four o’clock;——when his assurances, his
felicitations on a recovery in her siter even ' g
his expectation, gave her conﬁdence, comfort, and tears

of 'o .

hliirianne was in every respect materially better, and
he declared her entirely out of danger. Mrs Jennings,
perhaps satisﬁed with the partial justiﬁcation of her
foreboding: which had been found in their late alarm,
allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheer-
fulness, the probability of an entire recovery.

Elinor could not be cheerful. Her joy was of a
different kind, and led to anything rather than to gaiety.
Marianne restored to life, hmlth, friends, and to her doat-
in mother, was an idea to ﬁll her heart with sensations
o exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude;
—but it led to no outward demonstrations of joy, no
words, no smiles. All within Elinor‘s breast was
satisfaction, silent and strong.

She continued by the side of her sister with little in-
termission the whole afternoon, calming every fear,
satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits, supplying
every succour, and watching almost every loolt and
every breath. The possibility of a relapse would, of
course, in some moments, occur to remind her of what
anxiety was—but when she saw on her frequent and
minute examination, that every symptom of recovery
continued, and saw Marianne at six o’clock, sink into a

uiet, steady, and to all a arance comfortable sl ,
ghe silenced every doubt. we “P
' The time was now drawing on when Colonel Bran-
don might be expected back. At ten o’clock, she
trusted, or at least not much later, her mother would

15:

be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which .she
must now be travelling towards them. The Colonel
tool—perhaps scarcely less an object of pity l—Ohl
how slow was the progress of time which yet kept them
in i norance!

t seven o’clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly
asleep, she joined Mrs Jennings in the drawing-room to
tea. of breakfast she had been kept by her fean, and
of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eau'ng much ;—
and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feel-
ings of content as she brought to it, was particularly
welcome. Mrs Jennings would have persuaded her at
its conclusion to take some rest before her mother’s
arrival, and allow her to take her place by Marianne;
but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep
at that moment about her, and she was not to be
away from her sister an unnecessary instant. n
Jennings therefore attending her up stairs into the sick
chamber, to satisfy hsrherselt that all continued right,
left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and
retired to her own room to write letters and sleep.

The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared
round the house, and the min bent against the windows;
but Elinor all happiness within, regarded it not. Mari-
anne slept through every blast, and the travellers—
they had a rich reward in store, for every present in-
convenlence.

The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor
would have been convinced that at that moment she
hand a carriage driving u to the house ; and so strong
was the rsuasion that slie M in spite of the almost
impossibi 'ty of their being already come, that she moved
into the ad oining dressing-closet and o ned a window-
shutter, to satisﬁed of the truth. glen instant] saw
that her ears had not deceived her. The ﬂaring amps
of a carriage were immediately in View. By their un-

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

ulna-attth Theknowledgeofwhther
-mod\ermunhefcelingutheaniageloppedatdte
door,—of her doubt—her drud—perlnpaher 'l
anddwhatrkhadtomlll—withmch know
itwuimpodhlelohecalm. All thatrunainedtobe
dmewaatoheqnedy;andthereforenayingonlytill
the could leave MnJenniugl’a midwith he: ﬁner,
Ihehurrieddownuain.
Thebutleinthevenibuleﬂalheyaaaedalongan
innerlobby,amredherthattheywuealreadyindxe
home. She mahed forwards towards the drawing-
room—che entered it,—and law only Willonghby.

Chum: £1,117.

LINOR, starting back with a look of horror atthe
ﬁght of him, obeyed the an: impala: of her In:
in turning inland to quit the mom, and her

hand wan almdy on the Lek, when in action war nu-
pended by his haltin advancing, and saying, in a voice
rather of command than sup lication—

“ Min Daahwood, for f an hour—for ten minutes
—-I entreat you to stay."

“No, air,” she replied with ﬁrmneu, “I shall not
my. Your hullneas cannot be with m. The lenanta,
I luppoae, forgot to tell you that Mr Palmer was not in
the house."

“Had they told me,” he cried with vehemence,
“that Mr Palmer and all his relations were at the Elev“:

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 153

it would not have turned me from the door. My
bulineu in with you, and only you.”

“With mel "—in the utrnoet amazement—“well,
Iir—he uick—and ifyou can—lea violent.’ '

“ Sit wn, and I will be both.”

She helitzted; Ihe knew not whnt to do. The pos-
‘Iibility of Colonel Brandon’n arriving and ﬁnding him
there, came across her. But she had promised to hear
him, and her curiosity no less than her honour was
engaged. After a moment’s recollection, therefore,
concluding that pmdence required dispatch, and that
her acquiescence would beat promote it, she walked
nilentl towards the table and sat down. He took the
opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word wan
laid by either.

“ Pray be quick, air,” raid Elinor impatiently—u I
have no time to "

He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, end
Ieerned not to hear her.

“Your liner," said he, with ahruptneu, a moment
afterwnrdn—J‘in out of danger. I heard it from the
lean God be praisedl—But ll it trucI—il it really
true?”

Elinor would not' speak. He repeated the inquiry
with yet renter eagerness.

“ For (god’s sake tell me, in she out of danger, or in
Ihe not ? "

" We hope she in.”

He role up, and walked across the room.

“ Had I known as much half an hour ago—But
lince 1 am here ”——apeaking with a forced vivacity :-
he retumed to his neat—“ what doee it Iignify I—For
once, Min Duhwood—it will be the lm time, perha I
—let u be cheerful togethen—I am in a line mood {gr
gaiety.—Tell me honestly"—a deeper glow over-
Ipreading hil cheeks—“ do you think me most a knnve
or a fool 9 ”

[54 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than
ever. She began to think that he mutt be in liquor;
—the strangeness of such a visit, and of such manners,
seemed no otherwiae intelligible; and with this impru-
tion, the immediately rose, saying—

“Mr Willoughby, I adviae you at present to return
to Combe. I am not at leisure to remain with you
longer. Whatever your business may be with me, it
will be better recollected and ex lained to-momw."

“ I understand you," he replied, with an expressive
smile, and a voice perfectly calm. “Yea, I am very
drunk. A pint of porter with my cold beef at Marl-
borough wu enough to overset me.”

“At Marlborough! ” cried Elinor, more and more
at a lost to understand what he would be at.

“ Yet—I left London this morning at eight o'clock,
and the only ten minutes I have upcnt out of my chain:
Iince that time procured me a nuncheon * at Marl-
borough."

The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of
his eye as he spoke, convincin Elinor, that whatever
other unpardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland,
he was not brought there by intoxication, she said, after
a moment’s recollection.

“ Mr Willoughby, you wgbl to feel, and I certainly
do—that after what has passed—your cooling here in
this manner, and forcing yourself upon my notice, re-
quires a very-particular excuse. What in it that you
mean by it ?”

“ I mean,” said he, with serious energy, “ if I can,to
make you hate me one degree less than you do now. I
mean to offer some kind of explanation, some kind of
apology, for the past—to open my whole heart to you,
and by convincing you, that though I have been always

'A piece of victuall eaten between mule—“Johnson’l
Dimitry."

SENSE AND SENSIBILIT‘Y. [55

a blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtain
something like to 'veness from Ms—from your sister,"

“ Is this the reason of your coming ? ”

“ Upon my soul it is,"—-was his answer, with a
warmth which brought all the fomer Willough to
her remembrance, and in spite of herself made her 'nk
him sincere.

“If that is all, you may be satisﬁed already,—-for
Marianne don—she has long forgiven you."

“Has she! "—he cried, in the me eager tone.—
“ Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have
done it. But she shall forgive me again, and on more
reasonable grounds. Now, will you listean me?"

Elinor bowed her assent.

" I do not know,” said he, after a pause of expecta-
tion on her side, and thoughtﬁilness on his own,—“ how

may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister,
or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me.
——-Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,—it is
worth the trial, however, snd you shall hear everything.
When I ﬁrst became intimate in your family, I had no
other intention, no other view in the acquaintance than
to my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remsin
in evonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done
before. Your sister’ s lovely person and interesting man-
ners could not but please me; and her behaviour to me,
almost from the first, was of a kind It is astonishing,
when I reﬂect on what I was, and what tbs was, that
my heart should have been so insensible !—But at ﬁrst,
I must confess, my vanity only was elevated by it.
Careless of her happiness, thinking only of my own
amusement, giving way to feelings which I had always
been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured,
by every means in my power, to make myself pleasing to
her, without any design of returning her affection."

Miss Dashwood at this point, turning her eyes on

 

r 56 sense AND snusrmu'rv.
him with the most angry contempt, stopped him, by

m —-

y“ ft is hardly worth while, Mr Willou , for you
to relate, or for me to listen an longer. uch a begin-
ning as this cannot be follow by anything. Do not
let me be pained by hearing anything more on the sub-
-chn .
J “ I insist on your hearing the whole of it,” he replied.
“ My fortune was never large, and I had always been
expensive, always in the habit of associating with people
of better income than myself. Every year since my
coming of age, or even before, I believe, had added to
my debts; and though the death of my old cousin, Mrs
Smith, was to set me free, yet that event being uncer-
tain, and ibly far distant, it had been for some time
my intention to re-establish r? circumstances by marry-
ing a woman of fortune. o attach myself to your
sister, therefore, was not a thing to be thought of ;—and
with a meanness, selﬁshness, cruelty—which no indig-
nant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, Miss Dash-
wood, can ever reprobate too ’much—I was acting in
this manner, trying to engage her regard, without a
thought of remming it. But one thing may be said for
me, even in that horrid state of selﬁsh vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I
did not then know what it was to love. But have I
ever known it E—Well may it be doubted; for, had I
really loved, could I have sacriﬁced my feelings to
vanity, to avarice ?—or, what is more, could I have
sacriﬁced hers ?—But I have done it. To avoid a
com rative poverty, which her affection and her society
wo d have deprived of all its horrors, I have, by raising
myself to aﬁluence, lost everything that could make it a
blessing.”

“ You did then,” said Elinor, a little softened,

“ believe yourself at one time attached to her.”

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 157
“ To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood
Inch tendemessl—Is there a man on earth who could
have done it l—Yes, I found myself, by insensible
degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest hours
of my life were what I spent with her, when I felt my
intentions were strictly honourable, and my feelings
blameless. Even then, however, when fully determined
on paying my addresees to her, I allowed myself moat
improper to put off, from day to day, the moment of
dorng it, mm an unwillingness to enter into an engage-
ment while m circumstances were so greatly embar-
rassed. I will not reason here—nor will I stop for
you to expah'ate on the absurdity, and the worst than
absurdity, of scmpling to en age my faith where my
honour was already bound. he event has proved, that
I was _a cunning fool, providing with great circumspec-
tion for a 'hle o rtunity of making myself con-
tem 'ble and wretch for ever. At last, however, my
reso ution was taken, and I had determined, as soon as
I could engage her alone, to justify the auentions I had
so invariably paid her, and openly assure her of an affec-
tion which I had already taken such pains to display.
But in the interim—in the interim of the very few hours
that were to pass, before I could have an opportunity of
speaking with her in private—a circumstance occurred-—
an unlucky circumstance, to ruin all my resolution, and
with it all my comfort. A discovery took lace,”—
here he hesitated and looked down.—-“ Mrs mith had
somehow or other been infomed, I imagine by some
distant relation, whose interest it was to d rive me of
her favour, of an affair, a connexion—4n“ need not
explain myself farther," he added, looking at her with
a hei tened colour and In in uiring eye, “your '-
V cularglindrnacyvyou have priibably heard the me

story long a o.”
“ I have," retumed Elinor, colouring likewise, and

r 58 sues! urn susrsru'rv.

hardening her heart new again: any companion for
him,“Ihavehurditall. And howyouwillexplain
Iwa any gm of your guilt in that dreadful bulinel, I
co es: la and my com rebellion.”

“ R r,” cried illoughby, “from whom you
received the accent. Could it be an impartial one?
I acknowledge that her situation and her character ought
to have been reqrected by me. I do not mean to jultify
myself, but at the some time cannot leave you to luppoee
that I have nothing to urge,—that because she was
injured, she was irreproachable; and because I was a
libertine, :5: must he a saint. If the violence of her
pasdons, the weakness of her understanding—I do not
mean, however, to defend myself. Her aEecﬁon for
me deserved better treatment, and I often, with great
self-reproach, rccnl the tenderness which, for a vc
short time, had the power of creating any return.
wish—I heartily wish it had never been. But I have
injured more than herself; and I have injured one
whose affection for me (my I say it 2) was scarcely less
warm than hers, and whose mind—Oh! how inﬁnitely
superior! ”

“ Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate
girl—I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of
such a subject may well be—your indifference is no
apology for your cruel neglect of her. Do not think
yourself excused by any weakness, any natural defect of
understanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so
evident on yours. You must have known, that while
you were enjoying yourself in Devonshire, pursuing fresh
schemes, always gay, always happy, she was reduced to
the extremest indigence."

“But, u n my soul, I did not know it,” he warmly
replied; “ did not recollect that I had omitted to give
her my direction; and common-sense might have told
her how to ﬁnd it out.”

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY- [59

“Well, sir, and what said Mn Smith P"

“ She taxed me with the offence, at once, and my eon-
fusion ma be guessed. The purity of her life, the for-
mality 0 her notions, her i arance of the world——
everything was against me. he matter itself I could
not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it
She was reviously disposed, I believe, to doubt the
morality of my conduct in general, and was moreover
discontented with the ve little attention, the very little
portion of my time that? had beﬁowed on her, in my
present visit. In short, it ended in n total breach. By
one measure I might have saved myself. In the height
of her morality, good woman! she offered to forgive
the past if I would marry Eliza. That could not be—
and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her

. house. The night following this affair—I wan to go the
next morning—was spent bLme in deliberating on what
my fixture conduct should . The stnrggle was great
—-but it ended too soon. My affection for Marianne,
my thorough conviction of her atuchment to Mt
was all insuliicient to outweigh that dread of poverty, or
get the better of those false ideas of the necessity of
riches, which I was naturall inclined to feel, and ex-
pensive society had incre . I had reason to believe
myself secure of my present wife, if I chose to address
her, and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else
in common prudence remained for me to do. An hea
scene however awaited me, before I could leave Devon-
shire; I was engaged to dine with you on that very day,
some apology was therefore necessary for my breaking
the engagement. But whether I should write this
a logy, or deliver it in person, was a point of long

ba . To see Marianne, I felt would be dreadful,
and I even doubted whether I could see her again, and
keep to my resolution. In that point, however, I under-
valued my own magnanimity, as the event declared; for

r60 sens: All) sustain-n.

Iwengl ﬂVth,IIId awhernxiterable,and leﬁher
minerable—and left her, hoping never to see her ' "

“Wh did you call, Mr Willongbby i" laid ' ,
rep ull ; “a note would have mum-ed every
purpooe. hy um it necueary to call?”

“ It war necessary to my own pride. I could not
bear to leave the country in a manner that might lead
you, or the rout of the neighbourhood, to suspect any
part of what had really passed between Mn Smith and
mytelf, and I reeolved therefore on calling at the cottage,
in my way to Honiton. The eight of your dear llﬂtI',
however, wan really dreadful; and to heighten the
matter, I found her alone. You were all gone, I do
not know where. I had left her only the evening before,
to fully, to ﬁrmly reanlved within mylelf on doing right l
A few houn were to have engaged her to me for ever;
and I remember how happy, how y were my lpiriu, u
I walked from the cottage to Aﬂoham, tan-lied with
myaelf, delighted with everybody! But in thin, our lau
interview of friendthip, I approade her with a eenae
of guilt that almost took from me the power of die-
Icmbling. Her Ion'ow, her diuppointmcnt, her deep
regret, when I told her, that I was obliged to leave
Devonehire so immediately—I never shall forget it;
united, too, with Inch reliance, such conﬁdmce in me!
O God! what an hard-hearted ﬁscal I wan!”

They were both Iilent for a few moments. Elinor
ﬁrst ke.

“ id you tell her that you should soon return ?"

“ I do not know what I told her,” he replied, im-
patiently; “ less than was due to the past, beyond a
doubt, and in all likelihood much more than wait
justiﬁed by the future. I cannot think of it—it won’t
do. Then came your dear mother to torture me
farther, with all her kindness and conﬁdence. Thank
Heaven! it rid torture me. I was miserable. Mina

sense AND snusmm'nr. r61

Dashwood, ou cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to ook hack on my own miaery. I owe such
agrudge to myselfforthe atu id,ﬂscallyfollyofmy
own heart, that all my past angerings under it are onl
triumph and exultztion to me now. Well, I went1 leg
all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I
was only indifferent. My journ to town—travelling
with my own horses, and there re no tedioully—no
creature to speak to—my own reﬂections so cheerful—-
when I looked forward everything so inviting l—when
I looked back at Barton, the picture so soothing!—
oh l—it was a blessed journey."

He Itopped. ‘ -

“ Well, air," said Elinor, who, though pitying him,
grew impatient for his departure, “ and this is all ? ”

“ All l—uo—have you forgot what passed in town i
That infamom letter I . Did she show it you i "

“ Yea, I saw every note that passed."

" When the ﬁrst of hers reached me (as it immedi-
ately did, for I was in town the whole time), what I
felt iI—in the common phrase, not to be expressed; in
a more simple one—perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion—my feelings were very, very painﬁil. Every
line, every word was—in the hackneyed meta hor which
their dear writer, were she here, would forb' a dagger
to my heart. To know that Marianne was in town
was in the same language—a thunderbolt. Thunder-
bolts and daggersl—what a reproof would she have
given me !—-her taste, her opinions—I believe they are
better known to me than my own, and I am lure they
are dearer."

Elinor’a heart, which had undergone many change!
in the course of this extraordinary convenation, wan
now softened again; yet she felt it her duty to check
such idea in her companion as the last.

“This in not right, Mr Willnughhy. Remember

u. L

l6! SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

that you are married. Relate only what in your
commence you think neeeuary for me to hear."

“ Marianne'a note, by auuring me that I waa Kill I.
deartoheraain forrnerdaye—tbatinapite oftbe
many,manyweelta wehad been Iepanted,dae we. as
content in her own feeling- aud at full of faith in the
conanncy of mine at ever, aWIkened all my rename.
I lay awakened, becauae time and London, buaineae and
dimpation had in tome meaaure uieud it, and I had
been growing a ﬁne hardened villain, fancying myaelf
indifferent to her, and chuaing to fanc that the too
muat have become indifferent to me; king to myaelf
of our part attachment as a mere idle, triﬂing business,
ahrugging'up my thoulderl in proof of it. being to, and
ailencing every reproach, overcoming every to lg by
tecretly laying now and then, ‘I shall be h ' y glad
to hear the ll well married.’ ‘But this note made me
know myeelf better. I felt that the waa inﬁnitely
dearer to me than an other woman in the world, and
that I was using her infamoualy. But everything was
then juat settled between Miu Grey and me, To
retreat waa impoaaible. All that I had to do, was to
avoid you both. I sent no anrwer to Marianne,
intending by that meant to preserve myaelf from her
farther notice; and for tome time I war even deter-
mined not to call in Berkele -5treet: but at lat,
judging it wiser to affect the air of a cool, common
acquaintanCe than anything elae, I watched you all Iafely
out of the houre one morning, and left my name.”

" Watched ua out of the houacl ”

“Even to. You would be aurpriaed to hear how
often I watched you, how often I was on the point of
falling in'with you. I have entered many a ahop to
avoid your tight, at the carriage drove by. Lodging an
I did in Bond Street, there was hardly a day.in which
I did not catch a glimpae of one or other of you; and

sense AND SILNSXBILI‘I'V. :6;

nothing but the moat constant watchfulnese on my aide,
a moat invariath prevailing dedre to it out of your
ti ht, could have separated us [0 long. avoided the
rddletona as much as poasihle, as well as everybody
else who was likely to prove an acquaintance in common.
Not aware of their being in town, however, I hlundered
on Sir John, I believe, the lint day of his coming,
and the day after I called at Mn Jennings'e. He
aaked me to a party, a dance athishouseinthe
evening. Had he not told me as an inducement that
you and your sister were to be there, I should have
felt it too certain a thing to our: in If near him.
The next morning brought another ort note from
Marianne—still affectionate, o , artless, conﬁd-
ing—everything that could mat? "I! conduct most
hateful. I could not answer it. I tried, but could not
frame a eentence. But I thought of her, I believe,
every moment of the day. If’pu can pity me, Mias
Dnshwood, pity my situation at it was then. With my
head and heart full of your liner, I was forced to play
the happy lover to another wornanl Those three or
four weelu were worse than all. Well, at last, an I
need not tell u were forced on me : and what a
sweet ﬁgure out -whatan evening of agony it wasl
Marianne, beautiful at an angel, on one side, calling me
' Willooghby in such a tone l—O Codi—holding out
her_ hand to me, aalring me for an exploration with rheoe
hear-itching eyes ﬁxed in such Ipeaking solicitude on my
faoel and Sophia, jealous as the devil, on the other
hand, looking all that was- Well, it does not signify;
it in over now. Such-an eveningl Iran away from
uall uaoon an I could,but not beforeIhad seen
ﬁarianne'l sweet face as white as death. That was
the last, lut look I ever had of her—the last manner in
which ahe appeared to me. It war a horrid sightl Yet
’ when I thought of her to-day as really dying, it wu a

I64 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly
how the would ap r to thoee who aw her laet in this
world. She we: fore me, coumntly before me, an I
travelled, in the same look and hue."

A ehort pauee of mutual thoughtfulneu succeeded.
Willoughby, ﬁrlt routing hinuell', broke it thus—

" Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your sister
it certainly better, certainly out of danger ? ”

“ We are assured of it. ’

“ Your poor mother too l—doring on Marianne! "

“ But the letter, Mr Willoughby, your own letter;
have ou anything to lay about that.”

“ en, yes, that in 'cular. Your liner wrote to
me again, you know, e very next morning. You law"
what. Ihe laid. I was breakfasting at the Ellisona’;
and' her letter, with some others, was brought to me
there from my lodgings. It happened to catch Sophia’e
eye before it caught mine; and in size, the ele-
gance of the paper, the handwriting, altogether im.
mediately gave her a luspicion. Some vague report
had reached her before of my attachment to tome
young lady in Devonuhire, and what had paued within
her obeervntion the preceding evming had marked
who the young lady was, and made her more jealoua
than ever. Aﬂ'ecting that air of playfulness, therefore,
which ll delightful in a woman one lover, she opened
the letter directly, and read its contents. She wae well
paid for her impudence. She read what made her
wretched. Her wretchedneu I could have home, but
her passion—her malice—~at all eventl it mutt be
'appened. And in short, what do you think of my
wife’e ater of letter-writing l—delicate, tender, truly
feminine—wan it not 9 ”

“ Your wifel—the letter wan in your own hand-

writrn ."
“ng but I had only the credit of eenilely copying

snnsn mo swam-n. :65

such sentencesulwnsuhunedtoput mynamem.
Theoriginslwasallherown,her own [up ythoughtl
and gentle diction. But whst could I do l,—we am
to everythin in repsrsu'on, the da almon ed
if? am bikini a fool. Prepunyttion l—dsy I
——In honest words, her money was necessary to me,
and in I situation like mine Anything was to be done to
prevent a rupture. And after all, what did it ignifyto
my cluneter in the opinion of Marianne and her friends,
in what language my answer was wuchcdi‘ It must
have been only to one end. My business was to declare
In If n scoundrel, and whether I did it with s bow or
n luster was of little in: nee. ‘ I am mined for
ever in their opinion,’ sai I to myself; ‘ I am shut out
for ever from their society; they already think me an
un rincipled fellow, this letter will only make them
think me a blackng one.’ Such were my reasoning:
as, in a sort of d te carelessness, I copied my wife’s
words, and p with the [set relics of Marianne.
Her three notes—unluckin they were all in my pocket-
book, or I should have denied their existence, and
boarded them for ever; I was forced to put them up,
Ind could not even kiss them. And the lock of hair—
thattoolhsdulwayvcan‘iedaboutmeindrelsme
pocket-book, which was now searched b Madam with
the mo: ' ingndating vimlenoe,——the ear lock—all,
every memento was torn from me."

“You are very wrong, Mr Willoughby, ve blame-
able,” said Elinor, while her voice, in spite o herself,
betrayed her compassionate emotion; “ you ought not
to speak in this way, either of Mn Willoughhy or my
liner. - You have made our own choice. It was not
forced on you. Your wufe has I claim to your lite-
ness, to your t, at least. She must be attic ed to
you, or she wo d not have married you. To treat her
with unkindness, to speak of her slightingly, is no atone-

166 sous: AND snusmurv.

ment to Marianne, nor can I mppooe it a relief to your
own conscience.”

“Do not talk to me of m wife," laid he, with a
heavy nigh. “ She does not euerve your companion.
She knew I had no regard for her when we married.
Well, man'ied we were, and came down to Combe
Magna to be happy, and afterward: returned to town
to be gay. And, now do you pity me, Min Duhwood P
or have said all thin to no purpntei Am I—be it
only one degree—am Ilene guilty in your opinion than I
wan before? M intentions were not alwayl wrong.
Have I explain away any of my guilt 2 "

" Yes, you have certain y removed something—a
little. You have proved younelf, on the whole, lea
faulty than I had believed on. You have proved your
heart lee: wicked, much ii» wicked. But I hardly
know—the misery that you have inﬂicted—I hardly
know what could have made it wane.”

“Will you repeat to your liner, when the ll re-
covered, what I have been telling you} Let me be a
little Ii hlened too in her opinion at well an in yourl.
You teﬁ me that the has forgiven me alread . Let me
be able to fancy that a better knowledge 0 my heart,
and of my present feelings, will draw from her a more

nuneoul, more natural, more gentle, leu digniﬁed
orgiveneu. Tell her of my mieery and my penitence,
tell her that my heart was never inconatant to her, and
if you will, that at thin moment the in dearer to me than
ever.”

“I will tell her all that is necessary to what may
comparatively be called your justiﬁcation. But you
have not explained to me the particular team of your
coming now, nor how you heard of her illnelo.”

“ Last night, in Drury-lane lobby, I ran again-t Sir
John Middleton, and when he saw who I was for the
ﬁrst time these two month) he spoke to me. hat he

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 167

had cut me ever ainoe my marriage, I had teen without
nuprile or reaentment. Now, however, hia good-
natured, hone-t, ltupid soul. full of indignation ngninvt
me, and concern for your sister, could not reoiut the
temptation of telling me what he knew ought to, thou h
probably he did not think it would, vex me horribf.
AI bluntly an he could speak it, therefore, he told me
that Marianne Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at
Cleveland—a letter that morning received from Mn
Jennings declared her danger moot imminent— the
Palmen all gone off in n fright, Bic. I was too‘ much
Ihocked to be able to pan myuelf off an insemibIe, even
to the undincemin Sir John. Hie heart wan loftened
in seeing mine an er; and so much of hit ill-will wan
done nwny, that when we rted, he almon think me
bathe hand, while he reminded me of an old promiae
I ut a pointer uppy. What I felt on hnring that
your llm wa- ymg—and dying, too, believing me the
E21” villain upon earth, acorningf,l hnﬁng me in her
momenta—for how could I te what horrid pro-
jects might not have been imputed i—OII: I wu
cure would represent me M capable of unyt 'ng. What
I felt wan dreadfull My reoolution wan noon made,
and at eight o’clock this momiug I wu in my carriage.
Now you know all."
Elinor made no answer. Her thouth were
~ silently ﬁxed on the irreparable injury which too early
on inde ndence and its conuequent habits of idlenes,
dinipanon,nnd luxur , had made in the mind, the charac-
ter, the ha ‘neu, o a man who, to every advantage of
peroon In talentl, united a dirporition naturally op:
and honevt, Ind'l feeling, tﬂ'ectionute temper.
world had'made him extruvagant and vnin; extrava-
gnce Ind vanity had made him cold-hearted and Ielﬁnh.
anity, while aeekin its own guilty triumph at the ex-
pense of another, ha involved him in a real attachment,

168 sans: AND snusrum‘rv.

which extravagance, or at least its offspring necessity, had
required to be sacriﬁced. Each faulty propensity, in lead-
ing him to evil, had led him likewiseto punishment. The
anachment from which against honour, against feeling,
against every better interest he had outwardly torn himself,
now, when no longer allowable, governed every thought ;
and the connexion, for the sake of which he had, with
little scmple, left her sister to misery, was likely to prove
asouroe of unhappiness to himself of afar more incurable
nature. From a reverie of this kind she was recalled at
the end of some minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing
himself from a reverie at least equally painful, started up
in p ration for going, and said—

“ here is no use in staying here; I must be of."

“Are you oing back to town i "

“ No ; to Sombe Magna. I have business there;
from thence totown in a da or two. Good-bye."

He held out his hand. he could not refuse to give
him hers ; he pressed it with alfection.

“ And you do think something better of me than you
did?” said he, letting it fall, and leaning against the
mantelpiece, as if forgetting he was to go.

Elinor assured him that she did; that she forgave,
pitied him, wished him well—was even interested in
his ha piness—aud added some gentle counsel as so the
behaviour most likely to promote it. His answer was
not very encouraging. '

“ As to that, ’ said he, “ I must rub through the
world as well as I can. Domestic happiness is out of
the question. If, however, I am allowed to think that

ou and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions,
v it may be the means-4t may put me on my guard—at
least, it may be something to live for. Marianne, to be
sure, is lost to me for ever. Were I even, by any
blessed chance, at liberty again—”
Elinor stopped him with a reproof.

sens: AND summary. :69

“Well,” he lied, “ once more good-bye. I shall
now go awn anrdplive in dread of one event."

“ What you mean 2”

“ Your sister’s marriage.”

“You are very wrong. She an never be more lost
to you than she is now. ’

“ But she will be gained by some one else. And if
that some one should be the very he whom, of all
others, I could least bear— But I will not stay to
rob myself of all your compassionate ood-will, by
showing that where I have most inju I can lent
for 've. Good-bye] God bless you! "

ml with these words, he almost ran out of the mom.

Chapter ’19.

LINOR, for some time after he left her, for some

time even after the sound of his carria e had

died away, remained too much opp by a

crowd of ideal, widely differing in themselves, but of

which udness wu the general result, to think even of
her sister.

Willonghby—he whom only half-an-honr ago she had
abhorred as the most worthless of men—Willoughby,
in spite of all his faults, excited a degree of commisera-
tion for the suﬁ'erings produced by them, which made
her think of him as now separated for ever from her
family with s tenderness, a regret, rather in proportion,
as she soon acknowledged within herself, to his wishes
than to his merits. She felt that his inﬂuence over her
mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not
in reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon I
attraction—dint open, affectionate, and lively runner
which it was no merit to pain; Ind by that till

I70 SINSI AND SENSIBILITY.

ardent love for Marianne, which it was not even inno-
cent to indulge. But she felt that it was so, long, long
before she could feel his inﬂuence less.

When at last she returned to the unconscious Mari-
anne, she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long
and sweet a sleep to the extent of her hopes. Elinor’s
heart was full. The past, the resent, the fumre—
Willoughby’s visit, Marianne’s cry, and her mother’s
expected arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation
of in'ts which kept of every indication of fatigue, and
ma e her only fearful of hetla ing herself to her sister.
Short was the time, however, in which that fear could
affect her, for within half-an-hour after Willoughby's
leaving the house, she was again called down-stairs by
the sound of another carriage. Eager to save her
mother from every unnecessary moment’s horrible sus-
pense, she ran immediawa into the hall, and reached
the outward dour just in time to receive and support
her as she entered in

Mrs Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the
house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne’s
being no more, had no voice to inquire after her, no
voice even for Elinor; but :52, wailing neither for
salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief ;
—and her mother, catching it with all her usual '
warmth, was in a moment as much overcome by her
happiness as she had been before by her fears. She
was supported into the drawing-room between her
daughter and her friend: and there, shedding tears of
joy, though still unable to speak, embraced Elinor again
and again, turning from her at intervals to press Colonel
Brandon’s hand, with a look which spoke at once her

ratitnde, and her conviction of his sharing with herself

In the bliss of the moment. He shared it, however, in
I silence even greater than her own.

As soon as Mrs Duhwood had recovered herself, to

SENSE AND SINSIBILITY. 171

see Marianne was herlirst desire] and in two minutes
she was with her beloved child, rendered dearer to her
than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger. Elinor‘s
delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting?!”
only checked by an apprehension of its robbing ari-
anne of further sleep: but Mrs Dashwood could be
calm, could be even rudent, when the life of a child
was at stake, and arianne, satisﬁed in knowing her
mother was near her, and conscious of being too weak
for conversation, submitted readily to the silence and
uiet prescribed by every nurse around her. Mrs
ﬁashwood would sit up with her all night, and Elinor,
in compliance with her mother’s entreat , 'went to bed.
But the rest, which one night entirei’y sleepless and
many hours of the most wearing anxxety seemed to
make uisite, was ke t of by irritation of irits.
Willoulgeliby, “poor Willbughby,’ as she now al owed
herself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she
would not but have heard his vindication for the world,
and now blamed, now uitted herself, for having
judged him so harshly be re. But her promise of
relating it to her sister was invariably painful. She _
dreaded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect
on Marianne might be; doubted whether, after such an
explanation, she could ever be happy with another, and
for s moment, wished Willoughby a widower; then
remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved herself, felt
that to Li: sufferings and bi: constancy, far more than
to his rival’s, the reward of her sister was due, and
wished anything rather than Mrs Willoughhy’s death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon’s errand at Barton
had been much softened to Mrs Dashwood by her own
levious alarm; for so great was her uneasiness about
hilarioune, that she had already determined to set out
for Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any
farther intelligence, and had so far settled her journey

[18 ms: All) mun.

before hi: arrival, on: due Carey; were then expecred
everymornmt lofetehMargaret away,u her mother
wurmwillingmnkeherwhererheremightheinfeaioo.

Marianne condoned to mend every day, and the
brilliant cheer-fullne- of Mn Daahwood’a look: and
qiﬁuprovdhermhgaalherepeatedlydeclared her-
aelﬁooenfthe in theworld. Elinor
mild not he: rhe declmrion,norwitneal it: proofs,
without Iometimer wondering whether her rumher ever
recollected Edward. But Mr! Dadawood, honing to
the turn me account of her own dinppoinnnent
which linor had rent her, waa led any the
exuberance of her joy to think only of what d in-
ereaaeit Mariannewaareawred wherfromadanger
iowhich,asr.henowbegan to feel,her own minaken
judgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to
Willoughhy had contributed to place her; and in her
recovery the had yet another room: of joy unthought
ofby Elinor. It wan thul imparted to her, an coon as
any opportunity of private conference between them
new

“At In we are alone. M Elinor, you do not

et know all my happiness. lonel Brandon [om
ldaﬁanne; he haa told me no him-elf.”

Her daughter, feeling by turn- hoth placed and
pained, aurprited and not aurpriaed, war all ilent
Indium]. '

“You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I Ihould
wonder at your composure now. Had I let down to
wiah for any possible good to my family, I Ihould have
ﬁxed on Colonel Brandon’s marrying one of you an the
object most derirable. And I believe Marianne will he
the most happy with him ofthe two,"

Elinor was half inclined to ask her reamn for think-
ing no, because deﬁed that none founded on an im-
partial connidemtion of their age, chamcten. or feeling;

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. [73

could be given ;—but her mother mun always be
carried away by her imagination on any inrerening
luhjeet, end therefore, intend of an inquiry, the paced
it all with I Imile. I

“He edhiewhoehenrttomeyesterda uwe
tnvelledfpel‘t came out quite unnwaree, uitey unde--
eignedly. I, you may well believe, co d talk of
nothing but my child ;-—he could not conceal his dis-
true; I uw that it equalled my own, and he, perhape,
thinking that mere fHEndll’iip, n the world now goes,
would not justify Io warm I sympathy—or rather not
thinking at Ill, I euppoee—giving way to irresistible
feelingi, made me ac uainted with hie earnest, tender,
conuant affection for arinnne. He llﬂl loved her, my
Elinor, ever ince the ﬁrst moment of seeing her."

Here, however, Elinor perceived, not the language,
not the rofetsiona of Colonel Brandon, but the natunl

-eInhell' ments of her mothefa active fancy, which
fahioned everything delightful to her, a it chooe.

“His regard for her, inﬁnitely Iurpusing anything
that Willonghby ever felt or feigned, as much more
warm, u more sincere or constant—whichever we are
to all it—haa mblisted through all the knowledge of
deer Marianne’l unhappy prepooseuion for tint worth-
leu young maul—and without Ielﬁlhnees—witliout
encouraging a l—-could he have seen her happy
with another? uch a noble mindl—Iuch openness,

[such Iincerity l—no one can be deceived in bias. ’

“Colonel Brandon’s character," mid Elinor, “u an
excellent man, is well established.”

“1 know it in," lied her mother seriously, “ or
after euch n wamingjjP should he the lat to encourlge
Inch nﬁ‘ection, or even to be pleased it. But his
coming for me as he did, with such active, such ready
ﬁfiendnhi , in enough to prove him one of the worthielt
0 men.

I74 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y.

“ His character, however,” answered Elinor, “does
not rest on one act of kindness, to which his aﬂ'ection
for Marianne, were humanity out of the use, would
have prompted him. To Mrs Jennings, to the Middle-
tons, he had been long and intimately known; they
r ually love and respect him: and even my knowledge

0 him, though lately acquired, is very considerable,
and so highly do I value and esteem him, that if Mari-
snne can be happy with him, I shall be as ready ss
yourself to think our connexion the greatest blessing to
us in the world. What answer did you give him? Did
you allow him to ho i"

“ Oh! my love, could not then talk of hope to
him or to myself. Marianne might at that moment he
d 'ng. But he did not ask for hope or encouragement.
I-lis was an involuntapy conﬁdence, an i iessihle
effusion to a soothing riend,——not an application to a
parent. Yet after a time I :54! as , for at ﬁrst I Was
quite overcome, that if she lived, as trusted she might,
my greatest happiness would lie in promoting their
marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightful
security, I have repeated it to him more full , have
given him every encouragement in my power. im, a
very little time, I tell him, will do everything ;-—Mari-
snne’s heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a man
as Willoughby. His own merits must soon secure it.”

" To judge from the Colonel’s spirits, however, you
have not yet made him equally sanguine.”

“ No. He thinks Marianne’s affection too deeply
rooted for any change in it under a great length of
time; and even su posing her heart again free, is too
diﬂident of himsel to believe, that with such a differ-
ence of age and di sition, he could ever attach her.
There, however, he Is quite mistaken. His age is only
so much beyond hers as to he an advantage, as to make
his character and principles ﬁxed; and his disposition,

SENSE AND SENBIBILITV. I75

I am well convinced, i: exactly the very one to make
your-inter And hir penon, hir nnnnen too,
Irelllinhia vour. Mypartiali doelnotblindme;
~ he certainlin noun handsome ll illoughby; but,“
the me time, there in romething much more pleadng
in hit countenance. There wu alwa a something. if
you remember, in Willoughby’r eyes at timer, which I
did not like.” '

Elinor could not remember it; but her mother,
without waiting for her assent, continued—

“And his mannerl, the Colonel’n mannerl, are not
only more pleasing to me than Willoughby’a ever were,
but they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly
attaching to Marianne. Their gentleness, their genuine
attention to other peqde, and their manly unnudied
rimplicity, in much more accordant with her real dia-

tion, than the livelineu, often artiﬁcial, and often
ill-timed, of the other. I am v lure myrelf, that
had Willoughby turned out or real y amiable an he ha.
proved himaelf the contrary, Marianne would yet never
have been I0 hapyy with Lint, :- she will be with
Colonel Brandon.’

She yaured. Her daughter could not uite a tee
withher,butherdiuentwunotheard,an th rev
gave no offence. .

“At Delaford, Ihe will be within an distance of
me,” added Mrs Duhwood, “even if remain at
Barton; and in all probability, for I hear it ir a large
village—indeed there certainl Marthe some rmnll houae
or cottage cloae by, that we :1 suit or quite an well an
our pruent dtuation."

Poor Elinor! here war a new scheme for getting her
to Delafordl but her I irit war nubhom.

“ Hi: fomne tool or at my time of life, you know,
everybody carer about that; and though I neither know, -
nor desire to know, what it really is, I am can it mult
be a good one.”

r76 sense arm SBNSIHILITY.

Here they were interrupted by the entrln'ce of a
thirdperson,snd Elinotwithdnewto think it all over
‘ rinte,towiehmcoesstoherﬁiend,sndyet,in
w‘ ‘ g it, to feel a psng for Willoughhy.

charm $1173.

ARIANNE’S illness, though weakening in its
kind, had not been long enough to make her
recovery slow; and with youth, natural nrength,

and her mother’s presence in aid, it proceeded so
mootth as to enable her to remove, within four days
after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs Palmer‘s dren-
ing-room. When there, at her own particular request,
for she was impatient to pour Rmh her thanks to him
for fetching her mother, Colonel Brandon was invited
to visit her.

His emotion in entering the room, in seeing her altered
looks, and in receiving the pale hand which she im-
mediately held out to him, was such as in Elinor‘s
conjecture, mutt arise from something more than his
affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its being
known to others; and she soon discovered in his melan-
choly eye and varying complexion as he looked at her
sister, the probable recurrence of many past scenes of
misery to hie mind, brought back by that resemblance
between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged,
and now strengthened by the hollow eye, the sickly
skin, the ore of reclining weakness, and the warm
acknowl gment of peculiar obligation.

Mrs Dashwood, not less watchful of what panned
than her daughter, but with a mind very diﬂ'erently
inﬂuenced, and therefore watching to very diﬁ'erent
effect, saw nothing in the Colonel’s behaviour but what

ms: AND IHSIBILITY. I77

arose from the most simple and self-evident sensations,
while in the actions and words of Marianne she per-
mdedherselftothinkthatsmnethingmoretlnngnti-
tude already dawned.

At. the end of another day or two, Marianne growing
visihl stronger every twelve hours, Mrs Dashwood,
urgedv eqmlly by her own and her daughter’s wishes,
began to talk of removing to Barton. On bermeasures
depended those of her two friends; Mrs Jennings could
not quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods’ stay, and
Colonel Brandon was soon brought by their united
request, to consider his own abode there as equally
detenuiuate, if not equally indispensable.‘ At his and
Mrs Jennings’s united request in return, Mrs Dash-
wood was prevailed on to accept the use of his carriage
on her journey back, for the better accommodation of
her sick child; and the Colonel, at the joint invitation
of Mrs Dasth and Mn Jennings, whose active
good-nature made her friendly and hospitable for other
people as well as herself, engaged with pleasure to
redeem it by I visit It the cottage, in the course of a
few" weeks.

The day of separation and re arrived; and
Marianne,sftertakingsoparti arandlen eneds
leave of Mn Jennings—one so earnestly grs ul, so full
of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret. acknowledgment of past insttention
—and bidding Colonel Brandon farewel with the
cordiality of a friend, was carefully assisted by him into
the carnage, of which he seemed anxious that she
should eugrou at least half. Mn Duhv‘vood sud
Elinor then followed, and the others were left by them-
selves, to talk of (he travellers, and feel their own dul-
ness, till Mrs Jennings was summoned to her chaise to
take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss
of her two young companions; and Colonel Brandon

n. M

_m e E2; m “a. 3%me m m
. mm“ am am WWW. mmﬂmﬂﬂmwmw
m M wmmmwmﬂ ﬁmmmmmmmw
m do .umﬂm w¢.mmm¢m.mq.m..ww.
: E1 Ema www.mmmrmfm

wmmugmmﬂ mewmmmmﬁw
m mmhmmrdﬁﬁﬁﬂm mm:me

I sum AND SINSIBILITY. I79

paued swly without the atonemnt of a smile. After
dinner, she would try her ' forte. She went to it;
butthemusiconwhich ereyeﬁrstrenedwasan
opera, procured for her by Willoughby, containing some
0 their favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf
her own name in his handwriting. That would not do.
She shook her held, put the music aside, and, aﬂer run-
ning over the keys for a minute, complained of feeble-
neu in her ﬁngers, and cloned the instnrment again;
declaring, however, with ﬁrmness as she did so, that she
should in future practise much.
The next momin produced no abatement in theae
happy symptoms. I: the contrary, with' a mind and
body alike strengthened by rest, she looked snd spoke
with more genuine irit, sntici ting the leasure‘of
Margaret's return, an talking the dear gmin party
which would then be restored, of their mutual pursuits
and cheerful society as the only happiness worth a wish.
“ When the weather is settled, and I have recovered
my strength," said she, “ we will take long walks
together every day. We will walk to the farm at the
ed e of the down, and see how the children go on ; we
wiﬁ walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross,
and the Abbeyland; and we will often go to the old
ruins of the Prio , and try to tmce its foundations as
far no we ore and they once reached. I know we
shall be happy. I know the summer will happily
away. I mean never to be later in 'rising n six, and
from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment
between music and reading. I have formed my plan,
‘ and am determined to enter on a course of serious study.
Our own library is too well known to me to he resorted
. to for anything ond mere amusement. But there
are‘many works we worth reading It the Park; and
there are others of more modern production which I

know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon. By reading

r8o m m slusmu-rv.

I'x harm a , I in“ ' in the now: of 3
mm a grit” deal of which I now
feel mylelf to want.”

Elinor homured her for a plan which originated Io
noblyaathia;thoughlmilingtoaeethenmeager

whichhadbeenladinghermtheexu'emeof
languid indolence and selﬁsh repining. now at work in
introducing excel into a rcherne of each rational
employment and virtuoua nelf-controul. Her smile,
however, changed to a sigh when the remembered that
her promiae to Willoughhy was yet unfulﬁlled, and
fearedlhehadthatto commuicnevhich mightagnin
maenlethemindofMaﬁanngnnd ruin at leu‘tnfﬁtma
time this Fair of can ‘ ‘ty. ‘ ' g
therefore to diminish: ﬂedw waittill
her litter'a health were more recure, before Ill: appointed
it But the mlution was made only to be broken. -

Marianne had been two or three days at home, before
the weather was ﬁne enough for an invalid like herself
to venture out. But at last a loft, gentlr’moming
a h a mi ht the da I wiahel
amfu confidean Manan‘ “511;, leaning on
Elinor‘l arm, was authorind to walk at long as ahe could
without fatigue, in the lane before the home.

The inter: set out at a pace Ilow a the feebleneu of
Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since her ill-
neu required ;—and they had advanced only no far
beyond the home an to admit I full View of the hill,
the in mm hill behind, when, ulin with here
turnedptzwarda it, Marianne calmi); ’9’,

“ There, exactly there ”——pointing with one hand,
“on that m'ecting mound—there I fell; and there I
ﬁrst aw igli oughby.”

Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving,
the added—

“ I am thankful to ﬁnd that I can look with I0 little

9.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 18!

'n on the Wl—Il’llll we ever ulk an that Iubject,

linorl"—heriutingly it w uid.—“ Or will it be
wrongi—I mulk of it now, I hope. a I ought to
do."

Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.

“ Al for re t," uid Marianne, " I have done with
thngufaru in concerned. I donotmeanlotalk
to you of what my feeling: have been for him, but what
they are m. At present,“ I could be utiaiied on one
point—if I could be allowed to think that he won not
delay actin a part, not alwny deceiving rne ;—hut
aboveth could he curred that he neverwu to
very wicked u my fear: have Iometimel fancied him,
Iinee the atory of that unfortunate girl—"

She ﬂopped. Elinor joyfully uncured her word: u
the nnewered—

“If you could be assured of that, you think you
lhould be ."

“ Yea. y peace of mind in doubly involved in it;
—for not only in it horrible to suspect a penon, who has
been what be he been to me, of ruch dedgng—but
what muat it make me to appear myself? What in a
ritnntion like mine, but a moot rhnmefully unguarded
aﬁection could expose me 00—"

“ How then," asked her deter, “ would you Icconnt
for hie behaviour?”

“I would lu pose him,—Oh! how ladly would I
up him, 0 y ﬁckle—very, very G: e."

' r'enid no more. She wu debating within her-

, Ielfon the eligibility of beginning her Rory directly, or

poetponing it till Marianne were in etronger hulthr—
nnd they crept on for a few minuter in nilence.

' “ I m not wishing him too much good," said
Mnl'iannectlutwithn Iigh, “when Iwilhhin Iecret
reﬂection: my be no more unpleuant than my own.
He will luﬂ'er enough in them." '

182 SENSE AND SENSlBlLlTY.

“ Do you compare your eonth with his? ”

“ No. I compare it with what it ought to have
been; Icompareitwithyonn." ‘

“ Our durations have borne little resemblance."

“ They have home more than our conduct. Do
not, my dearest Elinor, let your kindneu defend what I
know your judgment mun cemure. My illness ha.
made me think—4t has given me leieure Ind calmness
for serious recollection. Long before I was enough
recovered to talk, 1 was perfecdy nhle to reﬂect. I
considered the past: I saw in my own behaviour, since
the beginning of our acquaintance with him laet autumn,
nothing but a series of impmdence towards myself, and
want of kindness to others. I saw that my own feel-
ings had pre red my sufferings, and that my went of
fortitude on r them had almost led me to the grave.
My illness, I well knew, had been entirely brought on
by myself, by such negligence of my own health an I
felt even at the time to be wrong. Had I. died, it
would have been self-destruction. I did not know my
danger till the danger was removed ; but with such feel-
ingl as these reﬂections gave me, I wonder at my re-
covery,—wonder that the very eagerness of my dean-e to
live, to have time for atonement to In God, and to
you all, did not kill me at once. Had died, in what
peculiar mine should I have left you, my nune,my friend,
my sister!-— on, who had been all the fretful selﬁsh-
neu of my latter days; who had known all the mur-
murings of my hesrtl—How should I have lived in
your remembrance l—My mother too ! How could
you have consoled her !-—I cannot express my own ab-
horrence of myself. Whenever I looked towards the

t. I aw some duty neglected, or some failing indulged.

verybody seemed Injured by me. The kindneu, the
nnceasing kindness of Mrs Jennings, I had repaid with
ungrateful contempt. To the Middletons, the Palmers,

I SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. 183

the Steeles, to every common acquaintance even, I had
been insolent and unjust; with anhearthardenedagainst
their merits, and a temper in-iuted by their very atten-
tion. To John, to Fanny, — yes, even to them,
little as they deserve, I had given less than their due.
But yam—you above all, above my mother, had been
wronged me. I, and only I, knew your heart and
its sorrows; yet, to what did it inﬂuence me i—not to
any compassion that could beneﬁt you or myself. Your
examplewasbefore me: butto what avail? Was I
more considerate of you and your comfort? Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraintl, by
taking any part in those oﬂices of geneml ‘oomplaisanoe
or particular gratitude which you had hitherto been left
to alone? No ;—not less when I knew youto
be unhappy, than when I had believed you at ease, did
I turn away from every exertion of duty or friendship ;
scarcely allowed sorrow to exist but with me, regremn
only that heart which deserted and wronged me, an
leaving , for whom I professed an unbounded affec-
tion, to cunﬁserable for my sake.”

Here ceased the rapid ﬂow of her self-reproving spirit ;
and Elinor, impatient to soothe, though too honest to
ﬂatter, gave her inmatly that praise and mu rt which
her frankness and her contrition so we deserved.
Marianne pressed her hand and replied——

“You are very good. The future must bemy roof.
I have laid down my plan, and if I am ca le of
adhering to it, my feelings shall be governed and my
temper improved. They shall no longer worry others,
nor torture myself. I shall now live solely for my
family. You, my mother, and Margaret, must hence-
forth be all the world to me 3 you will share my affec-
tions entirer between you. From you, from my home,
I Ml never again have the smallest incitement to
move ; and if I do mix in other society, it will only be m

184 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

show that my spirit is humbled, my heart amended, and
that I can practise the civilities, the lesser dutiu of life,
with gentleness and forbearance. As for Willoughby,
to ﬂy that I shall soon or that 1 shall ever forget him,
would be idle. His remembrance can be overcome by
no change of circumstancu or opinion. But it ahallhe
regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason, by
constant employment."

She paused, and added in a lower voice, “ If I could
but know Iii: heart, everything would become easy.”

Elinor, who had now been some time reflecting on
the propriety or impropriety of speedily hanrding her
narration, wrthout feeling at all nearer decision than the
ﬁrst, heard this; and perceiving that u reﬂection did
nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herself lead-
ing to the fact.

She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address;
prepared her anxious listener with caution ; related
simply and honestly the chief ints on which Wil-
lough y grounded llll apology; id justice to his repent-
ance, and softened only his protestations of present re-
gard. Marianne said not a word; she trembled, her
eyes were ﬁxed on the ground, and her li I became
whiter than even sickness had left them. thousand
inquiries sprang up from her heart, but she dared not
urge one. She caught every syllable with panting
eagernesa; her hand, unknowingly to herself, closely
pressed her sister’ I, and tears covered her cheeks.

Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards
home; and till they reached the door of the cottage,
easily conjecturing what her curiosity must be, though
no question wan suffered to speak it, talked of nothing
but Willoughby, and their conversation together was
carefully minute in every particular of speech and look,
where minuteness could be mfer indulged. AI soon
as they entered the house, Marianne, with a kiss of

sense AND snusmurv. 185

gratitude, and these two words just articulate through
her team, " Tell mama,” withdrew ﬁom her sister and
walked alowa upnain. Elinor would not attempt to
dieturh a solitude no reasonable an what the now nought;
and with a mind anxiously pie-arranging its reeult, and
a recolution of reviving the Iub‘ect again ahould
Marianne fail to do it, she turned into the parlour to
ﬁrlﬁl her parting injunction.

Chill"! 5117]].

RS DASHWOOD did not hear unmoved
the vindication of her former favourite. She
rejoiced in his being cleared from some part

of his imputed guilt; Ihe was sorry for him; she
wished him happy. But the feelings of the past could
not he recalled. Nothing could restore him with a
faith unbroken—a character unblemished, w Marianne.
Nothing could do away the knowledge of what the
latter had suﬂ‘ered through his means, nor remove the
guilt of hie conduct towards Eliza. Nothing could
replace him, therefore in her former esteem, nor injure
the intereat of Colonel Brandon.
Had Mrs Dashwood, like her daughter, heard
I Willoughhy’a story from himself—had Ihe wimeued
hie distress, and been under the inﬂuence of his counte-
nance and his manner, it is probable that her compassion
~ would have been greater. But it was neither in
Elinor’s power, nor in her wish, to rouse such feelings
in another, by her mailed explanation, as had at lint
been called forth in herself. Reﬂection had given
calmneas to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion
of Willoughhy’s deserts; she wished, therefore, to
declare only the Iimple truth, and lay open such facta

:86 sans: um snsmun.

. we: rally b to h' chum, without. any
Mdmmmhﬁnqmy.
hdnevuing'hnthqiuellldnemgahs,
mmmedhnﬁn;hﬂ
“Baum-Mbmmﬁu
Whvﬂihhdhaformﬁm
unudyvoir. ' bowed.
‘IvHIwa-nnywholh,”-'ddle,'thnlne
Wmemmw
wood would Inn inla'nqnnd II: in-

mdy'ilhnodingmhdmtﬁlinonwho
mﬂy'ihedmhnrhaiin’squinhmby
mupign,engugedhcilum Mariannedovly
continued—-

“Ithagmndicftomﬁlinormldmthil
mtuing—Ihnmhxdencdyvhtlvﬂndm
but." Formmnhervoiceulotgbut.
.mvﬁngbdﬁhadﬂmdvithgmalm
thaheﬁxe:“lmmpuﬁcdyadﬁed. I'Mfor
nodunge. Imculdhvebeenlnwywithhim,
Mmﬁwumwhtﬂ'lmmMEMIH
thin. I thould luv: Ind no conﬁdence, mm.
Nothingeouldhndomittnymmy feelings”

“Iknow it—Ihwwit,”criedha'|nodnr. “
withlnnnoflibcnine ' ! thmcvbohd
ninjuredthcpaceo thedulmofomﬁimdgand
dlebmofmen.’ NHyMariannehanotahmn
mbemadclnmybynchanun! Hucomckncqln
amniﬁve con-dame, would luv: felt all that the
con-deuce ofhcrhmband oughtm have felt.”

Marianne lighcd, and [wand—“l vii for no
change.”

“You oonliderdnlnamr,” Iii Elinor, “uncdy
aagoodmind andaloundundemndingmm
conideritgmdldanayympucévgn'dlu

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, 137

myself, not only in this, but in many other circum-
Innoes, moon enough to be convinced that your
marriage must have involved you in many certain
troubles and disappointments in which you would have
been poorly su rted by In affection, on his side, much
lessoertsin. Edywmrﬁedyoumusthsvebeen
slwsys poor. His expensiveness is acknowledged even
by himself, and his whole conth declares that self-
denial is a word hardly understood by him. His
demands and your inexperience together on s small, very
small income, must have brought on distresses which
would not be the In: grievous to you from having been
entirely unknown and untbou ht of before. T our sense
of honour and honesty would have led on, I know,
when aware of your situation, to attempt the economy
thatwould Spear to you posible; and perhaps, as long
as your {mg lty retrenched only on your own comfort,
you might have been suﬁered to practise it, but beyond
that—and how little could the utmost of your single
management do to stop the min which had begun before
your marriage i—beyond (but, had you endeavoured,
however reasonably, to abrid‘ge lu'r enjoymenta, is it not
to be feared, that instead 0 prevailing on feelings so
selﬁsh to consent to it, you would have lessened your
own inﬂuence on his heart, and made him regret
the connexion which had involved him in such
diﬂiculties ? ”

Marianne’s lips quivered, and she repeated the word
“Selﬁsh?” in a tone that implied “Do you really
think him selﬁsh?”

“The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor, “ from
thebe ' ningtotheendoftheaﬂ'air,hasbeengrounded
on ess- It was selﬁshness which ﬁrst made him
you with your aﬂ'ectiom—which afterwnrds, when his

~ own were engaged, made him delay the confession of it,
e andwhichﬁnallycarried him from Barton. Hisown

188 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.

en' ment, or his own an, wu in every parﬁculnr hie

‘ gprinciple." -

“tisverytrue. Myhappineuneverwuhis
d,jech’l

“At preterit,” continued Elinor, “he regret: what
he has done. And why does he regret it? Because
he ﬁnds it has not answered towards himeelf. It lm
not made him happy. Hie circumutances are now un-
emlmraucd—he suffers from no evil of that kind, and
he thinks only that he has married a woman of a lee:
amiable temper than your-elf. But doee it thence
follow that, had he married you, he would have been
by”? The inconveniencel would have been different.

e would then have suffered under the pecuniary die-
treeaes which, becausethey are removed, he now reckons
as nothing. He would have had a wife of whoee
temper he could make no complaint, but he would have
been always necessitous—always poor; and probably
would soon have learnt to rank the innumerable com-
forts of a ciear estate and good income anof far more
importance, even to domestic happineu, than the mere »
temper of a wife.

“ I have not a doubt of it," said Marianne;
Fund, I have nothing to regret—nothing but my own
all . ’

‘i’Rather say your mother’s impmdence, my child,”
nid Mrs Duahwood; “ :5: must be answerable.”

Marianne would not let her proceed; and Elinor,
eatislied that each Mt their own error, wished to avoid
any survey of the put that might weaken her siner'e
lpirita; she therefore, pursuing the ﬁret subject, immedi-
ately continued—

“ One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from
the whole of the story—that all Willoughby’a difﬁculties
have arisen from the ﬁrst oﬂ'ence against virtue, in hie
behaviour to Eliza Williams. That crime has been

!ENSI AND melanin. 189

theoriginofeveryleuerone,andofallhiapreeent
dim-items.”

Marianne auented moot feelineg to the remark; and
her mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel
Bnndon’l injuriea and merits, warm at friendship and
delign could unitedly dictate. Her daughter did not
look, however, an if much of it were heard by her.

_ Elinor, accordin to her ex tion, law on the two
or three following days, that liar-lame did not continue
to gain Itrength n the had done; but while her reeolu-
tion wan unmbdued, and she atill tried to ap r cheer- ,
ful and euy, her diner could tafer trust to thzleﬂ'ect of
time upon her health. '
"mm returnéd, and the family were a 'n all
to each other, again guietly aettled at e cot-
tage, and if not pursuing their usual nudiel with quite
no much vigour u when they first came to Barton, It
lean Planning a vigorous pmlecntion of them in future.

Ehnor grew impatient for Iome tidingl of Edward.
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving Lon-
don, nothing new of hie plane, nothing certain even of
hit present abode. Some letters had passed between
her and her brother, in conlequence of Marianne'l ill-
ness; and in the ﬁrst of John’u, there had been thin
centence :—“ We know nothing of our unfortunate
Edward, and can make no enquiriel on no prohibited 9
subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford; ” which
wan all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the
correspondence, for hie name was not even mentioned
in any of the lucceeding letters. She wan not doomed,
however, to be long in Ignorance of his mea'uru.

Their man-tenant had been tent one morning to
Exeter on bulineaa; and when, as he waited at table,
he had utiaﬁed the inquiries of his mistress u to the
event of his errand, thi- wae hil voluntary communica-
tion—

:90 same AND SINSIBIUW.

"I mppote you know, m’am, that Mr Ferrars in
married.

Marianne gave a violent start, ﬁxed her eyea upon
Elinor, saw her turning pale. and fell back in her chair in
hynerics. Mrs Daahwood, whote as she answered
the Iervant’s inquiry, had- intuitivey uken the same
direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor’s counte-
nance how much she reall Iuﬁ'ered, and in a moment
afterwards, alike dimmed y Mnrianne’s situation, knew
not on which child to bertow her principal attention.

The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was
taken ill, had senee enough to call one of the maids,
who, with Mn Dashwood’s assistance, supported her
into the other room. By that time, Marianne waa
rather better, and her mother leaving her to the care of
Margaret and the maid, returned to Elinor, who though
still much disordered, had to far recovered the use of
her reason and voice as to be just beginning an in
of Thomas as to the source of his intelligence. quI
Dnshwood immediately took all that trouble on herself:
and Elinor had the beneﬁt of the infonmtion without
the exertion of seeking it.

“ Who told you that Mr Ferrari wal
Thomas P”

“I see Mr Ferrars myself, ma’arn, thin morning in
Excur, and his lady too, Miss Steele as was. They
was stop 'ng in a chaise at the door of the New London
Inn, as went there with a message from Sally at the
Park to her brother, who is one of the ya. ‘L
I happened to look up as I Went the c 'se, and so
I see directly it war the youngest in Steele; so I
took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me,
and in uired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies,
especile Misc Marianne, and bid me I should give her
compliments and Mr Fen-ars’s, their best compliments
and service, and how sorry they was they had not time

SENS! AND SENSIBHJTY. 19X

to come on and see you—but they was in a great hurry
to o forwards, for they was going further down for a
littfe while—but howsever, when they come back, they ’d
make sure to come and see you.”

“ But did ehe tell you she was married, Thomas P ”

“Yes, ma’am. She smiled, and said how she had
changed her name since she was in these parts. She
was always a very affable and freeyken young lady,
andnvery civil-behaved. So, I m e free to wish her
a .

J ’2‘ Was Mr Ferrars in the carriage with her 2 ”

“ Yes, ma’am, I just see him leaning back in it, but
he did not look up ;—he never was a gentleman much
for talking.”

Elinor I heart could easily account for his not putting
himself ferward; and Mrs Dashwood probably found
the same explanation.

“ Wa- there no one else in the carriage ? "

“No, ma'am, only they two.”

“Do you know where they came from .’ ”

“They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy—
Mrs Ferrars told me.”

“ And are going {anther westward? ”

“ Yes, ma’am—but not to hide long. They will
soon be back again, and then they ’d be sure and all
here.’

Mrs Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but
Elinor knew better than to expect them. She recog-
nised the whole of Lucy in the message, and was very
conﬁdent that Edward would never come near them.
She observed, in a low voice, to her mother, that
they were probably going down to Mr Pratt's, near
Plymouth.

Thoman’s intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked
as if she wished to hear more.

“ Did you see them ol‘lr before you came away ? ”

I92 SINSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ No, ma’am—the horses was just coming out, but
I could not hide any longer; I was afraid of being
late."

“ Did Mrs Femrs look well 9”

“ Yes, ma’am, she said how she was very well; and
to my mind she was always a very handsome young
lady—and she seemed vastly contented.”

Mrs Dashwnod could think of no other question, and
Thomas and the table-cloth, now alike needless, were
soon after dismissed. Marianne had already sent to
say that she should eat nothing more ; Mrs Dashwood’s
and Elinor’s appetites were equally lost, and Margaret
might think herself very well off, that with so much
uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced, so
much reason as they had often had to be careless of
the meals, she had never been obliged to go without her
dinner before.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and
Mrs Dashwood and Elinor were left to themselves, they
remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulueu
and silence. Mrs Dashwood feared to hazard any
remark, and ventured not to offer consolation. She
now found that she had erred in relying on Elinor’s re-
presentation of herself; and justly concluded Lhatevery-
thing had been expressly softened at the time, to spare
her from an increase of unhappiness, sulfering as she
then had suffered for Marianne. She found that the
had been misled by the careful, the considerate attention
of her daughter, to think the attachment, which once
she had so well understood; much slighter in reality than
she had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved
to be. She feared that under this Persuasion she had
been unjust, inattentive—nay, almost unkind to her
Elinor:—that Marianne’s aﬂliction, because more ac-
knowledged, more immediately before her, had too
much engrossed her tenderness, and led her away to

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 193

forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suﬁ‘ering
almost as much, certainly with less self-provocation, and
grater fortitude.

Chapter 5193]].

LINOR now found the diKemnce between the
expectation of an unpleasant event, however
certain the mind ma be told to consider it, and

certainty itself. She now ound, that in spite of herself,
she had always admitted a hope, while Edward remained
single, that something would occur to prevent his marry-
ing Lucy; that some resolution of his own, some
mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity
of establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the
happiness of all. But he was now manied, and she
condemned her heart for the lurking ﬂattery which so
much heightened the pain of the intelligence.

That he should be married so soon, before (as she
imagined) he could be in orders, and consequently
before he could be in possession of the living, surprised
her a little at ﬁrst. But she soon saw how likely it
was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste
to secure him, should overlook everything but the risk
of delay. They were married, married in town, and
now hastening donm to her uncle’s. What had Edward
felt on being within four miles of Barton, on seeing her
mother’s servant, on hearing Lucy’s messagel

They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Dela-
ford,—Delaford, that place in which so much conspired
to give her an interest—which she wished to be ac-
quainted with, and yet desired to avoid. She saw them
in an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in Lucy the
active, conniving manager, uniting at once a desire of
smart appearance with the utmost frugality, and ashamed

H. N

[94 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

to be suspected of half her economical practices ;-—
pursuing her own intereu in every thought, courting the
favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mn Jennings, and of
every wealthy friend. In Edward, she knew not what
she saw, nor what she wished to sen—happy or un-
happy—nothing pleased her ;—-she tumcd away her
head from every sketch of him.

Elinor ﬂuttered herself that some one of their con-
ncxions in London would write to them to announce
the event, and give farther palticulars; but day after day
passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings. Though
uncenain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or
indolent.

“ When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma’am 1‘ ”
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her
mind to have something going on.

“I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather
expect to see, than to hear from him again. I earnestly
pressed his coming to us, and should not be surprised to
see him walk in to-day or to-mon‘ow, or any day."

This was gaining something, something to look for-
ward to. Colonel Brandon mun have some information
to ive.

germ;er had she so determined it, when the ﬁgure of
a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window. He
stopped at their gate. It was at gentleman, it was
Colonel llnlmlnn himself. Now she should hear mom;
-—and she trembled in expectation of it. Bub—it was
not Colonel Brandon—neither his air, nor his height.
Were it possible, she should say it must be Edward.
She looked again. He had just dismounted ;—ohe
could not be mistaken—it was Edward. She moved
away and sat down. “He comes from Mr Pratt’s
purposely to see us. I will be calm; 1 will be mistress
of myself.’ ’

SENSE AND SENSIBILITV. [95

In a moment, she perceived that the others were
likewiee aware of the mistake. She saw her mother
and Marianne change colour: aw them look at herself,
and whisper a few sentences to each other. She would
have given the world to be able to speak—and to make
them understand that she hoped no coolness, no slight,
would appear in their behaviour to him ;——but she had
no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to their own
discretion.

Not a syllable paned aloud. They all waited in
silence for the appearance of their visitor. His footsteps
were heard along the gravel path; in a moment he was
in the passage, and in another he was before them.

His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too
happy, even for Elinor. His complexion was white
with agitation, and he looked as it fearful of his rec
tion, and conscious that he merited no kind one. 12;
Dashwood, however, conforming, as she turned, to the
wishes of that daughter by whom she then meant, in the
warmth of her heart, to be guided in everything, met him
with a look of forced complacency, gave him her hand,
and wished him joy.

He coloured, and smmmercd out an unintelligible
reply. Elinor’s lips had moved with her mother’s, and
when the moment of action was over, she wished that
the had shaken hands with him too. But it was then
too late, and with a countenance meaning to be open,
she sat down again and talked of the weather.

Marianne had retmaed as much as possible out of
sight, to conceal her distress; and Margaret, under-
standing some part, but not the whole, of the case,
thought it incumbent on her to be digniﬁed, and there-
fore took a seat as far from him as she could, and
maintained a strict silence.

When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of
the season, a very awful pause took place. It was put

196 SENSE AND SENSIBILITV.

an end to by Mrs Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope
that he had left Mrs F emirs very well. In a hurried
manner, he replied in the afﬁrmative.

Another pause.

Elinor, resolving to exert herself, though fearing the
sound of her own voice, now said—

“Is Mrs Ferrars at Longstaple ?"

“At Longstaple! "—he replied, with an air of
surprise. “ No, my mother is in town.”

“ I meant,” id Elinor, taking up some work from
the table, “ to inquire after Mrs Edward Femrs.”

She dared not look up ;—but her mother and
Marianne both tumed their eyes on him. He coloured,
seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and, after some
hesitation said——

“ Perhaps you mean—my brother—you mean Mr.-
Mrs Ruhr! Ferraro.”

“ Mrs Robert Ferrars! "—was repeated by Marianne
and her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement;
-—and though Elinor could not speak, even bzr eyes
were ﬁxed on him with the same impatient wonder.
He rose from his seat and walked to the window,
apparently from not knowing what to do; took up a
pair of scissars that lay there, and while spoiling both
them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as
he spoke, said, in an hurried voice——

“ Perhaps you do not know—you may not have
heard that my brother is lately married m—w the
youngest—to Miss Lucy Steele.”

His words were echoed with unspeakable astonish-
ment by all but Elinor, who sat with her head leaning
over her work, in a state of such agitation as made her
hardly know where she was.

“ Yes,” said he, “they were married last week and
are now at Dawlish.”

Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out of

SENSE AND smmu'n. 197

the room, and as soon as the door was closed, burst into
tears of joy, which at ﬁrst she thought would never
cease. Edward, who had till then looked Inywhele
rather than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw
—or even heard—her emotion ; for immediately after-
wards he fell into a reverie, which no remarks, no
inquiries, no affectionate address of Mrs Dashwood
could penetrate, and at list, without saying a word,
quitted the room, and walked out towards the village,
leaving the others in the greatest astonishment and
pezylexity on a change in his situation so wonderful
an so sudden—a perplexity which they had no means
of lessening but by their own conjectures.

Chart" SIJS.

NACCOUNTABLE, however, as the circum-
stances of his release might a or to the whole
family, it was certain that dward was free;

and to what purpose that freedom would be employed
was easily predetermined by all; for after experiencing
the blessings of an: impmdent engagement, contacted
without his mother’s consent, as he had already done
for more than four years, nothing less could be expected
of him in the fallure of lbat, than the immediate
contraction of another.

Hit errand at Barton, in fact, was a sim le one. It
was only to ask Elinor to marry him ; an considering
that he was not altogether inexperienced in such a
question, it might be strange that he should feel so
uncomfortable in the present case as he really did, so
much in need of encouragement and fresh air.

How soon he had walked himself into the proper
resolution however, how soon an opportunity of exer-

198 sense Aim slusnslnrrv.

cin'ng it occurred,in what m‘snnerheexpremdhimself,
and how he was received, need not be particularly told.
Thisonl needhe saidz—thstwhentheyallutdownto
table at our o’clock, about three hours after his arrival,
he had secured his lady, engaged her mother’s consent,
and was not only in the rapturous profusion of the
lover, but in the reality of reason and truth, one of the
happiest of men. His situation indeed was more than
commonly joyful. He had more than the ordinary
triumph of acCepted love to swell his heart, and raise
his spirits. He was released, without any reproach to
himself, from an entanglement which had long formed
his misery, from a woman whom he had long cased to
love—and elevated at once to that security with mother,
which he must have thought of almost with despair, as
soon as he had learnt to consider it with desire. He
was brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from
mise to ha iness ;——and the chan e was 0 1

kg in such”; genuine, ﬂowing, grate cheerﬁilﬂlssl:
as his friends had never witnessed in him before.

His heart was now open to Elinor—all its weaknesses,
all its errors confessed, and his ﬁrst boyish attachment
to Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of
twent -four.

“ I! was a foolish, idle inclination on my side, said
he, “ the consequence of ignorance of the world—and
want of employment. Had my mother given me some
active profession when I was removed at eighteen from
the care of Mr Pratt, I think—nay, I am sure, it
would never have happened; for, though I left Long-
staple with what I thought, at the time, a most uncon-
querable preference for his niece, yet hadI then had
any pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me
at a distance from her for a few months, I should very
soon have outgrown the fancied attachment, especiall
by mixing more with the world, as in such a case I

n

SENSE AND SENSIRILITY. X99

mun have done. But instead of having anything to do
—instead of having any profession chosen for me, or
being allowed to abuse any myself, I returned home to
be com letel idle ; and for the ﬁrst twelvernonth after-
wards, I had7 not even the nominal employment which
belonging to the university would have given me, for I
was not entered at Oxford till I was nineteen. I had
therefore nothing in the world to do. but to fancy my-
self in love; and as m mother did not make my home
in every respect com enable—as I had no friend, no
companion in my brother, and disliked new acquaintance,
it was not unnatural for me to be very often at Long-
staple, where I always felt myself at home, and was
always sure of a welcome ; and accordingly I spent the
test part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen.
ucy a red everything that was amiable and oblig-
ing. S e was pretty too—at least I thought so then .-
and I had seen so little of other women, that I could
make no comparisons, and see no defects. Considering
everything, therefore, I hope, foolish as our engagement
was, foolish as it has since in every way been proved,
it was not at the ﬁlm an unnatural, or an inexcunhle '
piece of folly."

The change which a few hours had wrought in the
minds and the happiness of the Dashwoods was such—
I0 great—as promised them all the satisfaction of a
sleepless night. Mrs Dashwood, too happy to be com-
fortahle, knew not how to love Edward nor praise
Elinor enough—how to be enough thankful for his
release without wounding his delicacy, nor how at once
to give them leisure for unrestrained convcmtion to-
gether, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the light and
society of both.

Marianne could speak bar happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur, regrets would arise l and
her] , though sincere as her love for her sister, was of
a kin to give her neither spirits nor language. '

10° SINSI AND SIlSlBle.

But Elinor, how are bar feeling! to be described?
From the moment of leaning that Lucy wan nnrried
to mother, that Edward wu free, to the moment of
hit justifying the hope: which had to instantly followed,
Ilt: war everything by turna but tranquil. But when'
the oecoud moment had paued—when the found every
doubt, every eolicitude removed—compared her ritua-
tion with what l0 lately it had been—now him honour-
any relented from bu forum-r ongagcrmnt—oavl him
innantly proﬁting by the releaee, to addreu her-elf and

an affection an tender, 2- conatant n the had
ever hippo-ed it to be—ahe was oppreued, the wan
overcome by her own felicity ; and haypily u
in the human mind to be eadly farniharioed with any
change for the better, it required Ieveral hour- to give
Iedateneu to her Ipiriu, or any degree of tranquillity to
her heart.

Edward was now ﬁxed at the cottage at lent for a
week; for whatever other claim: might be made on
him, it wan impouible that lets than a week should be
given up to the enjoyment of Elinor’l company, or
lulﬁce to say half that wan to he said of the past, the
present, and the future; for though a very few hour-I
rent in the hard labour of inceuant talkm' g will

elpatch more subjects than can really be in common
between any two rational creaturea. yet with lover! it is
dill'ermt. Between them no subject in ﬁniahed, no com-
munication is even made, till it has been made at least
twenty times over.

Lucy’s marriage, the unceaaing and reasonable wonder
among them all, formed of coune one of the earliest
ditcnuionu of the lovere; and Elinor’l particular
knowledge of each party made it appear to her, in
every View, as one of the most extraordinary and un-
accountable circumltancee the had ever heard. How
they could be thrown together, and by what attunion

SENSE AND SlllslBle. 30X

Robertwuldbednwn on to many I girl ofwhme
beauty the had henelf heard him Ipeak without any
admiration—u girl too already engaged to hi- brother,
Ind on whale account that brother had been thrown off
by his fumil —it war beyond her com rehenaion to
make out. 'l‘o her own heart it was a de ightful affair,
to her imaginah'on it won even a ridiculoul one; but
to hler reason, her judgment, it was completely a

z e.

Edward could only attempt an explanation by unp-
pocing that perhaps at lint accidentally meeting, the
vanity of the one had been no worked on by the ﬂattery
of the other, a to lead by degrees to all the rent. Elinor
remembered what Robert had told her in Harley-street,
of hi- opinion of what hi- owu medinu'on in him
brother’s ulﬁin might have done, if applied to in time.
She ted it to Edward. -

“ wan exactly like Robert,” was his immediate
observation. “ And 1641!,” he presently added, “ might
perhap- be in In" head when the ac naintance between
them ﬁnt be n. And Lucy per ape at ﬁrst might
think only 0 procuring hie good ofﬁcer in my favour.
Other denignr might afterward: urine."

How long it had been carrying on between them,
however, he war ﬁnally at I low with herself to make
out; {or at Oxfo , where he had remained by choice
ever since his quitting London, he had had no meam of
hearing of her but from henelf, and her letters to the
very list were neither less frequent nor less ntfecﬁonate
than ulual. Not the smaller: nupicion, therefore, had
ever occurred to prepare him for what followed; and
when at last it hunt on him in a letter from Lucy her-
Ielf, he had been for some time, he believed, half
mpiﬁed between the wonder, the horror, and the joy,
of Inch 3 deliverance. He .put the letter into Elinor’l

202 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

“ Dun Sru,—Being very Iure I have long lootiyour
affection, I have thought merlf at liberty to bestow
my own on another, Ind have no doubt of being a
happy with him an I once need to think‘I might be
with you; but I team to ace t a hand while the heart
was nnother'e. Sincerely wlll’l you ha y in your
choice, and it shall not be my fault i we are not.
alwayn good friends, ac our near relationehip now nukes
proper. I can cafer my I owe you no ill-will, and am
lure you will he too generous to do us any ill allies.
Your brother has gained my affections entirely, and u
we could not live without one another, we are jut
returned from the altar, and are now on our way «3
Dawlish for a few weeks, which place your dear
brother he great curionity to see, but thought I would
first trouble you with these few lines, and shall alwaye
remainr—Your lincere well-wither, friend, and liner,

" Lucy Faun.

“I have burn! all your lettern, and will return your
picture the ﬁm nunity. Please to destroy my
acnwlu; but the ring, with my hair, you are very
welcome to keep.’ ’

Elinor read Ind returned it without any comment.

“ I will not ilk our opinion of it an a composition,”
laid Edvard. “ or worlds would not I have had a
letter of here eeen 10!! in former days. In a liner it
ll bad enough, but In a wife! How I have bluhed
over the pages of her writing! and I believe I may any
that Iince the ﬁrst half-year of our foolish—business—
thil i: the only letter I ever received from her, of which
the substance made me any amende for the defect of the

le.”

“ However it may have come about,” said Elinor,
after a use, “they are certainly married. And your
mother brought on herself a most appropriate pun-

8m! AND msrnru'rv. 103

ialunent. The independence the Iettled on Robert,
through relentment againlt you, ha: put it in hit
tomkehieownchoicegandnhehuacoullybeen
bribing one son with a thounnd a-year, to do the very
«ad which line diainherited the other for intending so
do. She will hardly be less hurt, I euppoee, by
Rnben’a marrying Lucy dun she would have been by
your marrying her.” '

“ She will be more hurt by It, for Robert alwayl wan
her favourite. She will be more hurt by it, and on the
lame principle will forgive him much Iooner."

In what state the affair ﬂood at preterit between
them Edward knew not, for no communication with
anyofhiafamilyhadyetbeenattempted byhim. He
had quieted Oxford within four-and-twenty hour: after
any’l letter arrived, and with onl one object before
him, the neare‘ mad tanrton, ha had no leisure to
form an scheme of conduct with which that road did
not hol the moat intimate connexion. He could do
nothing till he were assured of his fate with Mine
Duhwood; and by his rapidity in seeking (but fate, it
in to he Iuppoeed, in ite of the jealouay with which he
had once thought of olonel Brandon—in Ipite of the
moduty with which he rated l‘lil own damn, and the
politeneu with which he talked of his doubts, he did
not upon the whole, expecta very cmel reception. It was
his bulineu, however, to say that he id, and he said it
very pmtily. What he mi t any on the subject a
twelvemonth after, Inuit be re erred to the imagination
of hulbnnda and wives.

That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go all
with a ﬂouriah of malice against him in her me e by
Thoma wan y clear to Elinor; and E ward
hinuelf now run hly enlightened on her character,
had no cc ein be'eving her ca le of the utmolt
manne- o wanton ill-nature. hough his eye. had

204 SENSE AND SENSIBILI'I'Y. .

been long opened, even before hia acquaintance [with
Elinor began, to her ignorance and a want of lilting? in
some of her opinions, they had been equally impu by
him to her want of education; and till her last letter
reached him he had nlwa believed her to be a well-
disposed, good-hearted gir , and thoroughly attached to
himself. Nothing but such a persuasion could have
prevented his putting an end to an engagement which,
ong before the discovery of it laid hirn open to his
mother's anger, had been a continual source of disquiet
and regret to him.

“I thought it my duty,” said he, “independent of

my feelings, to give her the option of continuing the
engagement or not, when I was renounced by my mother,
and stood to all appearance without a friend in the world
to assist me. In such a situation as that, where there
seemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any
living creature, how could I suppose, when she l0
esmestly, so warmly insisted on sharing my fate, what-
ever it might be, that anything but the most disinterested
affection was her inducement? And even now, I can-
not comprehend on what motive she acted, or what
fancied advantage it could be to her, to be fenered to a
man for whom she had not the smallest regard, and
who had only two thousand pounds in the world. She
could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me 1
[Mn .” '
“$10, but she might suppose that something would
occur in your favour; that your own family might in
time relent. And at anymte, she lost nothing by con-
tinuing the engagement, for she has proved that it fettered
neither her inclination nor her actions. The connexion
was certainly a respectable one, and probably gained her
consideration among her friends; and if nothing more
advantageous occurred, it would be better for her to
marry you than be single."

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 205

Edward was of course immediately convinced that
nothing could have been more natural than Lucy’s con-
duct, nor more self-evident than the motive of it.

Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold
the impnldence which compliments themselves, for
having syent so much time with them at Norland, when
he must have felt his own inconstancy.

“Your behaviour was certainly very wrong,” said
she, “ because—to say nothing of my own conviction—
our relations were all led away by it. to fancy and expect
«that, as you were [bur situated, could never be.”

He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart,
and a mistaken conﬁdence in the force of his engagement.

" I was simple enough to think that, because my faith
was plighted to another, there could be no danger in
my being with you ; and that the consciousness of my
engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred as
In honour. I felt that I admired you, but I told my-
self it was only friendship; and till I began to make
comparisons between yourself and Lucy, I did not
know how far I was got. After that, I sup se, I was-
wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, an the argu-
ments with which I Ieconciled myself to the expediency
of it were no better than these :—T he danger is my
own i I am doing no injury to anybody but myself."

Elinor smiled and shook her head.

Edward heard with yleasure of Colonel Brandon’s
being expected at the cottage, as he really wished not
only to be better acquaian with him, but to have an
opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented
his giving him the living of Delaford—~“Whiel1 at
present,” said he, “ after thanksso ungraciously delivered
as mine were on the occasion, he must think I have
never forgiven him for offering.”

Now he felt astonished himself that he had never yet
been to the place. But so little interest had he taken in

205 SENSE AND SENSIBILH'Y.

the matter, that he owed all his knowledge of the house,
garden, and glebe, extent of the rish, condition of the
land, and rate of the tithes, to 'linor herself, who had
heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard
it with so much attention as to be entirely mistress of the
sub'ect.

brie question after this only remained undecided
between them, one diﬂieulty only was to be overcome.
They were brought together by mutual affection, with
the warmest approbation of their real friends, their
intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their
happiness certain—and they only wanted something to
live upon. Edward had two thousand pounds, and
Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, was all that
they could call their own; for it was impossible that
Mrs Dashwood should advance anything, and they were
neither of them quite enough in love to think that three
hundred and ﬁfty )ounds a year would supply them with
the comforts of lifn

Edward was not entirely without hopes of some
favourable change in his mother towards him; and on
that he rested for the residue of their income. But
Elinor had no such dependance; for, since Edward
would still be unable to many Miss Morton, and his
chusing herself had been spoken of in Mrs Fermrs’s
ﬂattering language as only a lesser evil than his chasing
Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert’s offence would -
serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny.

About four days after Edward's arrival, Colonel
Brandon a pared, to complete Mrs Dashwood’s satis-
faction, and to give her the dignity of having, for the
ﬁrst time since her living at Barton, more company with
her than her house would hold. Edward was allowed
to retain the privilege of ﬁrst-comer, and Colonel Bran-
don therefore wnlked every night to his old quarters at
the Park; from whence he usually returned in the

SENSE AND SINSHJILITY. 207

morning, earl enough to interrupt the loven’ Em tib-
a-téte before reakfast
A three weeks’ residence at Delaford, where, in his
evening hours at lean, he had little to do but to calcu-
late the disproportion between thirty-six and seventeen,
brought him to Barton in a tem r of mind which
needed all the improvement in Mananne’s looks, all the
kindness of her welcome, and all the encouragement of
her mother’s language, to make it cheerful. Among
such friends, however, and such ﬂattery, he did revive.
No rumour of Lucy’s marriage had yet reached him;
he knew nothing of what had passed, and the ﬁn hours
of his visit were consequently spent in hearing and in
wondering. Everything was explained to him by Mrs
Duhwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoice in
what he had done for Mr Fer-ran, since eventually it
promoted the interen of Elinor. '
It would be needless to nay that the gentlemen ad-
vanced in the good opinion of each other as they
advanced in each other’s acquaintance, for it could not
be otherwise. Their resemblance in good principle: and
good sense, in disposition and manner of tlunking, would
probably have been sufﬁcient to unite them in friendship,
without any other attraction ; but their being in love with
two sisters, and two sisters fond of each other, made
that mutual regard inevitable and immediate, which might
otherwise have waited the elfect of time and judgment.
' The letters from town, which a few days before
would have made every nerve in Elinor’s body thrill
with transport, now arrived to be read with less emotion
than mirth. Mn Jennin I wrote to tell the wonderful
tale to vent her honest rndignation against the jiltﬁg
' ,and pour fonh her compassion towards poor
ward, who, she was sure, had quite doated upon the
- worthless hussey, and was now, by all accounts. almost
broken-hearted, at Oxford—“I do think," she can-

.208 SENSE AND SINSXBILITY.

tinned, “nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it was
but two days before Lucy called and sat a couple of
hours with me. Not a soul suspected anything of the
maner, not even Nancy, wh‘o, poor soul! came c 'ng
to me the day after, in a great fright for fear ofrhllrs
Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to get to Ply-
mouth; for Lucy, it seems, borrowed all her money
before she went off to be married, on pu , we sup-
pose, to make a shew with, and poor ancy had not
seven shillings in the world ;—so I was very glad to
give her ﬁve guinea, to take her down to Exeter, where
she thinks o staying three or four weeks with Mrs
Burgess, in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the
doctor again. And I must say that Lucy’s crossness
not to mine her along with them in the chaise, is worse
than all. Poor Mr Edward! I cannot t him out
of my head, but you must send for him wﬁarton, and
Miss Marianne must try to comfort him."

Mr Dashwood’s strains were more solemn. Mrs
Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women—poor
Fanny had suﬁ'ered agonies of sensibility—and he con-
sidered the existence of each, under such a blow, with
grateful wonder. Robert’s offence was un Ie,
but Luc ’s was inﬁnitely worse. Neither 0 them was
ever again to he mentioned to Mrs Fermi; and, even
if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son, his
wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter, nor
be rmitted to appear in her presence. The secrecy
withe which everything had‘been carried on between
them, was rationally treated an enormously heightening
the crime, because had any suspicion of rt occurred on
the others, proper measures would have been taken to
prevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to join
with him in regretting that Luc ’s engagement with
Edward had not rather'heen ﬁr lled, than that she
should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in
the family. He thus continued—

ml! All) IINSIBILI'I’Y. 209

"Mn Fen-m has never yet mentioned Edwerd'l
name, which doel not surprise up, but, to our greet
monilhrnent. not a line he been received from him on
the cation. Perhape, however, he in kept lilent by
his fear of offending, and I lhall therefore give him I
hint, by in line to Oxford, that hie litter and I both'
think a letter of proper ruhminiou from him, nddrened
perhaps to Fanny, and by her shown to her mother,
might not be taken amine; for we all know the tender-
nest of Mn Ferrari: heart, and thnt the wilhel for
nothing to much an to be on good term: with her
children.”

This ragmph war of some importance to the proo-
pectl u conduct of Edwm‘l. t determined him to
attempt a reconciliation, though not exactly in the
manner pointed out by their brother and liner.

“A lener of proper rubmiuion!” repented he;
"would they have me beg my mother’e n for
Robert’l ingratitude to La, and breach 0 honourto
Inf—J can make no Iubrnilaion—I am grown neither
humblenor itentbywhat hu panned. Inmgrown
very htppy, t that would not intereet. I know ofno
mbmiuron that i: proper for me to make.”

" You may certainly ask to be forgiven," laid Elinor,
“ became you hue offended ;——and I ehould think you
might now Venture so far as to profess tome concern for
having ever formed the engagement which drew on you
your mother’s anger."

He agreed that he might.

J‘And when the hu forgiven Inﬁrhnpe e little
humility may be convenient w ’e ac ow edging e
Iecond engagement, almott u imprudent in La- eyes as
the ﬁrm" ’

He had nothing to urge against it, but Mill ruined
the idea of a letter of proper eubmiuion 3 and therefore,
to make it euier to him, at he declared a much greater

ll. 0

210 SENSE AND SENSIBHJTY.

willingneu to make mean concelaione by word of mouth
than on per, it wu resolved that, instead of writing to
Fanny, e should go to London, and cperennially enueat
her good ofﬁce: in hit favour. “ An if they really do
intereet themaelvec,” laid Marianne, in her new chaneter
of candour, “in bringing about a reconciliation, I Ihall
think that even John and Fanny are not entirely without
merit"

After a visit on Colonel Brandon’s ride of only three
or four da a, the two gentlemen (Fitted Barton to-
gether. hey were to go immediately to Delaford,
that Edward might have me pemna knowledge of
his future home, and anirt hie patron and friend in
deciding on what improvement: were needed to it y and
from thence, after naying there a couple of night: he
wan to proceed on bill journey to town.

than“: I.

FTER a proper resistance on the part of Mn

A F errare, just no violent and I0 steady at to preserve

her from that reproach which the alwaya aeerned

fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable,

Edward was admitted to her presence, and pronounced
to be again her Ion.

Her family had of late been exceedingly ﬂuctuating.
For many years of her life the had had two none; but
the crime and annihilation of Edward, a few weelu
ago, had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation of
Robert had left her for a fortni ht without any; and
now, by the renunciation of dward, she had one
again.

In spite of hir being allowed once more to live, how-
ever, he did not feel the continuance of bin existence

SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY. 2]!

mute, till he had‘ revealed hie preeent enga nt; for
the publication of that eircummuee, he Err; might
give a madden turn to his conetibution, and curry him of
n rapidly as before. With apprehenve caution there-
fore it waa revealed, and he was listened to with
unexpected calmneas. Mn Ferrari at lint reaaonably
endeavoured to diuuade him from marrying Mia Daah-
wood, every argument in her power ;—told him, that
in Mi- omn he would have a woman of higher rank
and larger fortune t—and enforced the nasertion by

' that Mi- Morton was the daughter of a
nobleman with thirty thou-and pounds, while Mia!
Duhwood wan only the daughter of a private gentle-
man, with no more than lbrn ,- but when she found
that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her re-
sentation, he was by no meam Inclined to be guid by
it, she judged it wisest, from the experience of the fan,
to subunit—and therefore, after ruch an ungrucioua elay
I: die owed to her own dignity, and an eerved to prevent
every suspicion of good-er, «he iuued her decree of
content to the mamage of Edward and Elinor.

What she would engage to do towards augmenting
their income was next to be considered: and here it
plainly appeared, that though Edward was now her
onl son, he was by no means her eldest; for while
Robert wan inevitably endowed with a thousand pound!
a ear, not the smallest. objection was made lgainn
E ward’a taking orders for the sake of two hundred
and hit at the utmost; nor wan anything promised
either r the preeent or in future, and the ten
thou-rid pounds, which had been given wrth Funny.

‘ It wen In much, however, u was desired, and more
than VIII expected, by Edward and Elinor; and Mn
Ferrari herself, by her ahuﬂling excuuel, termed the
onl non eurprisedlat her not giving more.

1th an income quite euﬂicient to their wants thua

212 SENSE All) SENSIBILITV.

lecured to them, they had nothing to wait for after
Edward was in poundon of the living, but the readi-
ness of the home, to which Colonel Brandon, with an
uger desire for the accommodation of Elinor, wa- mnk-
ing comiderahle in: rovemenu ; and aﬂer waiting some
time for their completion—after ex riencing, an urual,
a thousand disappointment: and de aye, from the unac-
countable dilator-incur of the workmen,—Elinor, 3.
mal, broke through the lint positive resolution of not
marrying till everything was ready, and the ceremony
took place in Barton church early in the autumn.

The ﬁrst month after their mania e was spent with
their friend at the Mansion-home, (groin whence they
could ruperintend the progreu of the Parronage, and
direct everything me they liked on the Ipot; could
chuee papers, reject Ihrubberiel, and invent a weep.
Mr- Jenningu propheciee, though rather jumbled lo-

ether, were chieﬂy fulﬁlled; for she wae‘ able to visit-

dward and his wife in their Pauonage Mchaelnrae,
and she found in Elinor and her hueban , u the reall
believed, one of the happiert [couples] in the worltz
The had in fact nothing to wiah for, but the marriage
of olonel Brandon and Marianne, and rather better.
paaturage for their cows.

T were visited on their ﬁrrt settling by almolt all
their re ationa and friendt. Mn Ferraro came to inepect
the happinesa Which the was almost ashamed of having
authomed; and even the Dashwoode were at the
expense of a journey from Suuex to do them honour.

“ I will not say that I am din pointed, my dear
inter," said John, ac they were king together one
morning before the gates of Delaford House—“Ibo:
would be saying too much, for certainly you have been
one of the most fortunate young women in the world,
as it is. But, I conform, it would give me great pleasure
to call Colonel Brandon brother. Hit property here,

I SENSE AND SENSIBIUTV. [[3

his place, hi. house, everything in mi. was]:

and excellent condition! and his woods! I hsve .

not seen such timber anywhere in Dorsetshire u
there is now standing in Dehford Hanger! And
though, perhaps, Msrianne my not seem exactly the
person to attract him, yet I think it would altogetherbe
sdvisshle for you to have them now frequently staying
with you, for as Colonel Brandon seems 1 great deal at
home, nobody can tell what my huppen—for, when

le are much thrown together, and see little of any-

y else—and it will always be in your power to set
her off to sdvantage, and so forth; rn short, you may
so well give her a chance—You undemtnnd me."

But though Mrs Fen-an :54! come to see them, and
always treated them with the make-believe of decent
aﬁ'ection, they were never insulted by her real favour
and preference. Tlm: was due to the folly of Robert,
and the cunning of his wife ; and it was earned by them
before many months had passed away. The selﬁsh
ssgaci of the latter, which had at ﬁrst drawn Robert
into e scrape, was the principal instmment of his
deliverance from it; for her respectful humility,assiduous
attentions, and endless ﬁatteries, as soon as the smallest
opening was given for their exercise, reconciled Mrs
Ferraro to his choice, and reestablished him completely
in her favour.

The whole of Lucy’s behaviour in the affair, and
the prosperity which crowned it. therefore, may be held
forth as s most encouraging instance of what an earnest,
an unceasing attention to self-interest, however it
progress may he apparently obstructed, will do in
securing every advantage of fortune, with no other
sacriﬁce than that of time and conscience. When
Robert ﬁrst sought her we usintsnce, and private!
visited her in Bartlett’s Bu' dings, it was only
the view imputed to him by his brother. He merely

214 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.

meant to pemrade her to give up the engagement; Ind
utherecould be nothin to overcome but the nﬁ'ec-
tion of both, he naturally expected that one or two
interview- would nettle the matter. In that ‘ t,how-
ever, and that only, he erred ;—for though my noon
gave him hopen that hit eloquence would convince her in
title, another visit, another converlation, wu alwayl
wanted to produce thin conviction. Some doubu nlwa
lingered in her mind when they parted, which could o y
be removed by another half-hour’e diecourle with hi . ,
Hit attendance wan b this means Iecured, and the rent
followed in couree. nltead of ﬁlling of Edward, they
came gradually to talk only of-Roherg—a abject on
which he had always more to say than on any other, and
in which the noon betrayed an interest even equal to hit
own; and in short, it became epcedily evident to both,
that he had entirely lupplanted his brother. He wan
proud of hit 'conqueet, proud of tricking Edward, and
very proud of marrying private! without his mother’l
consent. What immediawa fol owed in known. They
passed tome month in great ha pineu at anlinh ; for
the had many relation! and ol acquaintance to cut—
and he drew several plane for magniﬁcent cottage"—
and from thence returning to town, procured the forgive-
ness of Mn Ferraro, by the rimple expedient ofaaking it,
which, at Lucy's instigation, was adopted. The forgive-
neas at ﬁrst, indeed, as was reuonable, comprehended
only Robert; and Luc , who had owed hit mother no
duty, and therefore co d have trancgreteed none, still re-
marned eome weeks longer unpardoned. But penever-
ance in humth of conduct, and mentaget, in Ielf-con-
demnation for diabert’l offence, and gratitude for the
unkindneu she wan treated with, procured her\in time
the, haughty notice which overcame her by _ iu
gmcioulnena, and led won afterwardl, by rapid degrees,
to the highest state of aﬂection and inﬂuence. Lucy

SENSE AND sustain-n. 215

hecameuneeeaarymMrn queitherkohertor
Fanny; and while Edward we. never cordially fo 'ven
for having once intended to marry her, and nor,
though uperior to her in fortune and birth, when
of at an Intruder, (be wall in everything conai , and
alwayt openly acknowledged, to be a favourite child.
They settled in town, received very liberal animnee
from Mn Femre, were on the best terms imaginable
with the Daehwoodl, and setting aside the jealouliea and
ill-will continually lublieting between Fanny and Lucy,
in which their huabanda of course took a part, as well u
the frequent domeetic disagreement: between Robert and
Lucy thermelves, nothing could exceed the harmony in
which the all lived together.

What dward had done to forfeit the right of eldet
con, mi t have puzzled many people to ﬁnd out; and
what obert had done to succeed to it, might have
puzzled them ntill more. It wan an amngement, how-
ever, juatiﬁed in its effects, if not in it- cauae; for
nothing ever appeared in Robert’s style of living, or of
talking, to give a luapicion of his regretting the extent of
hi- income, as either leaving hi5 brother too little, or
bringing himqu too much ;—-and if Edward might be
judged from the ready diacharge of his duties in every
particular, from an increaain attachment to hie wife and
his home, and from the reguﬁl cheerfulneu of hi. lpiriu.
he might be auppoeed no es- contented with his lot, no '
lean free from" every with of an exchange.

Elinor’a marriage divided her at little from her family
II could well be contrived, without rendering the cottage
at Barton entirely uncle“, for her mother and linen
Bent much more than half their time with her. Mn

achwood was acting on motives of policy at well a
pleasure in the frequency of her viaitl at Delaford; for
her wiah of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon
together wan hardly lees earnest, though rather more

216 ms: AND sumrmv.

liberal, than what John had expresud. It was now
her darling object. Precious as was the company of her
daughter to her, she desired nothing so much as to give
up in constant en' men: to her. valued friend; and to
see Marianne at the Mansion-house was ually
the wish of Edward and Elinor. They each 3t his
sorrows and their own obligations, and Marianne, by
general consent, was to be the rewsrd of all. '

With such a confedemcy against her-«with s know-
ledge so intimate of his goodness—with a conviction of
his fond attachment to herself, which at last, though long
after it was observable to everybody else, burst on her—-
what could she do?

Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary
fate. She was born to discover the falsehood of her
own opinions, and to counteract, by her conduct, her
most favourite maxims. She was born to overcome an
affection fanned so late in life as at seventeen, and with
no sentiment superior to urong esteem and lively friend-
ship, voluntarily to give her hand to another l—and that
other, a man who had suffered no less than herself under
the event of a former amchmeng—whom, two
before, she had considered too old to be mnrried,—snd
who still sought the constitutional safeguard of a ﬂannel
waistcoat! ~

But so it wss. Instead of falling a sacriﬁce to an
irresistible passion, as once she had fondly ﬂattered her-
self with expecting,—instesd of remaining even for ever
with her mother, and ﬁnding her only pleasures in
retirement and study, as afterwards in her more calm
and sober judgment she had determined on,—she found
herself, at nineteen, submitting to new attachments,
entering on new duties, placed in a new home, a wife,
the mistress of a family, and the ﬁneness of a villsge.

Colonel Brandon was now as ppy as all those who
best loved him believed he deserved to be ; — in

SENS! AND SENSIBILITY. 217

Marianne he was consoled for every past aﬂiiction ,-
her and her society restored his mind to anima-
tion, and his spirits to cheerfulneas: and that Marianne
found her own ha piness in forming his, was equally the
persimion and delight of each observing friend. Mari-
anne could never love by halves; and her whole heart
became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it
had once been to Willoughby. ~

Willou by could not hear of her marriage without a
Pang; an his punishment was soon afterwards complete
in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs Smith, who, by
stating his marriage with a woman of character, as the
source of her clemency, gave him reason for believing,
that had he behaved with honour towards Marianne, he
might at once have been haPpy and rich. That his
repentance of misconduct, which thus brought its own

unishment, was sincere, need not be doubted; nor that

helong thought of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of
Marianne with regret. But that he was for ever in-
consolahlc—that he ﬂed from society, or contracted an
habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart,
must not be depended on—for he did neither. He
lived to exert, and Frequently to enjoy himself. His
wife was not always out of humour, nor his home
always uncomfortable! and in his breed of horses and
dogs, and in sporting of every kind, he found no incon-
ddenble degree of domestic elicity.

For Marianne, however—4n spite of his incivility in
surviving her loss——he always remined that decided
regard which interested him in ever thing that hech
her, and made her his secret standard, of perfection in
woman; and many a rising beauty would be slighth by
him in after days as hearing no comparison with Mrs
Brandon.

Mrs Dashwood was pmdent enough to remain at the
cottage, without attempting a removal to Delaford;

H, P

218 SENSE AND SENSIBILXTY.

nnd fortunately for Sir John 'hnd Mn Jenningn, when
Mariannewumkenfronnhem,Margamhad reachedun
nge highly Iuitable for dancing. and not ineligible
for being an to have I lover.

Between and Delaford, there w tint con-
Itant communication which mung family affection
would natunll dictate ; and among the meritl and the
happinw of E inor and Marianne, let it not be ranked
u the leaat considerable, that though nine", and living
Ilmmt within sight of each other, they could live with-
out dingreement between then-Inches, or producing
coolness between their huﬁqndn.